<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <TITLE> Principles of Political Economy </TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<CENTER>

<H2>

<B><I><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT></I></B></H2></CENTER>



<CENTER>

<H2>

<B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy</FONT></I></B></H2></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>by James Steuart</FONT></B></CENTER>



<HR>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><A HREF="book01.txt"><FONT SIZE=+1>Book One: Of Population and Agriculture</FONT></A>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><A HREF="book02.txt"><FONT SIZE=+1>Book Two: Of Trade and Industry</FONT></A>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><A HREF="book03.txt"><FONT SIZE=+1>Book Three: Of Money and Coin</FONT></A>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><A HREF="book04.txt"><FONT SIZE=+1>Book Four: Of Credits and Debts</FONT></A>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="book05.txt">Book Five: Of Taxes, and of the

Proper Application of their Amount</A></FONT></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>



<HR>

</BODY>

</HTML>



An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy






by James Steuart




















An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy being an






Essay on the Science of Domestic Policy in Free Nations.






in which are particularly considered






Population, Agriculture, Trade, Industry, Money, Coin, Interest,






Circulation, Banks, Exchange, Public Credit, and Taxes













by Sir James Steuart, Bart.













Ore trabit quodcumque potest atque addit acervo.






                Hor. Lib. I. Sat. 1













in Two Volumes.













London:






Printed for A. Millar, and T. Cadell, in the Strand.













MDCCLXVII




















PREFACE













    It is with the greatest diffidence that I present to the






public this attempt towards reducing to principles, and forming






into a regular science, the complicated interests of domestic






policy. When I consider the time and labour employed in the






composition, I am apt to value it from selfish considerations.






When I compare it even with my own abilities, I still think






favourably of it, for a better reason; because it contains a






summary of the most valuable part of all my knowledge. But when I






consider the greatness of my subject, how small does the result






of my application appear!






    The imperfections, therefore, discovered in this work, must






be ascribed to the disproportion between the extent of the






undertaking, and that of my capacity. This, I can assure my






reader, has been exerted to the utmost: and if, after all, I have






failed, it may, at least, with justice, be said, that I have






miscarried in an attempt of the greatest importance to mankind.






    I no where, I think, have shewn a desire to make my court to






any particular minister, whose administration might have been






hinted at. I have freely followed the thread of my reasoning






without a bias, either in favour of popular opinions, or of any






of the numberless systems which have been formed by those who






have written upon particular parts of my subject. The warmth of






my temper may have led me sometimes into commendations when I






have been pleased; but when I felt the effects of ill humour on






being dissatisfied with particular circumstances, relating to






countries, to men, and to things, which I had in my eye at the






time I was writing, I was immediately aware of the danger of






blaming the steps of any administration, without being well






formed of the whole combination of circumstances which the






minister may have had before him at the time.






    This composition being the successive labour of many years






spent in travelling, the reader will find some passages in which






the unities of time and place have not been observed. These I






could have corrected with ease, had I not been advised to leave






them as characters to point out the circumstances under which I






wrote, and thereby to confirm the authenticity of certain facts.






    The modes of thinking, also, peculiar to the several






countries where I have lived, have, no doubt, had an influence on






what I have written concerning their customs: this work,






therefore, will not, in general, correspond to the meridian of






national opinions any where; and of this it is proper the reader






should be apprised, that he may not apply to the domestic






circumstances of his own country what was intended to refer to






those of other nations; nor impute to wilful prejudice, what was






the irresistible effect of my experience and conviction.






    Since the first publication of this work some criticisms upon






it have been published in which little regard has been paid to






this advertisement.






    The greater part of it by far, (the three first books






particularly) was composed abroad. Can it be supposed, that






during an absence of near twenty years, I should in my studies






have all the while been modelling my speculations upon the






standard of English notions.






    It has been alleged that I have imbibed prejudices abroad, by






no means consistent with the present state of England, and the






genius of Englishmen.






    To which I answer, that I flatter myself to have imbibed no






prejudices either abroad or at home, at least I think I have






exhibited none of them in my work; because there I have rejected






all party opinions whatever.






    According to my way of treating this subject no general rule






can be laid down in political matters: every thing there must be






considered according to the circumstances and spirit of the






nations to which they relate. Accordingly we shall find in this






inquiry some reasonings built on the principles of arbitrary






power, others on those of national liberty, others again on those






of democracy. Had I, in compliment to the sentiments of






Englishmen, suppressed every combination which might apply to the






circumstances of those very countries where I was studying my






subject, from the actual inspection of their policy, what merit






should I have had to plead with my own countrymen from my travels






and from my studies, any local English writer describing English






policy and sounding through every page the most peculiar opinions






of this nation, might have amused his readers far better than






ever I could pretend to.






    If, from this work, I have any merit at all, it is by






divesting myself of English notions, so far as to be able to






expose in a fair light, the sentiments and policy of foreign






nations, relatively to their own situation.






    Now the principal attention of an intelligent reader who






peruses a book like this, will be directed towards the






investigatory part of it: every step of the reasoning will be






weighed by him until the final conclusion be drawn; he will then






give his assent to it in proportion to the accuracy of the






induction; but he never will recoil from what he has once






assented to, in order to form a general notion conceding any






result by comparing it with his own animal feelings or with the






popular opinion of his countrymen.






    This much I am obliged to say in my own justification, with






respect to several passages which have been written at times when






England was very distant from my thoughts.






    I have read many authors on the subject of political






oeconomy; and I have endeavoured to draw from them all the






instruction I could. I have travelled, for many years, through






different countries, and have examined them, constantly, with an






eye to my own subject. I have attempted to draw information from






every one with whom I have been acquainted: this, however, I






found to be very difficult until I had attained to some previous






knowledge of my subject. Such difficulties confirmed to me the






justness of Lord Bacon's remark, that he who can draw information






by forming proper questions, must be already possessed of half






the science.






    I could form no consistent plan from the various opinions I






met with: hence I was engaged to compile the observations I bad






casually made, in the course of my travels, reading, and






experience. From these I formed the following work after






expunging the numberless inconsistencies and contradictions which






I found had arisen from my separate inquiries into every






particular branch.






    I had observed so many persons declining in knowledge as they






advanced in years, that I resolved early to throw upon paper






whatever I had learned; and to this I used to have recourse, as






others have to their memories. The unity of the object of all my






speculations, rendered this practice more useful to me than it






would be to one whose researches are more extended.






    Whoever is much accustomed to write for his own use merely,






must contract a more careless style than another who has made






language his study, and who writes in hopes of acquiring a






literary reputation. I never, till very lately, thought of






appearing as an author on this subject; and, in the frequent






perusals of what I had written, my corrections were chiefly in






favour of perspicuity. add to this, that the language in which I






now write was, for many years, foreign to those with whom I lived






and conversed. When these circumstances are added to the






intricacy of my subject, which constantly carried off my






attention from every ornament of language, I flatter myself that






those of my readers, at least, who enter as heartily as I have






done into the spirit of this work, will candidly overlook the






want of that elegance which adorns the style of some celebrated






authors in this Augustan age.






    I present this enquiry to the public as nothing more than an






essay which may serve as a canvass for better hands than mine to






work upon.






    It contains such observations only as the general view of the






domestic policy of the countries I have seen, has suggested. It






is a speculation, and no more. It is a rough drawing of a mighty






plan, proportioned in correctness to my own sagacity, to my






knowledge of the subject, and to the extent of my ideas.






    It goes little farther than to collect and arrange some






elements relating to the most interesting branches of modern






policy, such as population, agriculture, trade, industry, money,






coin, interest, circulation, banks, exchange, public credit, and






taxes. The principles deduced from all these topics, appear






tolerably consistent; and the whole is a train of reasoning,






through which I have adhered to the connection of subjects as






faithfully as I could: but the nature of the work being a






deduction of principles, not a collection of institutions, I






seized the opportunities which my reasoning threw in my way, to






connect every principle, as I went along, with every part of the






inquiry to which it could refer; and when I found the connexion






sufficiently shewn, I broke off such disquisitions as would have






led me from the object then present.






    When principles thus casually applied in one part, to matters






intended to be afterwards treated of in another, came to be taken






up a-new, they involved me in what may appear prolixity. This I






found most unavoidable, when I was led to thoughts which were new






to myself, and consequently such as must have cost me the






greatest labour to set in a clear and distinct point of view. Had






I been master of my subject on setting out, the arrangement of






the whole would have been rendered more concise: but had this






been the case, I should never have been able to go through the






painful deduction which forms the whole chain of my reasoning,






and upon which, to many readers slow in forming combinations, the






conviction it carries along with it in a great measure depends:






to the few, again, of a more penetrating genius, to whom the






slightest hint is sufficient to lay open every consequence before






it be drawn, in allusion to Horace, I offer this apology, Clarus






esse laboro, prolixus fio.






    The path I have taken was new to me, after all I had read on






the subject. I examined, by my own principles, what I had






gathered from others; and adopted it as far as I found it tally






with collateral circumstances. When, on the other hand, I found a






disagreement, I was apprized immediately of some mistake; and






this I found constantly owing to the narrowness of the






combinations upon which it had been founded.






    The great danger of running into error upon particular points






relating to this subject, proceeds from our viewing them in a






light too confined, and to our not attending to the influence of






concomitant circumstances, which render general rules of little






use. Men of parts and knowledge seldom fail to reason






consequentially on every subject; but when inquiries are made






concerning the complicated interests of society, the vivacity of






an author's genius is apt to prevent him from attending to the






variety of circumstances which render uncertain every






consequence, almost, which he can draw from his reasoning. To






this I ascribe the habit of running into what the French call






Systèmes. These are no more than a chain of contingent






consequences, drawn from a few fundamental maxims, adopted,






perhaps, rashly. Such systems are mere conceits; they mislead the






understanding, and efface the path to truth. An induction is






formed, from whence a conclusion, called a principle, is drawn






and defined; but this is no sooner done, than the author extends






its influence far beyond the limits of the ideas present to his






understanding, when he made his definition. The best method,






therefore, to detect a pretended system, is always to substitute






the definition in place of the term.






    The imperfection also of language engages us frequently in






disputes merely verbal; and instead of being on our guard against






the many unavoidable ambiguities attending the most careful






speech, we place a great part of our learning when at school, and






of our wit when we appear on the stage of the world, in the






prostitution of language. The learned delight in vague, and the






witty in equivocal terms. In general, we familiarize ourselves so






much to words, and think so little, when we speak and write, that






the signs of our ideas take the place of the images which they






were intended to represent.






    Every true proposition, when understood, must be assented to






universally. This is the case always, when simple ideas are






affirmed or denied of each other. Nobody ever doubted that sound






is the object of hearing, or colour that of sight, or that black






is not white. But whenever a dispute arises concerning a






proposition, wherein complex ideas are compared, we may often






rest assured, that the parties do not understand each other.






Luxury, says one, is incompatible with the prosperity of a state.






Luxury is the fountain of a nation's welfare and happiness, says






another. There may, in reality, be no difference in the






sentiments of these two persons. The first may consider luxury as






prejudicial to foreign trade, and as corrupting the morals of a






people. The other may consider luxury as the means of providing






employment for such as must live by their industry, and of






promoting an equable circulation of wealth and subsistence,






through all the classes of inhabitants. If each of them had






attended to the other's complex idea of luxury, with all its






consequences, they would have rendered their propositions less






general.






    The difference, therefore, of opinion between men is






frequently more apparent than real. When we compare our own






ideas, we constantly see their relations with perspicuity; but






when we come to communicate these relations to other people, it






is often impossible to put them into words sufficiently






expressive of the precise combination of them we have made in our






own minds.






    This being the case, I have avoided, as much as possible,






condemning such opinions as I have taken the liberty to review;






because I have examined such only as have been advanced by men of






genius and reputation; and since all matters of controversy






regard the comparison of our ideas, if the terms we use to






express them were sufficiently understood by both parties, most






political disputes would, I am persuaded, be soon at an end.






    Here it may be objected, that we frequently adopt an opinion,






without being able to give a sufficient reason for it; and yet we






cannot persuade ourselves to give it up, though we find it






combated by the strongest arguments. To this I answer, that in






such cases we do not adhere to our own opinions, but to those of






others received upon trust. It is our regard for the authority,






and not for the opinion, which makes us tenacious: for were the






opinion truly our own, we could not fail of seeing, or at least






we should not long be at a loss in recollecting, the ground upon






which it is built. But when we assent implicitly to any political






doctrine, there is no room for reason: we then satisfy ourselves






with the persuasion that those whom we trust have sufficient






reasons for what they advance. While our assent therefore is






implicit, we are beyond conviction; not because we do not






perceive the force of the arguments brought against our opinion,






but because we are ignorant of the force of those which can be






brought to support it: and as no body will sell what belongs to






him, without being previously informed of its value, so no body






will give up an implicit opinion, without knowing all that can be






said for it. To this class of men I do not address myself in this






inquiry.






    But I insensibly run into a metaphysical speculation, in






order to prove, that in political questions it is better for






people to judge from experience and reason, than from authority






to explain their terms, than to dispute about words; and to






extend the combinations of their own ideas, than to follow






conceits, however decorated with the name of systems. How far I






have avoided such defects, the reader will determine.






    Every writer values himself upon his impartiality; because he






is not sensible of his fetters. The wandering and independent






life I have led may naturally have set me free, in some measure,






from strong attachments to popular opinions. This may be called






impartiality. But as no man can be deemed impartial, who leans to






any side whatever, I have been particularly on my guard against






the consequences of this sort of negative impartiality; because I






have found it sometimes carrying me too far from that to which a






national prejudice might have led me.






    In discussing general points, the best method I found to






maintain a just balance in this respect, was to avert my eye from






the country in which I lived at the time; and to judge of absent






things by the absent. Objects which are present, are apt to






produce perceptions too strong to be impartially compared with






those recalled by memory only.






    When I have had occasion to dip into any question concerning






the preference to be given to certain forms of government above






others, and to touch upon points which have been the object of






sharp disputes, I have given my opinion with freedom, when it






seemed proper: but in stating the question, I have endeavoured to






avoid all trite, and, as I may call them, technical terms of






party; which in such disputes every side chuses to take in their






own acceptation: and as there is no sentiment of concord or






good-will in their hearts, instead of coming to explanations






together, they are charmed to find an occasion to differ






concerning general propositions, from those they hate for






particular considerations.






    I have sometimes entered so heartily into the spirit of the






statesman, as to be apt to forget my station in the society where






I live; and when as a private man I have read over the work of






the politician, my natural partiality in favour of individuals






has led me to condemn, as Machiavellian principles, every






sentiment, approving the sacrifice of private concerns in favour






of a general plan.






    In order, therefore, to reconcile me to myself in this






particular, and to prevent certain expressions here and there






interspersed, from making the slightest impression upon a reader






of delicate sentiments, I must observe, that nothing would have






been so easy as to soften many passages, where the politician






appears to have snatched the pen out of the hand of the private






citizen: but as I write for such only who can follow a close






reasoning, and attend to the general scope of the whole inquiry,






I have, purposely, made no correction; but continued painting, in






the strongest colours, every inconvenience which must affect






certain individuals living under our free modern governments,






whenever a wise statesman sets about correcting old abuses,






proceeding from idleness, sloth, or fraud in the lower classes,






arbitrary jurisdictions in the higher, and neglects in






administrations with respect to the interests of both. The more






any cure is painful and dangerous, the more ought men carefully






to avoid the disease. This leads me to say a word concerning the






connection between the theory of morals and that of politics.






    I lay it down as a general maxim, that the characteristic of






a good action consists in the conformity between the motive, and






the duty of the agent. Were there but one man upon earth, his






duty would contain no other precepts than those dictated by






self-love. If he come to be a father, a husband, a friend, his






self-love falls immediately under limitations: he must withhold






from himself, and give to his children; he must know how to






sacrifice some of his fancies, in order to gratify, now and then,






those of his wife, or of his friend. If he come to be a judge, a






magistrate; he must frequently forget that he is a friend, or a






father: and if he rise to be a statesman, he must disregard many






other attachments more comprehensive, such as family, place of






birth, and even, in certain cases, his native country. His duty






here becomes relative to the general good of that society of






which he is the head: and as the death of a criminal cannot be






imputed to the judge who condemns him, neither can a particular






inconvenience resulting to an individual, in consequence of a






step taken for a general reformation, be imputed to him who sits






at the helm of government.






    If it should be asked, of what utility a speculation such as






this can be to a statesman, to whom it is in a manner addressed






from the beginning to the end: I answer, that although it seem






addressed to a statesman, the real object of the inquiry is to






influence the spirit of those whom he governs; and the variety of






matter contained in it, may even suggest useful hints to himself.






But his own genius and experience will enable him to carry such






notions far beyond the reach of my abilities.






    I have already said that I considered my work as no more than






a canvass prepared for more able hands than mine to work upon.






Now although the sketch it contains be not sufficiently correct,






I have still made some progress, I think, in preparing the way






for others to improve upon my plan, by contriving proper






questions to be resolved by men of experience in the practical






part of government.






    I leave it therefore to masters in the science to correct and






extend my ideas: and those who have not made the principles of






policy their particular study, may have an opportunity of






comparing the exposition I have given of them with the commonly






received opinions concerning many questions of great importance






to society. They will, for instance, be able to judge how far






population can be increased usefully, by multiplying marriages,






and by dividing lands: how far the swelling of capitals, cities






and towns, tends to depopulate a country: how far the progress of






luxury brings distress upon the poor industrious man: how far






restrictions laid upon the corn trade, tend to promote an ample






supply of subsistence in all our markets: how far the increase of






public debts tends to involve us in a general bankruptcy: how far






the abolition of paper currency would have the effect of reducing






the price of all commodities: how far a tax tends to enhance






their value: and how far the diminution of duties is an essential






requisite for securing the liberty, and promoting the prosperity






and happiness of a people.






    Is it not of the greatest importance to examine, with






candour, the operations by which all Europe has been engaged in a






system of policy so generally declaimed against, and so contrary






to that which we hear daily recommended as the best? To shew,






from the plain principles of common sense, that our present






situation is the unavoidable consequence of the spirit and






manners of the present times; and that it is quite compatible






with all the liberty, affluence, and prosperity, which any human






society ever enjoyed in any age, or under any form of government?






A people taught to expect from a statesman the execution of






plans, big with impossibility and contradiction, will remain






discontented under the government of the best of Kings.













Book I













Of Population and Agriculture













Introduction













    Oeconomy, in general, is the art of providing for all the






wants of a family, with prudence and frugality.






    If any thing necessary or useful be found wanting, if any






thing provided be lost or misapplied, if any servant, any animal,






be supernumerary or useless, if any one sick or infirm be






neglected, we immediately perceive a want of oeconomy. The object






of it, in a private family, is therefore to provide for the






nourishment, the other wants, and the employment of every






individual. In the first place, for the master, who is the head,






and who directs the whole; next for the children, who interest






him above all other things; and last for the servants, who being






useful to the head, and essential to the well-being of the






family, have therefore a title to become an object of the






master's care and concern.






    The whole oeconomy must be directed by the head, who is both






lord and steward of the family. It is however necessary, that






these two offices be not confounded with one another. As lord, he






establishes the laws of his oeconomy; as steward, he puts them in






execution. As lord, he may restrain and give his commands to all






within the house as he thinks proper; as steward, he must conduct






with gentleness and address, and is bound by his own regulations.






The better the oeconomist, the more uniformity is perceived in






all his actions, and the less liberties are taken to depart from






stated rules. He is not so much master, as that he may break






through the laws of his oeconomy, although in every respect he






may keep each individual within the house, in the most exact






subordination to his commands. Oeconomy and government, even in a






private family, present therefore two different ideas, and have






also two different objects.






    What oeconomy is in a family, political oeconomy is in a






state: with these essential differences, however, that in a state






there are no servants, all are children: that a family may be






formed when and how a man pleases, and he may there establish






what plan of oeconomy he thinks fit; but states are found formed,






and the Oeconomy of these depends upon a thousand circumstances.






The statesman (this is a general term to signify the legislature






and supreme power, according to the form of government) is






neither master to establish what oeconomy he pleases, or, in the






exercise of his sublime authority, to overturn at will the






established laws of it, let him be the most despotic monarch upon






earth.(1*)






    The great art therefore of political oeconomy is, first to






adapt the different operations of it to the spirit, manners,






habits, and customs of the people; and afterwards to model these






circumstances so, as to be able to introduce a set of new and






more useful institutions.






    The principal object of this science is to secure a certain






fund of subsistence for all the inhabitants, to obviate every






circumstance which may render it precarious; to provide every






thing necessary for supplying the wants of the society, and to






employ the inhabitants (supposing them to be free-men) in such a






manner as naturally to create reciprocal relations and






dependencies between them, so as to make their several interests






lead them to supply one another with their reciprocal wants.






    If one considers the variety which is found in different






countries, in the distribution of property, subordination of






classes, genius of people, proceeding from the variety of forms






of government, laws, climate, and manners, one may conclude, that






the political oeconomy in each must necessarily be different, and






that principles, however universally true, may become quite






ineffectual in practice, without a sufficient preparation of the






spirit of a people.






    It is the business of a statesman to judge of the expediency






of different schemes of oeconomy, and by degrees to model the






minds of his subjects so as to induce them, from the allurement






of private interest, to concur in the execution of his plan.






    The speculative person who, removed from the practice,






extracts the principles of this science from observation and






reflection, should divest himself, as far as possible, of every






prejudice in favour of established opinions, however reasonable,






when examined relatively to particular nations: he must do his






utmost to become a citizen of the world, comparing customs,






examining minutely institutions which appear alike, when in






different countries they are found to produce different effects:






he should examine the cause of such differences with the utmost






diligence and attention. It is from such inquiries that the true






principles are discovered.






    He who takes up the pen upon this subject, keeping in his eye






the customs of his own or any other country, will fall more






naturally into a description of one particular system of it, than






into an examination of the principles of the science in general;






he will applaud such institutions as he finds rightly






administered at home; he will condemn those which are






administered with abuse; but, without comparing different methods






of executing the same plan in different countries, he will not






easily distinguish the disadvantages which are essential to the






institution, from those which proceed from the abuse. For this






reason a land-tax excites he indignation of a Frenchman, an






excise that of an Englishman. One who looks into the execution of






both, in each country, and in every branch of their management,






will discover the real effects of these impositions, and be able






to distinguish what proceeds from abuse, from what is essential






to the burden.






    Nothing is more effectual towards preparing the spirit of a






people to receive a good plan of oeconomy, than a proper






representation of it. On the other hand, nothing is better






calculated to keep the statesman, who is at the head of affairs,






in awe.






    When principles are well understood, the real consequences of






burdensome institutions are clearly seen: when the purposes they






are intended for are not obtained, the abuse of the statesman's






administration appears palpable. People then will not so much cry






out against the imposition, as against the misapplication. It






will not be a land-tax of four shillings in the pound, nor an






excise upon wines and tobacco, which will excite the murmurs of a






nation; it will be the prodigal dissipation and misapplication of






the amount of these taxes after they are laid on. But when






principles are not known, all inquiry is at an end, the moment a






nation can be engaged to submit to the burden. It is the same






with regard to many other parts of this science: while people






remain blind they are always mistrustful.






    Having pointed out the object of my pursuit, I shall only






add, that my intention is to attach myself principally to a clear






deduction of principles, and a short application of them to






familiar examples, in order to avoid abstraction as much as






possible. I farther intend to confine myself to such parts of






this extensive subject, as shall appear the most interesting in






the general system of modern politics; of which I shall treat






with that spirit of liberty, which reigns more and more every






day, throughout all the polite and flourishing nations of Europe.






    When I compare the elegant performances which have appeared






in Great Britain and in France with my dry and abstracted manner






of treating the same subject, in a plain language void of






ornament, I own I am discouraged on many accounts. If I be






obliged to set out by laying down, as fundamental principles, the






most obvious truths, I dread the imputation of pedantry, and of






pretending to turn common sense into science. If I follow these






principles through a minute detail, I may appear trifling. I






therefore hope the reader will believe me, when I tell him, that






these defects have not escaped my discernment, but that my






genius, the nature of the work, and the connection of the






subject, have obliged me to write in an order and in a style,






where every thing has been sacrificed to perspicuity.






    My principal aim shall be to discover truth, and to enable my






reader to touch the very link of the chain where I may at any






time go astray.






    My business shall not be to seek for new thoughts, but to






reason consequentially; and if any thing new shall be found, it






will be in the conclusions.






    Long steps in political reasoning lead to error: close






reasoning is tedious, and to many appears trivial: this, however,






must be my plan, and my consolation is, that the farther I






advance, I shall become the more interesting.






    Every supposition must be considered as strictly relative to






the circumstances presupposed; and though, in order to prevent






misapplication, and to avoid abstraction as much as possible, I






frequently make use of examples for illustrating every principle;






yet these, which are taken from matters of fact, must be supposed






divested of every foreign circumstance inconsistent with the






supposition.






    I shall combat no particular opinion in such intricate






matters; though sometimes I may pass them in review, in order to






point out how I am led to differ from them.






    I pretend to form no system, but, by tracing out a succession






of principles, consistent with the nature of man and with one






another, I shall endeavour to furnish some materials towards the






forming of a good one.













Chap. I













Of the Government of Mankind













    Man we find acting uniformly in all age, in all countries,






and in all climates, from the principles of self-interest,






expediency, duty, or passion. In this he is alike, in nothing






else.






    These motives of human actions produce such a variety of






circumstances, that if we consider the several species of animals






in the creation, we shall find the individuals of no class so






unlike to one another, as man to man. No wonder then if people






differ in opinion with regard to every thing almost which relates






to our species.






    As this noble animal is a sociable creature, both from






necessity and inclination, we find also, in all ages, climates






and countries, a certain modification of government and






subordination established among them. Here again we are presented






with as great a variety, as there are different societies; all






however agreeing in this, that the end of a voluntary






subordination to authority is with a view to promote the general






good.






    Constant and uninterrupted experience has proved to man, that






virtue and justice, in those who govern, are sufficient to render






the society happy, under any form of government. Virtue and






justice, when applied to government, mean no more than a tender






affection for the whole society, and an exact and impartial






regard for the interest of every class.






    All actions, and all things indeed, are good or bad by






relation only. Nothing is so complex as relations when considered






with regard to a society, and nothing is so difficult as to






discover truth, when involved and blended with these relations.






    We are not to conclude from this, that every operation of






government must become problematical and uncertain as to its






consequences: some are evidently good; others are notoriously






bad; those, the tendency of which is less evident, are always the






least essential, and the more complex they appear to a discerning






eye, the more trivial they are found to be in their immediate






consequences.






    A government must be continually in action, and one principal






object of its attention must be, the consequences and effects of






new institutions.






    Experience alone will shew, what human prudence could not






foresee; and mistakes must be corrected as often as expediency






requires.






    All governments have what they call their fundamental laws;






but fundamental, that is, invariable laws, can never subsist






among men, the most variable thing we know: the only fundamental






law, salus populi, must ever be relative, like every other thing.






But this is rather a maxim than a law.






    It is however expedient, nay absolutely necessary, that in






every state, certain laws be supposed fundamental and invariable:






both to serve as a curb to the ambition of individuals, and to






point out to the statesman the outlines, or sketch of that plan






of government, which experience has proved to be the best adapted






to the spirit of his people.






    Such laws may even be considered as actually invariable,






while a state subsists without convulsions or revolutions;






because then the alterations are so gradual, that they become






imperceptible to all, but the most discerning, who can compare






the customs and manners of the same people in different periods






of time and under different circumstances.






    As we have taken for granted the fundamental maxim, that






every operation of government should be calculated for the good






of the people, so we may with equal certainty decide, that in






order to make a people happy, they must be governed according to






the spirit which prevails among them.






    I am next to explain what I mean by the spirit of a people,






and to show how far this spirit must be made to influence the






government of every society.













Chap. II













Of the Spirit of a People













    The spirit of a people is formed upon a set of received






opinions relative to three objects; morals, government, and






manners: these once generally adopted by any society, confirmed






by long and constant habit, and never called in question, form






the basis of all laws, regulate the form of every government, and






determine what is commonly called the customs of a country.






    To know a people, we must examine them under these general






heads. We acquire the knowledge of their morals with ease, by






consulting the tenets of their religion, and from what is taught






among them by authority.






    The second, or government, is more disguised, as it is






constantly changing from circumstances, partly resulting from






domestic and partly from foreign considerations. A thorough






knowledge of their history, and conversation with their ministers






of state, may give one, who has access to these helps, a very






competent knowledge of this branch.






    The last, or the knowledge of the manners of a people, is by






far the most difficult to acquire, and yet is the most open to






every person's observation. Certain circumstances with regard to






manners are supposed by every one in the country to be so well






known, so generally followed and observed, that it seldom occurs






to any body to inform a stranger concerning them. In one country






nothing is so injurious as a stroke with a stick, or even a






gesture which implies a design or a desire to strike. in another






a stroke is not near so offensive as an opprobrious expression.






An innocent liberty with the fair sex, which in one country






passes without censure, is looked upon in another as the highest






indignity. In general, the opinion of a people with regard to






injuries is established by custom only, and nothing is more






necessary in government, than an exact attention to every






circumstance peculiar to the people to be governed.






    The kingdom of Spain was lost for a violence committed upon






chastity;(2*) the city of Genoa for a blow;(3*) the kingdoms of






Naples and Sicily have ever been ready to revolt; because having






been for many ages under the dominion of strangers, the people






have never been governed according to the true spirit of their






manners. Let us consult the revolutions of all countries, and we






shall find, that the most trivial circumstances have had a






greater influence on such events, than the more weighty reasons,






which are always set forth as the real motives. I need not






enlarge upon this subject, my intention is only to suggest an






idea which any one may pursue, and which will be applied upon






many occasions as we go along; for there is no treating any point






which regards the political oeconomy of a nation, without






accompanying the example with some supposition relative to the






spirit of the people.






    I have said, that the most difficult thing to learn






concerning a people, is the spirit of their manners.






Consequently, the most difficult thing for a stranger to adopt,






is their manner. Men acquire the language, nay even lose the






foreign accent, before they lose the peculiarity of their manner.






The reason is plain. The inclinations must be changed, the taste






for amusements must be new-modelled; established maims upon






government, manners, nay even upon some moral actions, must






undergo certain new modifications, before the stranger's






conversation and behaviour can become consistent with the spirit






of the people with whom he lives.






    From these considerations, we may find the reason, why






nothing is more heavy to bear than the government of conquerors,






in spite of all their endeavours to render themselves agreeable






to the conquered. Of this, experience has ever proved the truth,






and princes are so much persuaded of it, that when a country is






subdued in our days, or when it otherwise changes masters, there






is seldom any question of altering, but by very slow degrees and






length of time, the established laws and customs of the






inhabitants. I might safely say, there is no form of government






upon earth so excellent in itself, as, necessarily, to make the






people happy under it. Freedom itself, imposed upon a people






groaning under the greatest slavery, will not make them happy,






unless it is made to undergo certain modifications, relative to






their established habits.






    Having explained what I mean by the spirit of a people, I






come next to consider, how far this spirit must influence






government.






    If governments be taken in general, we shall find them






analogous to the spirit of the people. But the point under






consideration is, how a statesman is to proceed, when expediency






and refinement require a change of administration, or when it






becomes necessary from a change of circumstances.






    The great alteration in the affairs of Europe within these






three centuries, by the discovery of America and the Indies, the






springing up of industry and learning, the introduction of trade






and the luxurious arts, the establishment of public credit, and a






general system of taxation, have entirely altered the plan of






government every where.






    From feudal and military, it is become free and commercial. I






oppose freedom in government to the feudal system, to mark only






that there is not found now that chain of subordination among the






subjects, which made the essential part of the feudal form. The






head there had little power, and the lower classes of the people






little liberty. Now every industrious man, who lives with






oeconomy, is free and independent under most forms of government.






Formerly, the power of the barons swallowed up the independency






of all inferior classes. I oppose commercial to military; because






the military governments now are made to subsist from the






consequences and effects of commerce only. that is, from the






revenue of the state, proceeding from taxes. Formerly, every






thing was brought about by numbers; now, numbers of men cannot be






kept together without money.






    This is sufficient to point out the nature of the revolution






in the political state, and of consequence in the manners of






Europe.






    The spirit of a people changes no doubt of itself, but by






slow degrees. The same generation commonly adheres to the same






principles, and retains the same spirit. In every country we find






two generations upon the stage at a time; that is to say, we may






distribute into two classes the spirit which prevails; the one






amongst men between twenty and thirty, when opinions are forming;






the other of those who are past fifty, when opinions and habits






are formed and confirmed. A person of judgment and observation






may foresee many things relative to government, from an exact






attention to the rise and progress of new customs and opinions,






provided he preserve his mind free from all attachments and






prejudices, in favour of those which he himself has adopted, and






in that delicacy of sensation necessary to perceive the influence






of a change of circumstances. This is the genius proper to form a






great minister.






    In every new step the spirit of the people should be first






examined; and if this be not found ripe for the execution of the






plan, it ought to be put off, kept entirely secret, and every






method used to prepare the people to relish the innovation.






    The project of introducing popery into England was blown






before it was put in practice, and so miscarried. Queen Elizabeth






kept her own secret, and succeeded in a similar attempt. The






scheme of a general excise was pushed with too much vivacity, was






made a matter of party, was ill-timed, and the people nowise






prepared for it; hence it will be the more difficult to bring






about at another time, without the greatest precautions.






    In turning and working upon the spirit of a people, nothing






is impossible to an able statesman. When a people can be engaged






to murder their wives and children, and to burn themselves,






rather than submit to a foreign enemy, when they can be brought






to give their most precious effects, their ornaments of gold and






silver, for the support of a common cause; when women are brought






to give their hair to make ropes, and the most decrepit old men






to mount the walls of a town for its defence; I think I may say,






that by properly conducting and managing the spirit of a people,






nothing is impossible to be accomplished. But when I say, nothing






is impossible, I must be understood to mean, that nothing






essentially necessary for the good of the people is impossible;






and this is all that is required in government.






    That it requires a particular talent in a statesman to






dispose the minds of a people to approve even of the scheme which






is the most conducive to their interest and prosperity, appears






from this, that we see examples of wise, rich, and powerful






nations languishing in inactivity, at a time when every






individual is animated with a quite contrary spirit; becoming a






prey to their enemies, like the city of Jerusalem, while they are






taken up with their domestic animosities, merely because the






remedies proposed against these evils contradict the spirit of






the times.






    The great art of governing is to divest oneself of prejudices






and attachments to particular opinions, particular classes, and






above all to particular persons; to consult the spirit of the






people, to give way to it in appearance, and in so doing to give






it a turn capable of inspiring those sentiments which may induce






them to relish the change, which an alteration of circumstances






has rendered necessary.






    Can any change be greater among free men, than from a state






of absolute liberty and independence to become subject to






constraint in the most trivial actions? This change has however






taken place over all Europe within these three hundred years, and






yet we think ourselves more free than ever our fathers were.






Formerly a gentleman who enjoyed a bit of land, knew not what it






was to have any demand made upon him, but in virtue of






obligations by himself contracted. He disposed of the fruits of






the earth, and of the labour of his servants or vassals, as he






thought fit. Every thing was bought, sold, transferred,






transported, modified, and composed, for private consumption, or






for public use, without ever the state's being once found






interested in what was doing. This, I say, was formerly the






general situation of Europe, among free nations under a regular






administration; and the only impositions commonly known to affect






landed men, were made in consequence of a contract of






subordination, feudal or other, which had certain limitations;






and the impositions were appropriated for certain purposes.






    Daily experience shews, that nothing is more against the






inclinations of a people than the imposition of taxes; and the






less they are accustomed to them, the more difficult it is to get






them established.






    The great abuse of governors in the application of taxes






contributes not a little to entertain and augment this repugnancy






in the governed: but besides abuse, there is often too little






management used to prepare the spirits of the people for such






innovations; for we see them upon many occasions submitting with






cheerfulness to very heavy impositions, provided they he






well-timed, and consistent with their manners and disposition. A






French gentleman, who cannot bear the thought of being put upon a






level with a peasant in paying a land-tax, pays contentedly, in






time of war, a general tax upon all his effects, under a






different name. To pay for your head is terrible in one country;






to pay for light appears as terrible in another.






    It often happens, that statesmen take the hint of new






impositions from the example of other nations, and not from a






nice examination of their own domestic circumstances. But when






these are rightly attended to, it becomes easy to discover the






means of executing the same plan, in a way quite adapted to the






spirit, temper, and circumstances of the people. When strangers






are employed as statesmen, the disorder is still greater, unless






there be extraordinary penetration, temper, and, above all,






flexibility and discretion.






    Statesmen have sometimes recourse to artifice instead of






reason, because their intentions often are not upright. This






destroys all confidence between them and the people; and






confidence is necessary when you are in a manner obliged to ask a






favour, or when what you demand is not indisputably your right. A






people thus tricked into an imposition, though expedient for






their prosperity, will oppose violently, at another time, a like






measure, even when essential to their preservation.






    At other times, we see statesmen presenting the allurement of






present ease, precisely at the time when people's minds are best






disposed to receive a burden. I mean when war threatens, and when






the mind is heated with a resentment of injuries. Is it not






wonderful, at such a time as this, to increase taxes in






proportion only to the interest of money wanted; does not this






imply a shortsightedness, or at least an indifference as to what






is to come? Is it not more natural, that a people should consent






to come under burdens to gratify revenge, than submit to repay a






large debt when their minds are restored to a state of






tranquility.






    From the examples I have given, I hope what I mean by the






spirit of a people is sufficiently understood, and I think I have






abundantly shewn the necessity of its being properly disposed, in






order to establish a right plan of oeconomy. This is so true,






that many examples may be found, of a people's rejecting the most






beneficial institutions, and even the greatest favours, merely






because some circumstance had shocked their established customs.






No wonder then, if we see them refuse to come under limitations,






restraints, and burdens, when the utmost they can be flattered






with from them, is a distant prospect of national good.






    I have found it necessary to premise these general






reflections, in order to obviate many objections which might






naturally enough occur in the perusal of this inquiry. I shall






have occasion to make a number of suppositions, and to draw






consequences from them, which are abundantly natural, provided a






proper spirit in the people be presupposed, but which would be






far from being natural without this supposition. I suppose, for






example, that a poor man, loaded with many children, would be






glad to have the state maintain them; that another, who has waste






lands, would be obliged to one who would gratuitously build him a






farm-house upon it. yet in both suppositions I may prove






mistaken; for fathers there are, who would rather see their






children dead than out of their hands; and proprietors are to be






found, who, for the sake of hunting, would lay the finest country






in Europe into a waste.






    In order to communicate an adequate idea of what I understand






by political oeconomy, I have explained the term, by pointing out






the object of the art; which is, to provide food, other






necessaries, and employment to every one of the society.






    This is a very simple and a very general method of defining a






most complicated operation.






    To provide a proper employment for all the members of a






society, is the same as to model and conduct every branch of






their concerns.






    Upon this idea may be formed, I think, the most extensive






basis for an inquiry into the principles of political oeconomy.






    The next thing to be done, is to fall upon a distinct method






of analysing so extensive a subject, by contriving a train of






ideas, which may be directed towards every part of the plan, and






which, at the same time, may be made to arise methodically from






one another.






    For this purpose I have taken a hint from what the late






revolutions in the politics of Europe have pointed out to be the






regular progress of mankind, from great simplicity to complicated






refinement.






    This first book shall then set out with taking up society in






the cradle, as I may say. I shall here examine the principles






which influence their multiplication, the method of providing for






their subsistence, the origin of their labour, the effects of






their liberty and slavery, the distribution of them into classes,






with some other topics which relate to mankind in general.






    Here we shall find the principles of industry influencing the






multiplication of mankind, and the cultivation of the soil. This






I have thrown in on purpose to prepare my reader for the subject






of the second book; where he will find the same principle (under






the wings of liberty) providing an easy subsistence for a






numerous populace, by the means of trade, which sends the labour






of an industrious people over the whole world.






    From the experience of what has happened these last two






hundred years, we find to what a pitch the trade and industry of






Europe has increased alienations, and the circulation of money. I






shall therefore closely adhere to these, as the most immediate






consequences of the preceding improvement; and, by analysing






them, I shall form my third and fourth books, in which I intend






to treat of money and credit.






    We see also how credit has engaged nations to avail






themselves of it in their wars, and how, by the use of it, they






have been led to contract debts; which they never can satisfy and






pay, without imposing taxes. The doctrine, then, of debts and






taxes will very naturally follow that of credit in this great






chain of political consequences.






    By this kind of historical clue, I shall conduct myself






through the great avenues of this extensive labyrinth; and in my






review of every particular district, I shall step from






consequence to consequence, until I have penetrated into the






inmost recesses of my own understanding.






    When a subject is broken off, I shall render my transitions






as gradual as I can, by still preserving some chain of connexion;






and although I cannot flatter myself (in such infinite variety of






choice, as to order and distribution) to hit at all times on that






method, which may appear to every reader the most natural and the






most correct, yet I shall spare no pains in casting the materials






into different forms, so as to make the best distribution of them






in my power.













Chap. III













Upon what Principles, and from what natural Causes do Mankind






multiply? And what are the Effects of Procreation in Countries






where Numbers are found to increase?













    The multiplication of mankind has been treated of in






different ways; some have made out tables to show the progression






of multiplication, others have treated the question historically.






The state of numbers in different ages of the world, or in






different countries at different times, has been made the object






of inquiry; and the most exact scrutiny has been made into






ancient authors, as the means of investigating the truth of this






matter. All passages relative to the subject have been laid






together, and accompanied with glosses and interpretations the






most plausible, in order to determine the main question. The






elaborate performances of Mr Hume, and Dr Wallace, who have






adopted opposite opinions in regard to the populousness of the






ancient world, have left nothing new to be said upon this






subject; at least the application they appear to have given in






examining the ancients, is a great discouragement to any one who






might otherwise still flatter himself to find out circumstances






in them, proper to cast a new light upon the question.






    My intention in this chapter is not to decide, nor even to






give my opinion upon that matter, far less to combat the






arguments advanced on either side. I am to consider the question






under a different point of view; not to inquire what numbers of






people were found upon the earth at a certain time, but to






examine the natural and rational causes of multipliCation. If we






can discover these, we may perhaps be led to judge how far they






might have operated in different ages and in different countries.






    The fundamental principle of the multiplication of all






animals, and consequently of man, is generation; the next is






food: generation gives existence, food preserves it. Did the






earth produce of itself the proper nourishment for man with






unlimited abundance, we should find no occasion to labour in






order to procure it. Now in all countries found inhabited, as in






those which have been found desolate, if the state of animals be






inquired into, the number of them will be found in proportion to






the quantity of food produced by the earth, regularly throughout






the year, for their subsistence. I say, regularly throughout the






year, because we perceive, in those animals which produce in






great abundance, such as all the feathered sort, that vast






multitudes are destroyed in winter; they are brought forth with






the fruits of the earth, and fall in proportion to their decay.






This principle is so natural, that I think it can hardly be






controverted.






    As to man, the earth does not spontaneously produce






nourishment for him in any considerable degree. I allow that as






some species of animals support life by devouring others, so may






man; but it must be observed, that the species feeding must






always be much inferior in number to the species fed upon. This






is evident in reason and in fact.






    Were the earth therefore uncultivated, the numbers of mankind






would not exceed the proportion of the spontaneous fruits which






she offers for their immediate use, or for that of the animals






which might be the proper nourishment of man.






    There is therefore a certain number of mankind which the






earth would be able to maintain without any labour: allow me to






call this quantity (A). Does it not, from this exposition of the






matter, appear plain, that without labour (A) never can increase






any more than animals, which do not work for themselves, can






increase beyond the proportion of food provided for them by






nature? Let it be however observed, that I do not pretend to






limit (A) to a determinate number. The seasons will no doubt






influence the numbers of mankind, as we see they influence the






plenty of other animals; but I say (A) will never increase beyond






the fixed proportion above mentioned.






    Having resolved one question with regard to multiplication,






and shewn that numbers must become greater or smaller according






to the productions of nature, I come to the second thing proposed






to be treated of in the chapter; to wit, what will become of the






generative faculty after it has produced the full proportion of






(A), and what effects will afterwards follow.






    We see how beneficent, I might have said prodigal, nature is






in bestowing life by generation. Several kinds of animals,






especially insects, multiply by thousands, and yet the species






does not appear annually to increase. Nobody can pretend that






particular individuals of any species have a privilege to live,






and that others die from a difference in their nature. It is






therefore reasonable to conclude, that what destroys such vast






quantities of those produced, must be, among other causes, the






want of food. Let us apply this to man.






    Those who are supposed to be fed with the spontaneous fruits






of the earth, cannot, from what has been said, multiply beyond






that proportion; at the same time the generative faculty will






work its natural effects in augmenting numbers. The consequence






will be, that certain individuals must become worse fed,






consequently weaker. consequently, if, in that weakly state,






nature should withhold a part of her usual plenty, the whole






multitude will be affected by it; a disease may take place, and






sweep off a far greater number than that proportioned to the






deficiency of the season. What results from this? That those who






have escaped, finding food more plentiful, become vigorous and






strong. generation gives life to additional numbers, food






preserves it, until they rise up to the former standard.






    Thus the generative faculty resembles a spring loaded with a






weight, which always exerts itself in proportion to the






diminution of resistance: when food has remained some time






without augmentation or diminution, generation will carry numbers






as high as possible; if then food come to be diminished, the






spring is overpowered; the force of it becomes less than nothing.






Inhabitants will diminish, at least, in proportion to the






overcharge. If, upon the other hand, food be increased, the






spring which stood at 0, will begin to exert itself in proportion






as the resistance diminishes; people will begin to be better fed;






they will multiply, and, in proportion as they increase in






numbers, the food will become scarce again.






    I must here subjoin a remark very analogous to this subject.






That the generative faculty in man (which we have compared to a






spring), and the care and love we have for our children, first






prompt us to multiply, and then engage us to divide what we have






with our little ones. Thus from dividing and subdividing it






happens, that in every country where food is limited to a certain






quantity, the inhabitants must be subsisted in a regular






progression, descending down from plenty and ample subsistence,






to the last periods of want, and even sometimes starving for






hunger.






    Although the examples of this last extremity are not common






in some countries, yet I believe they are more so than is






generally imagined; and the other stages of want are productive






of many diseases, and of a decay which extinguishes the faculty






of generation, or which weakens it, so as to produce children






less vigorous and less healthy. I appeal to experience, if this






reasoning be not just.






    Put two or three pairs of rabbits into a field proper for






them, the multiplication will be rapid; and in a few years the






warren will be stocked: you may take yearly from it a hundred






pairs, I shall suppose, and keep your warren in good order: give






over taking any for some years, you will perhaps find your






original stock rather diminished than increased, for the reasons






above mentioned. Africa yearly furnishes many thousands for the






cultivation of America; in this she resembles the warren. I have






little doubt but that if all her sons were returned to her at






once, by far the greater part would die of hunger.













Chap. IV













Continuation of the same Subject, with regard to the natural and






immediate Effects of Agriculture, as to Population













    I now suppose man to add his labour and industry to the






natural activity of the soil: so far, as by this he produces an






additional quantity of food, so far he lays a foundation for the






maintenance of an additional number. This number I shall call






(B). From this I conclude, that as (A) is supposed to be in a






constant proportion to the spontaneous fruits, so (B) must be in






proportion to agriculture (by this term I understand at present






every method of augmenting food by labour), consequently the






number maintained by the labour of mankind must be to the whole






number of mankind as (B) is to (A + B), or as (B) is to (A) and






(B) jointly.






    By this operation we find mankind immediately divided into






two classes; those who, without working, live upon the






spontaneous fruits of the earth; that is, upon milk, cattle,






hunting, &c. The other part, those who are obliged to labour the






soil. It is proper next to inquire what should naturally oblige a






man to labour; and what are the natural consequences of it as to






multiplication.






    We have already said, that the principle of generation is






inherent in man, and prompts him to multiply. Another principle,






as naturally inherent in the mind, as the first is in the body,






is self-love, or a desire of ease and happiness, which prompts






those who find in themselves any superiority, whether personal or






political, to make use of every natural advantage. Consequently,






such will multiply proportionably: because by appropriating to






themselves the fruits of the earth, they have the means of






subsisting their offspring. The others, I think, will very






naturally become their servants; as this method is, of all






others, the most easy to procure subsistence. This is so






analogous to the nature of man, that we see every where, even






among children, that the smallest superiority in any one over the






rest, constantly draws along with it a tribute of service in one






way or other. Those who become servants for the sake of food,






will soon become slaves: for slavery is but the abuse of service,






established by a civil institution; and men who find no






possibility of subsisting otherwise, will be obliged to serve






upon the conditions prescribed to them.






    This seems a consequence not unnatural in the infancy of the






world: yet I do not pretend to affirm that this was the origin of






slavery. Servants, however, there have always been; and the abuse






of service is what we understand by slavery. The subordination of






children to their parents, and of servants to their masters,






seems to be the most rational origin of society and government.






The first of these is natural, and follows as the unavoidable






consequence of an entire dependence: the second is political, and






may very naturally take place as to those who cannot otherwise






procure subsistence. This last species of subordination may, I






think, have taken place, the moment man became obliged to labour






for subsistence, but no sooner.






    The wants of man are not confined to food, merely. When food






is to be produced from the rude surface of the earth, a great






part of his time must be taken up with this object, even






supposing him to be provided with every utensil proper for the






exercise of his industry: he must therefore be in a worse






condition to provide for his other wants: consequently, he may be






willing to serve any one who will do it for him. Whereas, on the






other hand, if we suppose all mankind idle and fed, living upon






the spontaneous fruits of the earth, the plan of universal






liberty becomes quite natural: because under such circumstances






they find no inducement to come under a voluntary subordination.






    Let us now borrow the idea of a primitive society, of a






government, of a king, from the most ancient history we have, the






better to point out the effects of agriculture and






multiplication. The society is the whole taken together; it is






Jacob, his sons, their wives, their children, and all the






servants. The government regards the institutions prescribed by






Jacob, to every one of the family, concerning their respective






subordination and duty. Multiplication will here go forward, not






in proportion to the generative faculty, but according to the






employment of the persons already generated. If Jacob continue






pasturing his herds, he must extend the limits of his right of






pasture; he must multiply his stock of cattle, in proportion as






the mouths of his family augment. He is charged with all this






detail: for he is master, and director, and statesman, and






general provider. His servants will work as they are ordered; but






if he has not had the proper foresight, to break up lands so soon






as his family comes nearly up to that proportion which his flocks






can easily feed; if in this case, a dry season should burn up the






grass in Palestine, he will be obliged to send some of his stock






of cattle, by some of his family, to market, there to be sold;






and with the price he must buy corn. For in this early age, there






was money, there were manufactures of sackcloth, of common






raiment, and of party-coloured garments; there was a trade in






corn, in spicery, balm, and myrrh. Jacob and his family were






shepherds, but they lived not entirely on flesh; they eat bread:






consequently there was tillage in those days, though they






exercised none. The famine however was ready to destroy them, and






probably would have done it, but for the providential






circumstance of Joseph's being governor of Egypt. He relieved






their distress, he gave to his family the best country in the






whole kingdom for pasture; and they had a gratuitous supply of






bread.






    No doubt, so long as these favourable circumstances






subsisted, multiplication would go on apace. What supernatural






assistance God was pleased to grant for the increase of his






chosen people, does not concern my inquiry.






    I have mentioned transiently this example of the patriarch,






to point out only how ancient the use of money, the invention of






trade and manufactures appear to have been. Without such previous






establishments, I consider mankind as savages, living on the






spontaneous fruits of the earth, as in the first supposition; and






confined, as to numbers, to the actual extent of these






productions.






    From what has been said, we may conclude, that the numbers of






mankind must depend upon the quantity of food produced by the






earth for their nourishment; from which, as a corollary, may be






drawn.






    That mankind have been, as to numbers, and must ever be, in






proportion to the food produced; and that the food produced will






be in the compound proportion of the fertility of the climate,






and the industry of the inhabitants.






    From this last proposition it appears plain, that there can






be no general rule for determining the number of inhabitants






necessary for agriculture, not even in the same country. The






fertility of the soil when laboured, the ease of labouring it,






the quantity of good spontaneous fruits, the plenty of fish in






the rivers and sea, the abundance of wild birds and beasts, have






in all ages, and ever must influence greatly the nourishment,






and, consequently, regulate the multiplication of man, and






determine his employment.






    To make an establishment in a country not before inhabited,






to root out woods, destroy wild and venomous animals, drain






marshy grounds, give a free course to water, and to lay down the






surface into corn fields, must surely require more hands than to






cultivate the same after it is improved. For the truth of this, I






appeal to our American brethren.






    We may therefore conclude, that the most essential requisite






for population, is that of agriculture, or the providing of






subsistence. Upon this all the rest depends: while subsistence is






upon a precarious footing, no statesman can turn his attention to






any thing else.






    The great importance of this object has engaged some to






imagine, that the luxurious arts, in our days, are prejudicial






both to agriculture and multiplication. It is sometimes of ill






consequence to fix one's attention too much upon any one object,






however important. Nobody can dispute that agriculture is the






foundation of multiplication, and the most essential requisite






for the prosperity of a state. But it does not follow from this,






that every body almost in the state should be employed in it;






that would be inverting the order of things, and turning the






master into the servant. The duty and business of man is not to






feed; he is fed, in order to do his duty, and to become useful in






his profession; whether agriculture, art, or science.






    It is not sufficient for my purpose to know, that the






introduction of agriculture, by multiplying the quantity of the






earth's productions, does evidently tend to increase the numbers






of mankind. I must examine the political causes which must






concur, in order to operate this effect.






    For this purpose, my next inquiry shall be directed towards






discovering the true principles which influence the employment of






man, with respect to agriculture. I shall spare no pains in






examining this point to the bottom, even though it should lead me






to anticipate some branches of my subject.






    I shall endeavour to lay down principles consistent with the






nature of man, with agriculture, and with multiplication, in






order, by their means, to discover both the use and abuse of the






two last. When these parts are well understood, the rest will go






on more smoothly, and I shall find the less occasion to interrupt






my subject, in order to explain the topics upon which the whole






depends.













Chap. V













In what Manner, and according to what Principles, and political






Causes, does Agriculture augment Population?




















    I have already shewn, how the spontaneous fruits of the earth






provide a fund of nourishment for a determinate number of men,






and have slightly touched upon the consequences of adding labour






to the natural activity of the soil.






    Let me now carry this inquiry a little farther. Let me






suppose a country fertile in spontaneous productions, capable of






improvements of every kind, inhabited by a people living under a






free government, and in the most refined simplicity, without






trade, without the luxurious arts, and without ambition. Let me






here suppose a statesman, who shall inspire a taste for






agriculture and for labour into those who formerly consumed the






spontaneous fruits of the earth in ease and idleness. What will






become of this augmentation of food produced by this additional






labour?






    The sudden increase of food, such as that here supposed, will






immediately diffuse vigour into all; and if the additional






quantity be not very great, no superfluity will be found. No






sooner will the inhabitants be fully nourished, but they will






begin to multiply a-new: then they will come to divide with their






children, and food will become scarce again.






    Thus much is necessary for the illustration of one principle;






but the effects, which we have been pointing out, will not be






produced barely by engaging those who lived by hunting (I






suppose) to quit that trade, and turn farmers. The statesman must






also find out a method to make the produce of this new branch of






industry circulate downwards, so as to relieve the wants of the






most necessitous: Otherwise, the plenty produced, remaining in






the hands of those who produced it, will become to them an






absolute superfluity; which, had they any trade with a






neighbouring state, they would sell, or exchange, and leave their






fellow-citizens to starve. And as we suppose no trade at all,






this superfluity will perish like their cherries, in a year of






plenty; and consequently the farmers will immediately give over






working.






    If, to prevent this inconveniency, the statesman shall force






certain classes to labour the soil, and, with discretion,






distribute the produce of it to all that have occasion for






subsistence, taking in return their services for the public






benefit; this will prove an infallible way of multiplying






inhabitants, of making them laborious, and of preserving a






simplicity of manners; but it is also the picture of ancient






slavery, and is therefore excluded from the supposition.






    If he acts consistently with that spirit of liberty, which we






have supposed to animate his subjects, he has no method left, but






to contrive different employments for the hands of the






necessitous, that, by their labour, they may produce an






equivalent which may be acceptable to the farmers, in lieu of






this superfluity; for these last certainly will not raise it, if






they cannot dispose of it; nor will they dispose of it, but for a






proper equivalent. This is the only method (in a free state) of






procuring additional food, and of distributing it through the






society, as the price of those hours which before were spent in






idleness: and, as this will prove a more certain and more






extensive fund of subsistence, than the precarious productions of






spontaneous fruits, which cannot be increased at discretion, and






in proportion to demand, it will greatly increase numbers; but,






on the other hand, it must evidently destroy that simplicity of






manners which naturally reigns among nations who do not labour.






    A people, therefore, who have an industrious turn, will






multiply in proportion to the superfluity produced by their






farmers; because the labour of the necessitous will prove an






equivalent for it.






    Now this additional number of inhabitants, being raised and






fed with the superfluity actually produced by the farmers, can






never be supposed necessary for providing this quantity, which






(though relatively to the farmers it be called a superfluity) is






merely a sufficiency relatively to the whole society. and,






therefore, if it be found necessary to employ the new inhabitants






also in farming, it must be with a view only to a still greater






multiplication.






    Farther, we may lay it down as a principle, that a farmer






will not labour to produce a superfluity of grain relatively to






his own consumption, unless he finds some want which may be






supplied by means of that superfluity'. neither will other






industrious persons work to supply the wants of the farmer for






any other reason than to procure subsistence, which they cannot






otherwise so easily obtain. These are the reciprocal wants which






the statesman must create, in order to bind the society together.






Here, then, is one principle: Agriculture among a free people






will augment population, in proportion only as the necessitous






are put in a situation to purchase subsistence with their labour.






    If, in any country which actually produces nourishment for






its inhabitants, according to the progression above-mentioned, a






plan is set on foot for the extension of agriculture; the






augmentation must be made to bear a due proportion to the






progress of industry and wants of the people, or else an outlet






must be provided for disposing of the superfluity. And if, at






setting out, a foreign consumption cannot be procured for the






produce of husbandry, the greatest caution must be had to keep






the improvement of the soil within proper bounds: for, without






this, the plan intended for an improvement will, by over-doing,






turn out to the detriment of agriculture. This will be the case,






if the fruits of the earth be made to increase faster than the






numbers and the industry of those who are to consume them. For if






the whole be not consumed, the regorging plenty will discourage






the industry of the farmer.






    But if, together with an encouragement to agriculture, a






proper outlet be found for the superfluity, until the numbers and






industry of the people, by increasing, shall augment the






home-consumption, which again by degrees will diminish the






quantity of exportation, then the spring will easily overcome the






resistance; it will dilate; that is, numbers will continue to






increase.






    From this may be derived another principle: That agriculture,






when encouraged for the sake of multiplying inhabitants, must






keep pace with the progress of industry; or else an outlet must






be provided for all superfluity.






    In the foregoing example, I have supposed no exportation, the






more to simplify the supposition: I was, therefore, obliged to






throw in a circumstance, in order to supply the want of it; to






wit, an augmentation of inland demand from the suspension of






hunting; and I have supposed those who formerly supported






themselves by this, to consume the superfluous food of the






farmers for the price of their labour. This may do well enough as






a supposition, and has been made use of merely to explain






principles. but the manners of a people are not so easily






changed; and therefore I have a little anticipated the






supposition of trade, to shew only how it must concur with






industry, in the advancement of agriculture and multiplication.






    Let me next consider the consequences of an augmentation of






agriculture in a country where the inhabitants are lazy; or where






they live in such simplicity of manners, as to have few wants






which labour and industry can supply. In this case, I say, the






scheme of agriculture will not succeed; and, if set on foot, a






part of the grounds will soon become again uncultivated.






    The laziest part of the farmers, disgusted with a labour






which produces a plenty superfluous to themselves, which they






cannot dispose of for any equivalent, will give over working, and






return to their ancient simplicity. The more laborious will not






furnish food to the necessitous for nothing: such therefore who






cannot otherwise subsist, will naturally serve the industrious,






and thereby sell their service for food. Thus by the diminution






of labour, a part of the country, proportional to the quantity of






food which the farmers formerly found superfluous, will again






become uncultivated.






    Here then will be found a country, the population of which






must stop for want of food; and which, by the supposition, is






abundantly able to produce more. Experience every where shews the






possible existence of such a case, since no country in Europe is






cultivated to the utmost: and that there are many still, where






cultivation, and consequently multiplication, is at a stop. These






nations I consider as in a moral incapacity of multiplying: the






incapacity would be physical, if there was an actual






impossibility of their procuring an augmentation of food by any






means whatsoever.






    These principles seem to be confirmed by experience; whether






we compare them with the manner of living among the free American






savages, or among the free, industrious, and laborious Europeans.






We find the productions of all countries, generally speaking, in






proportion to the number of their inhabitants; and, on the other






hand, the inhabitants are most commonly in proportion to the






food.






    I beg that this may not be looked upon as a quibble, or what






is called a vicious circle. I have qualified the general






proposition by subjoining that it is found true most commonly;






and from what is to follow, we shall better discover both the






truth and meaning of what is here advanced. While certain causes






operate, food will augment, and mankind will increase in






proportion; when these causes cease, procreation will not augment






numbers; then the general proposition will take place; numbers






and food will remain the same, and balance one another. This I






imagine to be so in fact; and I hope to shew that it is rational






also. Let me now put an end to this chapter, by drawing some






conclusions from what has been laid down, in order to enlarge our






ideas, and to enable us to extend our plan.






    First, One consequence of a fruitful soil, possessed by a






free people, given to agriculture, and inclined to industry, will






be the production of a superfluous quantity of food, over and






above what is necessary to feed the farmers. Inhabitants will






multiply; and, according to their increase, a certain number of






the whole, proportional to such superfluity of nourishment






produced, will apply themselves to industry and to the supplying






of other wants.






    Secondly, From this operation produced by industry, we find






the people distributed into two classes. The first is that of the






farmers who produce the subsistence, and who are necessarily






employed in this branch of business; the other I shall call free






hands; because their occupation being to procure themselves






subsistence out of the superfluity of the farmers, and by a






labour adapted to the wants of the society, may vary according to






these wants, and these again according to the spirit of the






times.






    Thirdly, If, in the country we are treating of, both money






and the luxurious arts be supposed to be unknown, then the






superfluity of the farmers will be in proportion to the number of






those whose labour will be found sufficient to provide for all






the other necessities of the inhabitants; and, so soon as this is






accomplished, the consumption and produce becoming equally






balanced, the inhabitants will increase no more, or at least very






precariously, unless their wants be multiplied.













Chap. VI













How the Wants of Mankind promote their Multiplication




















    If the country we were treating of in the former chapter be






supposed of a considerable extent and fruitfulness, and if the






inhabitants have turn for industry, in a short time luxury, and






the use of money (or of something participating of the nature of






money), will infallibly be introduced.






    By LUXURY, I understand the consumption of any thing produced






by the labour or ingenuity of man, which flatters our senses or






taste of living, and which is neither necessary for our being






well fed, well clothed, well defended against the injuries of the






weather, or for securing us against every thing which can hurt






us.(4*)






    By MONEY, I understand any commodity, which purely in itself






is of no material use to man for the purposes above-mentioned,






but which acquires such an estimation from his opinion of it, as






to become the universal measure of what is called value, and an






adequate equivalent for any thing alienable.(5*)






    Here a new scene opens. This money must be found in the hands






of some of the inhabitants; naturally, of such as have had the






wit to invent it, and the address to make their countrymen fond






of it, by representing it as an equivalent value for food and






necessaries; that is to say, the means of procuring, without work






or toil, not only the labour of others, but food itself.






    Here then is produced a new object of want. Every person






becomes fond of having money; but how to get it is the question.






The proprietors will not give it for nothing, and, by our former






supposition, every one within the society was understood to be






abundantly supplied with food and necessaries; the farmers, from






their labouring the ground; the free hands, by the return of






their own ingenuity, in furnishing necessaries. The proprietors






therefore of this money have all their wants supplied, and still






are possessors of this new kind of riches, which we now suppose






to be coveted by all.






    The natural consequence here will be, that those who have the






money will cease to labour, and yet will consume; and they will






not consume for nothing, for they will pay with money.






    Here then is a number of inhabitants, who live and consume






the produce of the earth without labouring; food will soon become






scarce; demand for it will rise, and that will be paid with






money, this is the best equivalent of all; many will run to the






plough; the superfluity of the farmers will augment; the rich






will call for superfluities; the free hands will supply them, and






demand food in their turn. These will, the rich, who not be found






a burden on the husbandman, as formerly hired of them their






labour or service, must pay them with money, and this money in






their hands will serve as an equivalent for the superfluity of






nourishment produced by additional agriculture.






    When once this imaginary wealth (money) becomes well






introduced into a country, luxury will very naturally follow; and






when money becomes the object of our wants, mankind become






industrious, in turning their labour towards every object which






may engage the rich to part with it; and thus the inhabitants of






any country may increase in numbers, until the ground refuses






farther nourishment. The consequences of this will make the






subject of another chapter.






    Before we proceed, something must be said, in order a little






to restrain these general assertions.






    We have supposed a very rapid progress of industry, and a






very sudden augmentation of inhabitants, from the introduction of






money. But it must be observed, that many circumstances have






concurred with the money to produce this effect.






    We have supposed a country capable of improvement, a






laborious people, a taste for refinement and luxury in the rich,






an ambition to become so, and an application to labour and






ingenuity in the lower classes of men. According to the greater






or less degree of force, or concurrence of these and like






circumstances, will the country in question become more or less






cultivated, and consequently peopled.






    If the soil be vastly rich, situated in a warm climate, and






naturally watered, the productions of the earth will be almost






spontaneous: this will make the inhabitants lazy. Laziness is the






greatest of all obstacles to labour and industry. Manufactures






will never flourish here. The rich, with all their money, will






not become luxurious with delicacy and refinement; for I do not






mean by luxury the gratification of the animal appetites, nor the






abuse of riches, but an elegance of taste and in living, which






has for its object the labour and ingenuity of man; and as the






ingenuity of workmen begets a taste in the rich, so the






allurement of riches kindles an ambition, and encourages an






application to works of ingenuity, in the poor.






    Riches therefore will here be adored as a god, but not made






subservient to the uses of man; and it is by the means of swift






circulation only (as shall be observed in its proper place) that






they become productive of the effects mentioned above.(6*)






    When money does not circulate, it is the same thing as if it






did not exist; and as the treasures found in countries where the






inhabitants are lazy do not circulate, they are rather ornamental






than useful.






    It is not therefore in the most fruitful countries of the






world, nor in those which are the best calculated for nourishing






great multitudes, that we find the most inhabitants. It is in






climates less favoured by nature, and where the soil produces to






those only who labour, and in proportion to the industry of every






one, where we may expect to find great multitudes; and even these






multitudes will be found greater or less, in proportion as the






turn of the inhabitants is directed to ingenuity and industry.






    In such countries where industry is made to flourish, the






free hands (of whom we have spoken above) will be employed in






useful manufactures, which, being refined upon by the ingenious,






will determine what is called the standard of taste; this taste






will increase consumption, which again will multiply workmen, and






these will encourage the production of food for their






nourishment.






    Let it therefore never be said, that there are too many






manufacturers employed in a country; it is the same as if it were






said, there are too few idle persons, too few beggars, and too






many husbandmen.






    We have more than once endeavoured to shew, that these






manufacturers never can be fed but out of the superfluity of the






farmers. It is a contradiction, I think, to say, that those who






are fed upon the surplus of those who cultivate the soil are






necessary for producing a sufficiency to themselves. For if even






this surplus were to diminish, the manufacturers, not the






labourers, would be the first to be extinguished for want of






nourishment.






    The importance of the distributive proportion of mankind into






labourers and free hands appears so great, and has so intimate a






connection with this subject, that it engages me to seek for an






illustration of the principles I have been laying down, in an






example drawn from facts, as they are found to stand in one of






the greatest and most flourishing nations in Europe. But before I






proceed farther in this part of my subject, I must examine the






consequences of slavery with regard to the subject we are now






upon. Relations here are so many and so various, that it is






necessary to have sometimes recourse to transitions, of which I






give notice to my reader, that he may not lose the connection.













Chap. VII













The Effects of Slavery upon the Multiplication and Employment of






Mankind













    Before I go on to follow the consequences of the above






reasoning, I must stop to consider a difference of no small






importance between ancient and modern times, which will serve to






illustrate the nature of slavery, with regard to population and






the employment of mankind.






    We have endeavoured to lay down the principles which seem to






influence this question, supposing all to be free. In this case,






I imagine the human species will multiply pretty much in






proportion to their industry; their industry will increase






according to their wants, and these again will be diversified






according to the spirit of the times.






    From this I conclude, that the more free and simple the






manners of any country are, caeteris paribus, the fewer






inhabitants will be found in it. This is proved by experience






every where. The Tartars, who freely wander up and down a country






of vast extent, multiply but little; the savages in America, who






live upon hunting, in a state of great independence; the






inhabitants of several mountainous countries in Europe, where






there are few manufactures, and where the inhabitants do not






leave the country; in all such places mankind do not multiply.






What is the reason of this? One would imagine, where there is a






great extent of ground capable of producing food, that mankind






should multiply until the soil refused to give more. I imagine






the answer may be easily discovered from the principles above






laid down.






    Where mankind have few wants, the number of free hands






necessary to supply them is very small, consequently very little






surplus from the farmers is sufficient to maintain them. When






therefore it happens, that any poor family in the class of free






hands is very numerous, division there comes to be carried to its






utmost extent, and the greatest part become quite idle, because






there is no demand for their work. As long as they can be fed by






the division of the emoluments arising from the labour of their






parents, or by the charity of others, they live; when these






resources fail, they become miserable. In so wretched a situation






it is not easy to find bread. The farmers will not double their






diligence from a charitable disposition. Those who have land will






not allow those indigent people a liberty to raise grain in it






for nothing; and although they should, the poor are not in a






capacity to provide what is necessary for doing it. All other






work is fully stocked, the wretched die, or extinguish without






multiplying.






    To make this more evident, let us suppose the wants of






mankind, in any polite nation of Europe, which lives and






flourishes in our days upon the produce of its own soil, reduced






all at once to the simplicity of the ancient patriarchs, or even






to that of the old Romans. Suppose all the hands now employed in






the luxurious arts, and in every branch of modern manufactures,






to become quite idle, and all foreign trade to be cut off, how






could they be subsisted? What oeconomy could be set on foot, able






to preserve so many lives useful to the state? Yet it is plain by






the supposition, that the farmers of the country are capable of






maintaining them, since they actually do so. It would be absurd






to propose to employ them in agriculture, since there are enough






employed in this, to provide food for the whole.






    If it be certain that such people would die for want without






any resource; must it not follow that, unless their parents had






found the means of maintaining them when children, and they






themselves the means of afterwards subsisting by their industry






in supplying wants, they could not have existed beyond their






first infancy?






    This seems to strike deep against the populousness of the old






world, where we know that the wants of mankind, with regard to






trades and manufactures, were so few.






    But in those days the wants of mankind were of a different






nature. At present, there is a demand for the ingenuity of man;






then, there was a demand for his person and service. Now,






provided there be a demand for man, whatever use he be put to,






the species will multiply; for those who stand in need of them






will always feed them, and, as long as food is to be found,






numbers will increase.






    In the present times food cannot, in general, be found, but






by labour, and that cannot be found but to supply wants. Nobody






will feed a free man, more than he will feed the wild birds or






beasts of the field, unless he has occasion for the labour of the






one or flesh of the other.






    In the old world the principles were the same, but the spirit






of nations was different. Princes wanted to have numerous armies.






Free states sought for power in the number of their citizens. The






wants of Mankind being few, and a simplicity of manners






established, to have encouraged industry, excepting in






agriculture, which in all ages has been the foundation of






population, would have been an inconsistency. To make mankind






labour beyond their wants, to make one part of a state work to






maintain the other gratuitously, could only be brought about by






slavery, and slavery was therefore introduced universally.






Slavery was then as necessary towards multiplication, as it would






now be destructive of it. The reason is plain. If mankind be not






forced to labour, they will labour for themselves only; and if






they have few wants, there will be little labour. But when states






come to be formed, and have occasion for idle hands to defend






them against the violence of their enemies, food at any rate must






be procured for those who do not labour; and, as by the






supposition, the wants of the labourers are small, a method must






be found to increase their labour above the proportion of their






wants.






    For this purpose slavery was calculated: it had two excellent






effects with respect to population. The first, that, in






unpolished nations, living upon the spontaneous fruits of the






earth, and almost continually in war, lives were preserved for






the sake of making slaves of the captives. These, sold to private






people, or different states, were sure of being fed; whereas,






remaining in their own country, they occupied a place only,






which, by the force of the generative faculty, as has been






observed, was soon to be filled up by propagation: for it must






not be forgot, that when numbers are swept off, by any sudden






calamity, which does not proportionally diminish subsistence, a






new multiplication immediately takes place. Thus we perceive the






hurt done by plagues, by war, and by other devastations, either






among men, or cattle, repaired in a few years, even in those






countries where the standard number of both is seldom found to






increase. What immense quantities of cattle are yearly






slaughtered ! Does any body imagine that if all were allowed to






live, numbers would increase in proportion? The same is true of






men.






    The second advantage of slavery was, that in countries where






a good police prevailed, and where the people had fewer wants by






far than are felt in modern times, the slaves were forced to






labour the soil which fed both them and the idle freemen, as was






the case in Sparta; or they filled all the servile places which






freemen fill now, and they were likewise employed, as in Greece






and in Rome, in supplying with manufactures those whose service






was necessary for the state.






    Here then was a violent method making mankind laborious in






raising food; and provided this be accomplished, (by any means






whatever,) numbers will increase.






    Trade, industry, and manufactures, tend only to multiply the






numbers of men, by encouraging agriculture. If it be therefore






supposed, that two states are equally extended, equally fruitful,






and equally cultivated, and the produce consumed at home, I






believe they will be found equally peopled. But suppose the one






laboured by free men, the other by slaves, what difference will






be found in making war? In the first, the free hands must, by






their industry and labour, purchase their food, and a day lost is






in a manner a day of fasting: in the last, the slaves produce the






food, they are first fed, and the rest costs nothing to the body






of free men, who may be all employed in war, without the smallest






prejudice to industry.






    From these principles it appears, that slavery in former






times had the same effect in peopling the world that trade and






industry have now. Men were then forced to labour because they






were slaves to others; men are now forced to labour because they






are slaves to their own wants.






    I do not, however, pretend, that in fact slavery in ancient






times did every where contribute to population, any more than I






can affirm that the spirit of industry in the Dutch is common to






all free nations in our days. All that is necessary for my






purpose is, to set forth the two principles, and to shew the






natural effects of the one and the other, with respect to the






multiplication of mankind and advancement of agriculture, the






principal objects of our attention throughout this book.






    I shall at present enlarge no farther upon this matter, but






return to where I left off in the preceding chapter, and take up






the farther examination of the fundamental distribution of






inhabitants into labourers and free hands.













Chap. VII













What Proportion of Inhabitants is necessary for Agriculture, and






what Proportion may be usefully employed in every other






Occupation?













    I have proposed this question, not with an intention to






answer it fully, but to point out, how, with the proper lights






given, it may be answered.






    As I write under circumstances not the most favourable for






having recourse to books, I must employ those I have. The article






Political Arithmetic, of Mr Chambers's Cyclopedia, furnishes me






with some extracts from Sir William Petty, and Dr Davenant, which






I here intend to employ, towards pointing out a solution of the






question proposed. These authors consider the state of England as






it appeared to them, and what they say is conclusive with respect






to that state only.






    Sir William Petty supposes the inhabitants of England to be






six millions, the value of grain yearly consumed by them ten






millions sterling, the bushel of wheat reckoned at 5s., and that






of barley at 2s. 6d. If we cast the two together, and reckon upon






an average, this will make the quarter, or eight bushels of






grain, worth 1l. 10s.: but in regard, the barley cannot amount to






one half of all the grain consumed, especially as there is a good






quantity of rye made use of, which is worth more than the barley,






though less than the wheat; let us suppose the grain worth 32s.






per quarter, at a medium; then ten millions sterling will






purchase six millions of quarters of grain, or thereabouts;






which, used for nourishment, in bread and beer, gives the mean






quantity of one quarter, or 512 pounds troy of grain for every






inhabitant, including the nourishment of his proportional part of






animals; supposing that Sir William attended to this






circumstance, for it is not mentioned by Chambers. And I must






observe, by-the-bye, that this computation may hold good as to






England, where people eat so little bread; but would not answer






in France, nor in almost any other country I have seen.






    Dr Davenant, correcting Sir William's calculation, makes the






inhabitants 5,545,000. These, according to Sir William's prices






and proportions, would consume to the amount of 8,872,000l.






sterling. but the Dr carries it, with reason, a little higher,






and states it at 9,075,000l. sterling; the difference, however,






is inconsiderable. From this he concludes the gross produce of






the corn-fields to be about 9,075,000l. sterling. I make no






criticism upon this computation. 






    Next, as to the value of other lands; I find Sir William






reckons the gross produce of them in butter, cheese, milk, wool,






horses yearly bred, flesh for food, tallow, hides, hay, and






timber, to amount to 12,000,000l. sterling: The amount therefore






of the gross produce of all the lands in England must be equal to






these two sums added together, that is, to 21,075,000l. sterling.






    From these data, the Dr values the yearly rent of corn-lands






at two million sterling, and those of pasture, &c. at seven






millions; in all, nine millions.






    From this it appears, that the land-rents of England are to






the gross produce, as nine is to twenty-one, or thereabouts.






    Let me now examine some other proportions. 






    The rents of the corn-lands are to the gross produce of them,






as two is to nine; those of pasture, as seven to twelve.






    Now it is very certain, that all rents are in a pretty just






proportion to the gross produce, after deducting three principal






articles.






    First, The nourishment of the farmer, his family, and






servants. 






    Secondly, The necessary expences of his family, for






manufactures, and instruments for cultivating the ground.






    Thirdly, His reasonable profits, according to the custom of






every country.






    Of these three articles, let us distinguish what part implies






the direct consumption of the pure produce, from what does not.






    Of the first sort are the nourishment of men and cattle, wool






and flax for clothing, firing, and other smaller articles.






    Of the second are all manufactures bought, servants' wages,






the hire of labourers occasionally, and profits, either spent in






luxury, (that is, superfluity,) lent, or laid up.






    The three articles above mentioned (which we have distributed






under two heads) being deducted from the gross produce, the






remaining value shews the land-rent.






    This being the case, I am next to examine the cause of the






great disproportion between the rents of corn-lands, and those of






pasture, when compared with the gross produce, in order to draw






some conclusion, which may lead to the solution of the question






here proposed.






    This difference must proceed from the greater proportion of






labouring and other inhabitants employed in consequence of






tillage; which makes the expence of it far greater than that of






pasture. And since, in the one and the other, every article of






necessary expence or consumption ought naturally to be






proportionally equal among those concerned in both, that is,






proportional to the number of labouring inhabitants; it follows,






that the proportion of people employed in agriculture, and upon






the account of it, in different countries, is nearly in the ratio






of the gross produce, to the land-rent; or, in other words, in






the proportion of the consumption made by the farmers, and by






those employed necessarily by them, to the net produce, which is






the same thing.






    Now as the consumption upon corn-farms is 7/9, and that upon






pasture 5/12, the proportion of these two fractions must mark the






ratio between the populousness of pasture-lands, and those in






tillage; that is to say, tillage-lands in England were, at that






time, peopled in proportion to pasture-lands, as 84 is to 45, or






as 28 to 15.






    This point being settled, I proceed to another: to wit, the






application of this net produce or surplus of the quantity of






food and necessaries remaining over and above the nourishment,






consumption, and expence, of the inhabitants employed in






agriculture; and which we have observed above to be equal to the






land-rents of England, that is to say, to nine millions yearly.






    Must not this of necessity be employed in the nourishment,






and for the use of those whom we have called the free hands; who






may be employed in manufactures, trades, or in any other way,






according to the taste of the times?






    Now the numbers of a people, I take to be very nearly in the






proportion of the quantity of food they consume; especially when






a society is taken thus, in such accumulative proportion, and






when all are supposed to be under the same circumstances as to






the plenty of the year.






    The whole gross produce of England we have said to be






21,000,000 l. sterling, of which 9 millions have remained for






those not employed in agriculture; the farmers, therefore, and






their attendants, must annually consume 12 millions; consequently






the last class is to the first as 12 is to 9. If, therefore,






according to Dr Davenant, there be 5,545,000 people in that






kingdom, there must be about 3,168,571 employed or dependent upon






agriculture, and 2,376,429 free hands for every other occupation.






But this proportion of farmers will be found far less, if we






reflect, that we have reckoned for them the total amount of the






three articles above mentioned, that is to say, the total






consumption they make, as well in manufactures, profits upon






their labour, &c. as for food and necessaries: whereas there has






been nothing reckoned for the free hands, but the land-rent;






consequently there should be added to the number of the latter as






many as are employed in supplying with all sorts of manufactures






the whole of the farmers of England, and all those who depend






upon them; and this number must be taken from one and added to






the other class. If this number be supposed to amount to four






hundred thousand, it will do more than cast the balance upon the






opposite side.






    From these matters of fact (so far as they are so) we may






conclude:






    First, That the raising of the rents of lands shows the






increase of industry, as it swells the fund of subsistence






consumed by the industrious; that is, by those who buy it.






    Secondly, That it may denote either an increase of






inhabitants, or the depopulation of the land, in order to






assemble the superfluous mouths in villages, towns, &c, where






they may exercise their industry with greater convenience.






    While the land-rents of Europe were very low, numbers of the






inhabitants appeared to be employed in agriculture; but were






really no more than idle consumers of the produce of it. This






shall be further illustrated in the subsequent chapters.






    Thirdly, The more a country is in tillage, the more it is






inhabited, and the smaller is the proportion of free hands for






all the services of the state. The more a country is in pasture,






the less it is inhabited, but the greater is the proportion of






free hands.






    I do not pretend, as I have said above, that there is any






calculation to be depended on in this chapter; I have only






endeavoured to point out how a calculation might be made, when






the true state of England comes to be known.






    This question not being of a nature to enter into the chain






of our reasoning, may be considered rather as incidental than






essential; I have therefore treated it superficially and chiefly






for the sake of the conclusions.






    Our next inquiry will naturally be into the principles which






determine the residence of inhabitants, in order to discover why,






in all flourishing states, cities are now found to be every where






on the growing hand.













Chap. IX













What are the Principles which regulate the Distribution of






Inhabitants into Farms, Hamlets, Villages, Towns, and City?













    Having pointed out the natural distribution of inhabitants






into the two capital classes of which we have been treating, I am






going to examine how far their employment must decide as to their






place of residence.






    First, When mankind is fed upon the spontaneous fruits of the






earth, the distribution of their residence depends upon the






division of the lands. If these are in common to all, then the






inhabitants will be scattered abroad, or gathered together,






according as the productions of the earth are equally distributed






over the face of the country, or confined to some fruitful spots






only.






    Hence the Tartars wander with their flocks and feed upon






them: hence the hunting Indians are scattered in small societies,






through the woods, and live upon game: hence others, who feed






upon the fruits of the earth, are collected in greater numbers






upon the sides of rivers, and in watered valleys.






    Where therefore the surface of the earth is not appropriated,






there the place producing the food determines the place of






residence of every one of the society, and there mankind may live






in idleness, and remain free from every constraint.






    Secondly, When the earth is not in common to those who live






upon her spontaneous fruits, but is appropriated by a few, there






either slavery or industry must be introduced among those who






consume the surplus of the proprietors; because these will expect






either service or work in return for their superfluity. In this






case, the residence of the inhabitants will depend upon the






circumstances we are going to consider; and the object of






agriculture in countries where the surface of the earth is not






broken up, being solely directed towards the gathering in of






fruits, will determine the residence of those only who are






necessary for that purpose: consequently it will follow, that in






climates where the earth produces spontaneously, and in vast






abundance, there may be found large cities; because the number of






those who are necessary for gathering in the fruits is small in






proportion to the quantity of them; whereas in other countries,






where the earth's productions are scanty, and where the climate






refuses those of the copious and luxuriant kind, there will






hardly be found any considerable town, because the number of






those who are necessary for collecting the subsistence, bears a






great proportion to the fruits themselves. I do not say, that in






the first case there must be large towns, or that in the other






there can be none; but I say that, in the first case, those who






may be gathered into towns, bear a great proportion to the whole






society; and that, in the second, they bear a small one.






    I think I have found this principle confirmed by experience.






When I compare the bulk and populousness of the cities of






Lombardy, and still more, those of the watered provinces of






Spain, with the inhabitants of the territory which maintains






them, I find the proportion of the first vastly greater than in






those of France and England; and still more again in these two






last mentioned kingdoms, than in the more northern countries and






provinces, where the earth's productions bear a less proportion






to the labour bestowed in producing them. Now, although I allow






that neither the one or the other is fed by spontaneous






productions, yet still it may be inferred, that the more the






climate contributes to favour the labour of man, the more the






productions participate of the spontaneous nature.(7*)






    Again, in countries where labour is required for feeding a






society, the smaller the proportion of labourers, the greater






will be that of the free hands. Fruits which are produced by






annual labour, and still more, such as are the consequence of a






thorough cultivation, (such as luxuriant pasture,) give returns






far superior to the nourishment of those employed in the






cultivation; consequently, all the surplus is consumed by people






not employed in agriculture; consequently, by those who are not






bound to reside upon the spot which feeds them, and who may






choose the habitation best adapted for the exercise of that






industry which is most proper to produce an equivalent to the






farmers for their superfluities.






    From this it is plain that the residence of the farmers only






is essentially attached to the place of cultivation. Hence, farms






in some provinces, villages in others.






    I now proceed to the other class of inhabitants; the free






hands who live upon the surplus of the farmers.






    These I must subdivide into two conditions. The first, those






to whom this surplus directly belongs, or who, with a revenue in






money already acquired, can purchase it. The second, those who






purchase it with their daily labour or personal service.






    Those of the first condition may live where they please;






those of the second, must live where they can. The residence of






the consumers determines, in many cases, that of the suppliers.






In proportion, therefore, as those who live where they please






choose to live together, in this proportion must the others






follow them. And in proportion as the state thinks fit to place






the administration of government in one place, in the same






proportion must the administrators, and every one depending upon






them, be gathered together. These I take to be principles which






influence the swelling of the bulk of capitals, and smaller






cities.






    When the residence of the consumer does not determine that of






him who supplies it, other considerations are allowed to operate.






This is the case in what may properly be called manufactures,






distinguished from trades, whether they be for home-consumption,






or foreign exportation. These considerations are,






    First, Relative to the place and situation of the






establishment; which gives a preference to the sides of rivers






and rivulets, when machines wrought by water are necessary; to






the proximity of forests and collieries, when fire is employed;






to the place which produces the substance of the manufacture; as






in mines, collieries, brick-works, &c.






    Secondly, Relative to the convenience of transportation, as






upon navigable rivers, or by great roads.






    Thirdly, Relative to the cheapness of living, consequently






not (frequently) in great cities, except for their own






consumption. But it must be observed, that this last






consideration can hardly ever be permanent: for the very






establishment being the means of raising prices, the advantage






must diminish in proportion as the undertaking comes to succeed.






The best rule therefore is, to set down such manufactures upon






the banks of navigable rivers, where all necessary provisions may






be brought from a distance at a small cost. This advantage is






permanent, the others are not; and may prove in time hurtful, by






a change in those very circumstances which decided as to the






choice of the situation. From the establishment of manufactures






we see hamlets swell into villages, and villages into towns.






    Sea-ports owe their establishment to foreign trade. From one






or other of these and similar principles, are mankind gathered






into hamlets, villages, towns, and cities.













Chap. X













Of the Consequences which result from the Separation of the two






principal Classes of a People, the Farmers and the Free Hands,






with regard to their Dwelling













    I am next going to examine the consequences resulting to the






state, to the citizens, and to the landed interest, from this






kind of separation, as I may call it, between the parent earth






and her laborious children, which naturally takes place every






where in proportion to the progress of industry, luxury, and the






swift circulation of money.






    As to the state, it is, I think, very plain, that, without






such a distribution of inhabitants, it would be impossible to






levy taxes. For as long as the earth nourishes directly those who






are upon her surface, as long as she delivers her fruits into the






very hand of him who consumes them, there is no alienation, no






occasion for money, consequently no possibility of establishing






an extensive taxation, as shall in its place be fully explained.






From this principle is, I imagine, to be deduced the reason, why






we find taxation so little known under the feudal form of






government.






    The personal service of the vassals, with their cattle and






servants upon all occasions, made the power and wealth of the






lords, and their rents were mostly paid in kind. They lived upon






their lands, were commonly jealous of one another, and had






constant disputes. This was a very good reason to keep them from






coming together. Towns were situated round their habitations.






These were mostly composed of the few tradesmen and manufacturers






that were in the country. The lord's judge, his fiscal, and his






court of record, added to these numbers; lawsuits, and the lord's






attendance, brought the vassals frequently together; this gave






encouragement to houses of entertainment; and this I take to be






the picture of the greatest part of small towns, if we ascend






three or four hundred years from the present time.






    Cities were the residence of bishops. These lords were very






independent of the civil government, and had at the same time the






principal direction in it. They procured privileges to their






cities, and these communities formed themselves by degrees into






small republics: taxes here have ever been familiar. The feudal






lords seldom appeared here, and the inferior classes of the






people enjoyed liberty and ease in these cities only.






    In some countries of Europe, as in Germany, the principal






citizens, in time, became patricians. In France certain offices






of public trust sometimes procured nobility to those who bore






them, and always consideration. The representatives of the






citizens were even admitted into the states, and formed the tiers






êtat. Elsewhere they received casual marks of distinction from






the sovereign, as the Lord Mayor of London does to this day






usually receive knighthood. In short, the only dawning of public






liberty to be met with during the feudal government, was in the






cities; no wonder then if they increased.






    Upon the discovery of America and the East-Indies, industry,






trade, and luxury, were soon introduced in the kingdoms of Spain,






France, and England: the grandeur and power of the Hanstowns had






already pointed out to sovereigns the importance of these






objects.






    The courts of princes then became magnificent; the feudal






lords insensibly began to frequent them with more assiduity than






formerly. The splendor of the prince soon eclipsed those rays






which shone around them upon their own lands. They now no more






appeared to one another as objects of jealousy, but of emulation.






They became acquainted, began to relish a court life, and every






one proposed to have a house in the capital. A change of






habitation made a change of circumstances, both as to city and






country. As to the city; so far as inhabitants were increased, by






the addition of the great lords, and of those who followed their






example, so far demand increased for every sort of provision and






labour; and this quickly drew more inhabitants together. Every






one vied with another in magnificence of palaces, clothes,






equipages. Modes changed and by turns enlivened the different






branches of ingenuity. Whence came so great a number of






inhabitants all of a sudden? He who would have cast his eyes on






the deserted residences of the nobility, would quickly have






discovered the source; he would there have seen the old people






weeping and wailing, and nothing heard among them but complaints






of desolation: the youth were retired to the city: there was no






change as to them.






    This is no doubt a plain consequence of a sudden revolution,






which never can happen without being attended with great






inconveniences. Many of the numerous attendants of the nobility






who uselessly filled every house and habitation belonging to the






great man, were starving for want. He was at court, and calling






aloud for money, a thing he was seldom accustomed to have






occasion for, except to lock up in his chest. In order to procure






this money, he found it expedient to convert a portion of the






personal services of his vassals into cash: by this he lost his






authority. He then looked out for a farmer (not a husbandman) for






an estate which he formerly consumed in its fruits. This






undertaker, as I may call him, began by dismissing idle mouths.






Still greater complaints ensued. At last, the money spent in the






city began to flow into the hands of the industrious: this raised






an emulation and the children of the miserable, who had felt the






sad effects of the revolution, but who could not foresee the






consequences, began to profit by it. They became easy and






independent in the great city, by furnishing to the extravagance






of those under whose dominion they were born.






    This progression is perhaps too minutely traced to be exact;






I therefore stop, to consider the situation of affairs at that






period, when all the inconveniences of the sudden revolution had






ceased, and when things were come to the state in which we now






find them. Capitals swelled to a great extent; Paris and London






appearing monstrous to some, as being a load upon the rest of the






country. This must be examined.






    We agree, I suppose, that the inhabitants of cities are not






employed in agriculture, and we may agree that they are fed by






it: we have examined into the causes of the increase of cities,






and we have seen the fund provided for their subsistence, to wit,






the surplus of fruits produced by husbandmen.






    What are then the advantages resulting to the citizens from






this great increase of their city? I cannot find any great






benefit resulting to each individual from this circumstance; but






I conclude, that the same advantages which many find in






particular, must be common to great numbers, consequently great






numbers are gathered together.






    The principal objections against great cities are, that






health there is not so good, that marriages are not so frequent






as in the country, that debauchery prevails, and that abuses are






multiplied.






    To this I answer, that these objections lie equally against






most cities, and are not peculiar to those complained of for






their bulk; and that the evils proceed more from the spirit of






the inhabitants, than from the size of the capital.






    It is further urged, that the number of deaths exceeds the






number of births in great cities; consequently smaller towns, and






even the country, is stripped of its inhabitants, in order to






recruit these capitals.






    Here I first deny, that in all capitals the number of deaths






exceeds the number of births; for in Paris it is otherwise. But






supposing the assertion to be true, what conclusion can be drawn






from it, except that many people who are born in the country die






in town. That the country should furnish cities with inhabitants






is no evil. What occasion has the country for supernumerary






hands? If it has enough for the supply of its own wants, and of






the demands of cities, has it not enough? Had it more, the






supernumeraries would either consume without working, or, if






added to the class of labourers, instead of being added to the






number of free hands, would overturn the balance between the two






classes; grain would become too plentiful, and that would cast a






general discouragement upon agriculture: whereas, by going to






cities, they acquire money, and therewith purchase the grain they






would have consumed, had they remained in the country; and this






money, which their additional labour in cities will force into






circulation, would otherwise have remained locked up, or at least






would not have gone into the country, but in consequence of the






desertion of the supernumeraries. The proper and only right






encouragement for agriculture, is a moderate and gradual increase






of demand for the productions of the earth: this works a natural






and beneficial increase of inhabitants; and this demand must come






from cities, for the husbandmen never have occasion to demand; it






is they who offer to sale.






    The high prices of most things in large cities is a benefit






surely, not a loss to the country. But I must observe, that the






great expence of living in capitals does not affect the lower






classes, nor the moderate and frugal, in any proportion to what






it does the rich. If you live on beef, mutton, bread, and beer,






you may live as cheap in London and in Paris as in most cities I






know. These articles abound, and though the demand be great, the






provision made for supplying it is in proportion. But when you






come to fish, fowl, and game; delicacies of every kind brought






from far, by the post, by ships, and by messengers; when you have






fine equipages, large houses, expensive servants, and abundance






of waste in every article, without one grain of oeconomy in any,






it is no wonder that money should run away so fast. I do not,






from what has been said, conclude, that there is any evident






advantage in having so overgrown a capital as London in such a






kingdom as England; but that I do not find great force in the






objections I have met with against it. That there may be others






which I do not know, I will not deny, because I am not






sufficiently acquainted with that kingdom to be a competent judge






of the matter.






    Let me now conclude this chapter, by mentioning in what






respects I think cities an advantage, in general, to a country;






and, as I go along, I shall point out wherein they prove a






disadvantage, in particular, to some parts of it.






    The general advantages of them are:






    First, To remove the necessary load upon the land; those idle






people, who eat up a part of the produce of labour without






contributing to it.






    Secondly, The opportunity of levying taxes, and of making






these affect the rich, in proportion to the consumption they






make, without hurting industry or exportation.






    Thirdly, The advantages resulting to the landed interest are






no less considerable. This is proved by universal experience; for






we see every where, that the moment any city, town, or village,






begins to encrease, by the establishment of trade or






manufactures, the lands round about immediately rise in their






value. The reason of this seems easily deduced from the above






principles.






    When a farmer has got his oeconomy under right regulations,






not one supernumerary, nor useless mouth, but abundance of hands






for every kind of labour, which is generally the case near towns






and cities, the proximity of them discharges him of every






superfluity. His cattle consume the exact quantity of grain and






of forage necessary; what remains is money, a superfluous egg is






money; a superfluous day of a cart, of a horse, a superfluous






hour of a servant, is all money to the farmer. There is a






constant demand for every thing he can do or furnish. To make






this the more sensibly perceived, remove into a province, far






from a town, and compare situations. There you find abundance of






things superfluous, which cannot be turned into money, which






therefore are consumed without much necessity, and with little






profit. It is good to have an estate there, when you want to live






upon it; it is better to have one near the great town, when you






do not.






    It may be alleged, that the disadvantages felt by the distant






farmer and proprietor, when they compare situations with those






residing near the town, proceed from the town: this must be






examined.






    If the town consume the produce of this distant farm, it must






consume it in competition with every place at a smaller distance;






consequently this competition must do more good than harm to the






distant farm. If the city consume none of the produce, wherein






does it affect it? It may be answered, that, by entering into






competition with the distant farmer for the labouring






inhabitants, these desert agriculture, in favour of a more






lucrative occupation, to be found in the city. Scarcity of hands






in the country raises the price of labour on one hand, while it






diminishes the price of subsistence on the other; consequently






the farmer suffers a double disadvantage. Of this there can be no






doubt; but as these revolutions cannot by their nature be sudden,






it becomes the duty of the statesman, whom I suppose constantly






awake, directly to set on foot some branch of industry in every






such distant part of the country; and as prices of subsistence






will diminish for a while, for the reasons above-mentioned, this






will prove an encouragement to the establishment; this again will






accelerate propagation, as it will prove an outlet for children,






and, in a short time, the farmer will find himself in a better






situation than ever. But even without this assistance from






industry the state, a few years will set all to rights, provided






the spirit of is kept up: for cities, by swelling, extend their






demand to the most distant corners of a country; the inhabitants






who desert do not cease to consume, and thereby they repair the






hurt they do by their desertion. I appeal to experience for the






truth of this. Do we not perceive demand extending every year






farther and farther from great capitals? I know places in France






which, twenty years ago, never knew what it was to send even a






delicacy to Paris, but by the post, and which now send thither






every week loaded waggons, with many thousand weight of






provisions, so much that I may almost say, that a fatted chicken






in the most distant province of that country can be sold with






great profit in the Paris market during all the winter season;






and cattle carry thither their own flesh cheaper than any waggon






can. What distant farm then can complain of the greatness of that






noble city? There is however a case, where a distant part of a






country may suffer in every respect, to wit, when the revolution






is sudden; as when a rich man, who used to spend his income in






his province, for the encouragement of industry, goes to Paris or






London, and stays away for a year or two, without minding the






interest of the estate he abandons. No doubt this must affect his






province in proportion; but in every revolution which comes on






gradually by the desertion of such only as lived by their






industry, new mouths are born and supply the old. The only






question is about employing them well: while you have superfluous






food and good oeconomy, a country will always reap the same






benefit from her natural advantages.






    Fourthly, Another advantage of cities is, the necessity






arising from thence of having great roads, and these again prove






a considerable encouragement to agriculture.






    The miserable condition of roads over all Europe almost, till






within these hundred years, is a plain proof of the scanty






condition of the cities, and of the small encouragement formerly






given towards extending the improvement of the soil.






    Let any one examine the situation of the landed interest






before the making of great roads in several provinces in France,






and compare it with what it is at present. If this be found a






difficult inquiry, let him compare the appearance of young






gentlemen of middling fortune, as he finds them at Paris, or in






their regiment, with that of their fathers, who live in their






province in the old way, and he will have a very good opportunity






of perceiving the progress of ease and refinement in this class,






which has proceeded from no other cause than the improvement of






the soil. People complain that prices are risen; of this there is






no doubt with regard to many articles. Is not this quite






consistent with our principles? It is not because there is now a






larger mass of money in the kingdom, though I allow this to be






true, and also that this circumstance may have contributed to






raise prices; but the direct principle which has influenced them,






and which will always regulate their rise and fall, is the






increase of demand. Now the great roads in a manner carry the






goods to market; they seem to shorten distances, they augment the






number of carriages of all sorts, they remove the inconveniences






above-mentioned resulting from the distance of the city. The more






distant parts of the country come to market, in competition with






the farmers in the neighbourhood of the cities. This competition






might make the rents of lands lying round such cities as were the






first to encourage industry, sink in their value. But the hurt in






this respect done to the proprietors of these lands would soon be






repaired. The cities would increase in bulk, demand would






increase also, and prices would rise a-new. Every thing which






employs inhabitants usefully promotes consumption; and this again






is an advantage to the state, as it draws money from the






treasures of the rich into the hands of the industrious. The easy






transportation of fruits produces this effect: the distant farmer






can employ his idle hours in providing, and the idle days of his






servants and cattle in sending things to market, from farms which






formerly never knew what it was to sell such productions.






    I shall carry these speculations no farther, but conclude by






observing, that the making of roads and navigable canals must






advance population, as they contribute to the advancement of






agriculture.













Chap. XI













Of the Distribution of Inhabitants into Classes; of the






Employment and Multiplication of them













    Having deduced the effects of modern policy, in assembling so






large a proportion of inhabitants into cities, it is proper to






point the principles which should direct the statesman to the






proper means of providing, supporting, and employing them.






Without this they neither can live nor multiply. Their parent,






Earth, has in a manner banished them from her bosom; they have






her no more to suckle them in idleness; industry has gathered






them together, labour must support them, and this must produce a






surplus for bringing up children. If this resource should fail,






misery will ensue: the depopulation of the cities will be






followed by the ruin of the lands, and all will go to wreck






together. We have already laid down the principles which appear






the most natural to engage mankind to labour, supposing all to be






free and we have observed how slavery, in former times, might






work the same effect, as to peopling the world, that trade and






industry do now; men were then forced to labour because they were






slaves to others, men are forced to labour now because they are






slaves to their own wants: provided man be made to labour, and






make the earth produce abundantly, and provided that either






authority, industry, or charity, can make the produce circulate






for the nourishment of the free hands, the principle of a great






population is brought to a full activity.






    I shall now suppose these principles to be well understood.






Wants promote industry, industry gives food, food increases






numbers: the next question is, how numbers are to be well






employed?






    It is a general maxim in the mouth of every body; increase






the inhabitants of the state: the strength and power of a state






is in proportion to the number of its inhabitants.






    I am not fond of condemning opinions; but I am very much for






limiting general propositions. I have hardly ever escaped being






led into error by every one I have laid down. Nothing is so






systematical, nothing so pretty in a treatise as general maxims;






they facilitate the distribution of our ideas, and I have never






been able to dash them out but with a certain regret.






    As I often recur to private oeconomics for clearing up my






ideas it be a general rule, that concerning the political, I have






asked myself, if it be a general rule, that, the master of a






family should increase the mouths of it, to the full proportion






of all he can feed? Now it is my opinion, that in a small family






well composed, and where every one is properly employed, both






master and servants are much happier than in others vastly more






numerous, where the same order and regularity is not kept up; and






that a small number of well disciplined soldiers is more






formidable, and really stronger, than the numerous populace of a






large city.






    The use of inhabitants is to be mutually serviceable one to






another in particular, and to the society in general.






Consequently, every state should, in good policy, first apply






itself to make the inhabitants they have answer this purpose,






before they carry their views towards augmenting their numbers. I






think it is absurd to wish for new inhabitants, without first






knowing how to employ the old; and it is ignorance of the real






effects of population, to imagine that an increase of numbers






will infallibly remove inconveniences which proceed from the






abuses of those already existing.






    I shall then begin by supposing that inhabitants require






rather to be well employed than increased in numbers.






    If I know the number of inhabitants, I may know the






proportion which die every year: consequently, I know how many






pairs of breeders are necessary to keep up the stock. If I want






to raise twenty bushels of grain only, I do not sow my lands with






twenty bushels. If I have as many children born as there are






people who die, I have enough by the supposition. But these






children must be raised proportionally, from the different






classes of inhabitants, which I here consider as distributed into






two conditions; those who do not labour, and those who do. May I






not venture to say, that there is no absolute necessity that






those of the first class should multiply in order to recruit the






second. If then the second class is kept up to its proper






standard by its own multiplication, and if their work be all






consumed, will it not be found that the diminution of those






mouths who do not work, and which appear useful in consideration






only of the consumption they make, is no real loss to the nation?






But to this it is objected, that if the number of the first class






be diminished, the work of the second will lie upon hand.






    Here I look for my answer from what daily experience points






out. Two persons (A) and (B) have each 1000 l. a year; (A) has






many children, (B) has none: they both spend their income; (A)






upon the necessaries of life for his family, and for the






education of his children; for the supplying of which, those of






the working class only are employed, for whoever does or gives






any thing for money, I consider as a worker: (B) spends his






income as a fashionable young gentleman: he has a fine chariot,






abundance of footmen in laced liveries; in short, without






examining into the particulars of his expence, I find the whole






1000 l. spent at the end of the year. Neither (A) or (B) do any






work; or are any of (A's) children necessary as a supply to the






working hands, by the supposition. Is it not true then, that (B)






has consumed as much work or service, for these I consider as the






same thing, as (A) with his family? Nay, I may still go farther,






and affirm, that (B) has contributed as much, if not more, to






population than (A). For if it he true, that he who gives food






gives numbers, I say, that the expence of (B) has given food to






the children of the industrious employed by him: consequently,






instead of having directly contributed to the increase of the






idle of the state, which is the case with (A), he has indirectly






contributed to the multiplication of the industrious. What good






then does the state reap from (A's) children, from his marriage,






from his multiplication? Indeed, I see no harm although he had






remained a batchelor: for those who produce idle consumers only,






certainly add neither riches, strength, or ease to a state. And






it is of such people alone that there is any question here.






    From this I conclude, that there can be no determinate number






of rich idle consumers necessary to employ a determinate number






of industrious people, no more than of masters to employ a fixed






number of menial servants. Do we not see a single man frequently






attended by more servants than are necessary when he gets a wife






and family? nay, it many times happens, that a young man, upon






his marriage, diminishes the number of his domestics, in order to






give bread to his children.






    If riches be calculated, as I hope to prove, for the






encouragement of industry; if circulation is to be accelerated by






every method, in order to give bread to those who are disposed to






work, or, in other words, who are disposed to become vigorous






members of the commonwealth, by contributing with their strength,






their ingenuity, or their talents, to supply her wants, to






augment her riches, to promote and administer a good government






at home, or to serve it abroad: then, I say, the too great






multiplication of those who come under none of these classes, the






idle consumers as I have called them, contribute directly to make






the other part languish.






    There is no governing a state in perfection, and consequently






no executing the plan for a right distribution of the






inhabitants, without exactly knowing their situation as to






numbers, their employment, the gains upon every species of






industry, the numbers produced from each class. These are the






means of judging how far those of a particular trade or






occupation are in a situation to bring up a family. To examine,






on the other hand, the state of the higher classes who do not






labour, the ease of their circumstances, and the use the state






has for their service; this may appear superfluous; since those






who do not work, must be supposed to have wherewithal to live;






and consequently, not to stand in need of assistance. But this is






not every where, nor always the case; and many excellent subjects






are lost to a state, for want of a proper attention in the






statesman to this object.






    I have observed how necessary a thing it is to govern a






people according to their spirit; now by governing I understand,






protecting, cherishing, and supporting, as well as punishing,






restraining, and exacting. If, therefore, there be found in any






country, a very numerous nobility, who look upon trade and the






inferior arts as unbecoming their birth; a good statesman must






reflect upon the spirit of former times, and compare it with that






of the present. He will then perceive, that these sentiments have






been transmitted from father to son, and that six generations are






not elapsed since, over all Europe, they were universally






adopted: that, although the revolution we talked off in the 10th






chapter has in effect rendered them less adapted to the spirit of






the present times, they are however productive of excellent






consequences; they serve as a bulwark to virtue, against the






allurements of riches; and it is dangerous to force a set of men






who form a considerable body in a state, from necessity, to






trample under foot, what they have been persuaded from their






infancy to be the test of a noble and generous mind.






    About two hundred years ago, the nobility of several nations,






(I mean, by this term, all people well born, whether adorned with






particular marks of royal favour or not,) used to live upon the






produce of their lands. In those days there was little luxury,






little circulation; the lands fed numbers of useless mouths, in






the modern acceptation of useless, consequently produced a very






moderate income in money to the proprietors, who notwithstanding






were the most considerable persons in the state. This class of






inhabitants remaining inactive in the country, during the






revolution above mentioned, have, in consequence of the






introduction of industry, trade and luxury, insensibly had the






balance of wealth, and consequently of consideration turned






against them. Of this there is no doubt. This class however has






retained the military spirit, the lofty sentiments; and






notwithstanding their depression in point of fortune, are found






calculated to shine the brightest, when set in a proper






elevation. In times of peace, when trade flourishes, the lustre






of those who wallow in public money, the weight and consideration






of the wealthy merchant, and even the ease and affluence of the






industrious tradesman, eclipse the poor nobility; they become an






object of contempt to bad citizens, an object of compassion to






the good; and political writers imagine they render them an






important service, when they propose to receive them into the






lower classes of the people. But when danger threatens from






abroad, and when armies are brought into the field, compare the






behaviour of those conducted by a warlike nobility, with those






conducted by the sons of labour and industry; those who have






glory, with those who have gain for their point of view. Let the






state suffer only this nobility to languish without a proper






encouragement, there is no fear but they will soon disappear;






their lands will become possessed by people of a way of thinking






more *-la-mode, and the army will quickly adopt new sentiments,






more analogous to the spirit of a moneyed interest.






    I find nothing more affecting to a good mind, than to see the






distress of a poor nobility in both sexes. Some have proposed






trade for this class. Why do you not trade? I answer, for the






nobility; because, in order to trade, I must have money. This






objection is unanswerable. Why then do you not apply to other






branches of industry? If it is the state who is supposed to ask






the question, I ask, in my turn, What advantage she can reap from






their industry? What profit from their becoming shop-keepers,






weavers, or taylors? Are not, or ought not all these employments






to be provided with hands from their own multiplication? What






advantage can she reap by the children of one class taking the






bread out of the mouths of another?






    If the sentiments in which the nobility have been educated,






prove detrimental to the state, throw a discouragement upon them.






If birth is to be no mark of distinction, let it not be






distinguished by any particular privilege, which in appearance






sets this class above the level of those with whom the state






intends it should be incorporated. You do not make your






valet-de-chambre get behind your coach, though upon an occasion






it might be convenient, and though perhaps he had been your






footman the day before; you would even turn him out of doors, did






he not change his company with his rank.






    If you cannot afford to have a nobility, let it die away:






grant, as in England, the title of noble to one of a family only,






and let all the rest be commoners; that is to say, distinguished






by no personal privilege whatsoever from the lowest classes of






the people. But if you want them to serve you as soldiers, and






wish they should preserve those sentiments you approve of in a






soldier, take care at least of their children. If these appear to






you poor and ragged, while they are wandering up and down their






father's lands, chasing a wretched hare or a partridge compare






them, when in the troops, with those of your wealthy neighbours,






if any such you have.






    The establishment of an hôtel militaire shews that there are






some people at least who lend an ear to such representations. I






do not propose that a prince should divert into this channel






those streams of wealth which flow from every part of the state,






though nothing is more reasonable than for men to pay in order to






protect their gains; but let a tax be imposed upon noble






property, and let it be appropriated for the education of the






generous youth from their earliest years. There the state will






have all under her eye, they are her children, her subjects, and






they ask no more than to be taken from the obscurity of their






habitations, and rendered capable of being employed while young






and vigorous. When they have done their task, the country which






produced them will receive them back into her warm bosom; there






they will produce others like themselves, and support the spirit






and propagation of their own class, without becoming any charge






upon others.






    A statesman should make it his endeavour to employ as many of






every class as possible, and when employment fails in the common






run of affairs, to contrive new outlets for young people of every






denomination. The old and idle are, in many particulars, lost






beyond recovery.






    The mutual relations likewise, through industry, between






class and class, should be multiplied and encouraged to the






utmost. Relations by marriage, I am apt to believe, prove here






more hurtful than beneficial. That is to say, I would rather






discourage the intermarriage of the persons of different classes;






but I would encourage, as much as possible, all sorts of mutual






dependences between them, in the way of their trades. The last






tends to keep every one employed, according to the wants and






spirit of his class; the first is productive in general of no






good effect that I can perceive; which is reason sufficient for a






state to give at least no encouragement to such marriages, and






this is all the restraint proper to be imposed.






    Such members of the society as remain unemployed, either from






natural infirmities or misfortunes, and who thereby become a load






upon others, are really a load upon the state. This is a disease






which must be endured. There is no body, no thing, without






diseases. A state should provide retreats of all sorts, for the






different conditions of her decayed inhabitants: humanity, good






policy, and christianity, require it. Thus much may be said in






general upon the principles which direct the employment and






distribution of inhabitants, which in every state must be






different, according to circumstances relating to the extension,






situation, and soil of the country, and above all, to the spirit






of the people. I am next to offer some considerations with regard






to the proper methods of augmenting numbers.













Chap. XII













Of the great Advantage of combining a well digested Theory and a






perfect Knowledge of Facts with the practical Part of Government,






in order to make a People multiply













    We have the happiness to live in an age where daily






opportunities offer, of perceiving the difference between






exercising an art according to the mechanical received practice,






and according to the principles which study and refinement have






introduced for bringing it to perfection. This will appear in the






strongest light to one who compares the operation of building an






ordinary house, with that of executing a great public work, where






the most able architects are employed; the making a common parish






road, with that of a military way, through mountains, forests,






and marshes. In the first, every difficulty appears






unsurmountable: in the second, the greatest obstacles are made to






vanish. By comparing these things, we distinguish between the






artist, who proceeds by the rules of the science, and the






ordinary tradesman, who has no other resource than common






practice, aided by his own ingenuity.






    Every branch of science must be carried to perfection by a






master in it, formed by the hand of nature, and improved by






application and experience. The great genius of Mr de Colbert saw






through the confusion and perplexity of the administration of the






French finances; he invented resources for swelling the public






treasure, which never would have been liable to so many






inconveniences as are complained of, had the administration been






conducted with as much disinterestedness, as it was set on foot






with ability. The genius of Mr Law was original as to figures and






paper credit. Sir Robert Walpole discovered new principles of






taxation; he extended the plan of public credit, and reduced the






application of it to a science. These were horn statesmen in the






common acceptation of the word, they were creators of new ideas,






they found out new principles for the government of men, and led






them by their interest to concur in the execution of their plans.






Men of a speculative disposition may broach hints, although the






force of theory, destitute of practice, and unassisted by






experiment, be not sufficient to carry them the length of forming






a plan. A great genius, with power and authority, has occasion






for no more than a hint to strike out the system, and to carry






it, with success, into execution.






    No problems of political oeconomy seem more obscure than






those which influence the multiplication of the human species,






and which determine the distribution and employment of them, so






as best to advance the prosperity of each particular society.






    I have no where found these matters treated to my wish, nor






have I ever been able to satisfy myself concerning them. There






are many clouds which still cover the fruitful fields of this






science; and until these be dissipated, the political eye cannot






take in the whole landscape, nor judge of the deformities which






appear in the many representations which our modern painters are






daily giving of it.






    I may here, without an imputation of vanity, put myself so






far upon a level with the great Montesquieu, as to adopt the






saying of Correggio, Io anche son pittore; I am also a dauber;






for I frankly acknowledge my own incapacity to treat this subject






with all the perspicuity it deserves: my frequent repetitions,






and my often returning to it at different times, in order to






clear up my ideas and those of my readers, shews plainly, that I






am sensible of my own insufficiency. By setting it, however, in






different lights, and viewing it as it were from different






stations, perhaps both my reader and I may come at last to see a






little clearer.






    In a former chapter, I have endeavoured to lay down the






principles which influence multiplication; but alas! they are all






so general, that they can be considered only as the most remote.






They may satisfy a slight speculation, but can be of little use






in practice. I have principally insisted upon those which are






found to operate at all times among societies where primitive






simplicity prevails. Now this matter comes to be examined in a






more complex light, as relative to the manners of modern mankind,






which no statesman, however able, can change; where trade,






industry, luxury, credit, taxes, and debts, are introduced. In






these the most polite nations of Europe are involved. This is a






chain of adamant, it hangs together by a cohesion, which the






successive revolutions of three centuries have so cemented with






the spirit of nations, that it appears to be indissoluble. It is






not my business to examine how far the modern system is to be






preferred to the ancient; my point of view is, to investigate how






a statesman may turn the circumstances which have produced this






new plan of oeconomy to the best advantage for mankind, leaving






the reformation of such a plan to time and to events, of which I






am not the master. Schemes for recalling ancient simplicity and






for making mankind honest and virtuous, are beautiful






speculations: I admire them as much as any body, but not enough






to believe them practicable in our degenerate age.






    If therefore the principles I here lay down appear






contradictory to so amiable a system of policy, let no man thence






conclude any thing to my disadvantage upon the account of my






particular opinion concerning it, which is a matter of no






importance whatsoever. My object is to examine the consequences






of what we feel and see daily passing, and to point out how far






the bad may be avoided, and the good turned to the best






advantage.






    The loss of ancient simplicity, and the introduction of this






complicated scheme of living, has rendered the mechanism of






government infinitely more difficult, and almost every disorder






in the political body affects multiplication. Depopulation is as






certain a mark of political diseases, as wasting is of those of






the human body. The increase of numbers in a state shews youth






and vigour: when numbers do not diminish, we have an idea of






manhood, and of age when they decline.






    The importance of the subject therefore requires me to bring






it once more upon the carpet, in order to inquire into the proper






methods of restoring and preserving youth, and of diffusing






vigour into every articulation, into every vein, into every






nerve, as I may say, of a modern society.






    In the republic of Lycurgus an unmarried man met with no






respect; because no reason but debauchery could prevent his






marrying. Marriage was no load in a state where all were fed and






taken care of at the public charge. A Spartan who did not marry,






was considered as one who refused to contribute towards






recruiting of the army, merely to gratify a vicious habit.






    The jus trium liberorum, and the other encouragements given






by Augustus Caesar to engage the Romans to marry, were calculated






chiefly for the nobility, and for the citizens only, but not at






all for the inferior class (the slaves) bound to labour. The vice






to be corrected, and that which the emperor had in his eye in






those institutions, was the prodigal and dissolute life of rich






men who lived in celibacy. This affected the Roman state, and






deprived it of its principal force, the military power, the






equites. Judge of the force of this class by the numbers of them






destroyed at Cannae. In those days, the chief encouragement to






multiplication was to be directed towards the higher classes: the






lower classes of the people (by far the most numerous in all






countries and in all ages) were easily recruited, by the






importation of slaves, as they are now in the West Indies, where,






consequently, the same principle must naturally operate, which






fixed the attention of the wise emperor. The state of affairs in






Europe, and in England particularly, is changed entirely, by the






establishment of universal liberty. Our lowest classes are






absolutely free; they belong to themselves, and must bring up






their own children, else the state becomes depopulated. There is






no resource to us from importation, whether by ships, or acts of






parliament for naturalization. We shall always have a numerous






and free common people, and shall constantly have the same






inconveniences to struggle with, as long as the lowest classes






remain in such depression as not to be able to support their own






numbers. Here then lies the difficulty. In order to have a






flourishing state, which Sir William Temple beautifully compared






to a pyramid, we must form a large and solid basis of the lowest






classes of mankind. As the classes mount in wealth, the pyramid






draws narrower until it terminate in a point, (as in monarchy,)






or in a small square, as in the aristocratical and mixed






governments. This lowest class therefore must be kept up, and, as






we have said, by its own multiplication. But where every one






lives by his own industry, a competition comes in, and he who






works cheapest gains the preference. How can a married man, who






has children to maintain, dispute this preference with one who is






single? The unmarried therefore force the others to starve; and






the basis of the pyramid is contracted. Let this short sketch of






a most important part of our subject suffice at present; it shall






be taken up and examined at more length, in the chapter






concerning physical necessaries, or natural wants.






    From this results the principal cause of decay in modern






states: it results from liberty, and is inseparably connected






with it.






    Several modern writers upon this subject, recommend marriage,






in the strongest manner, to all classes of inhabitants; yet a






parish priest might, properly enough, be warranted not to join a






couple unless they could make it appear that their children were






not likely to become a burden to the parish. Could any fault be






found, reasonably, with such a regulation? Those who are






gratuitously fed by others are a load upon the state, and no






acquisition, certainly, so long as they continue so. Nothing is






so easy as to marry; nothing so natural, especially among the






lower sort. But as in order to reap, it is not sufficient to plow






and to sow, so in order to bring up children, it is not






sufficient to marry. A nest is necessary for every animal which






produces a helpless brood: a house is the nest for children; but






every man who can beget a child cannot build or rent a house.






    These reflections lead me to make a distinction which I






apprehend may be of use in clearing up our ideas concerning






population. Let me therefore consider the generation of man in a






political light, and it will present itself under two forms. The






one as a real multiplication; the other as procreation only.






    Children produced from parents who are able to maintain them,






and bring them up to a way of getting bread for themselves, do






really multiply and serve the state. Those born of parents whose






subsistence is precarious, or which is proportioned to their own






physical necessary only, have a precarious existence, and will






undoubtedly begin their life by being beggars. Many such will






perish for want of food, but many more for want of ease; their






mendicity will be accompanied with that of their parents, and the






whole will go to ruin; according to the admirable expression of






the Marechal de Vauban, in his Dixime Royale. La mendicite, says






he, est un mal qui tue bientot son homme. He had many examples of






the truth of it before his eyes; whoever has not, must have seen






little of the world.






    When marriage is contracted without the requisites for






multiplication, it produces a procreation, attended with the






above mentioned inconveniences; and as by far the greater part of






inhabitants are in the lower classes, it becomes the duty of a






statesman to provide against such evils, if he intends, usefully






to increase the number of his people.






    Every plan proposed for this purpose, which does not proceed






upon an exact recapitulation of the inhabitants of a country,






parish by parish, will prove nothing more than an expedient for






walking in the dark. Among such recapitulations or lists I would






recommend, as an improvement upon those I have seen in the






Marechal de Vauban's excellent performance above cited, and in






the states of his Prussian Majesty, or elsewhere, to have one






made out, classing all the inhabitants, not only by the trades






they exercise, but by those of their fathers, with a view to






distinguish those classes which multiply, from those which only






procreate. I should be glad also to see bills of mortality made






out for every class, principally to compare the births and deaths






of the children in them.






    Let me take an example. Suppose then, that I have before me a






general recapitulation of all the inhabitants of a country,






parish by parish, where they may appear distributed under the






respective denominations of their fathers' employment. I shall






immediately find a considerable number produced from the higher






classes; from those who live upon an income already provided, and






upon branches of industry which produce an easy and ample






subsistence. These have no occasion for the assistance of the






state in bringing up their children, and you may encourage






marriage, or permit celibacy in such classes, in proportion to






the use you find for their offspring when they are brought up.






When I come to the lower classes, I examine, for example, that of






shoemakers, where I find a certain number produced. This number I






first compare with the number of shoemakers actually existing,






and then with the number of marriages subsisting among them, (for






I suppose recapitulations of every kind,) from which I discover






the fertility of marriage, and the success of multiplication in






this part. When the state of the question is examined, class by






class, I can decide where marriage succeeds, and where it does






not. I have said, that I imagine it an advantage that every class






should support at least its own numbers; and when it does more, I






should wish (were it possible) that the higher classes might be






recruited from the lower, rather than the lower from the higher;






the one seems a mark of prosperity, the other of decay: but I






must confess that the first is by far the most difficult to be






obtained.






    According therefore to circumstances, and in consistence with






these principles, I would encourage marriage by taking the






children off the hands of their parents. Where marriage succeeds






the worst, if it happens to be in a very low class, great






encouragement should be given to it; perhaps the whole children






should be taken care of. Certain trades may be left with the care






of one child, others with two, and so progressively. But of this,






more in another place. I beg it may not here be imagined that I






propose, that the whole of the lower classes of people should






marry and propagate, and that the state should feed all their






offspring. My view extends no farther, than to be assured of






having such a number of children yearly taken care of as shall






answer the multiplication proposed, and that these be






proportionally raised from each class, and from each part of the






country, and produced from marriages protected by the state,






distinguished from the others, which under a free government






never can be prevented, but which must always be found exposed to






the inconveniences of want and misery. To guard against such






evils ought to be another object of public care. Hospitals for






foundlings are an admirable institution; and colonies are an






outlet for superfluous inhabitants. But I insensibly enter into a






detail which exceeds my plan. To lay down a scheme, you must






suppose a particular state to be perfectly known. This lies






beyond my reach, and therefore I shall go no farther, but






illustrate what I have said, by some observations and reflections






which seem analogous to the subject.






    I have not here proposed plans of multiplication inconsistent






with the spirit of the nations with which I am a little






acquainted; nor with the religion professed in Europe, for many






reasons, obvious to any rational man. But principally, because, I






believe, it will be found, that a sufficient abundance of






children are born already; and that we have neither occasion for






concubinage, or polygamy, to increase their numbers. But we want






a right method of taking care of those we have, in order to






produce a multiplication proportioned to the possibility of our






providing nourishment and employment. I have therefore proposed,






that a statesman, well informed of the situation of his people,






the state of every class, the number of marriages found in each,






should say, let a particular encouragement be given to so many






marriages among the lower classes and let these be distributed in






a certain proportion for every parish, city, borough, &c. in the






country; let rules be laid down to direct a preference, in case






of a competition, between different couples; and let the






consequence of this approbation be, to relieve the parents of all






children above what they can maintain, as has been said. I






propose no new limitations upon marriage, because I am a friend






to liberty, and because such limitations would shock the spirit






of the times. I therefore would strongly recommend hospitals for






foundlings over all the country; and still more strongly the






frugal maintenance of children in such hospitals, and their being






bred up early to fill and recruit the lowest classes of the






people.






    From what has been throw out in this chapter, let no one






conclude, that such oeconomical principles would lead to






regulations much too minute to be consistent with a just spirit






of manly freedom and self-government in the common affairs of






life. The regulations I have been recommending, regard those only






who cannot support their families without the assistance of the






state. In vain do we look for self-government or manly freedom






among such classes of inhabitants.













Chap. XIII













Continuation of the same Subject, with regard to the Necessity of






having exact Lists of Births, Deaths, and Marriages, for every






Class of Inhabitants in a modern Society













    Mr Derham has furnished some tables, which shew the






proportion between marriages and births in England, to be as 1 to






4; that of births to burials as 1 12/100 to 1: from which it






appears that multiplication there goes on, though slowly: a mark






of youth and vigour. Dr Davenant values this augmentation at 9000






a year. Could matters be kept at that standard, I should prefer






it by far to a more rapid multiplication: it amounts to about a






million in a century (without entering into accumulations or






exact calculations), and the longer youth is preserved so much






the better. A rapid multiplication will stop at some period, and






this stop, which marks distress, must produce great






inconveniences.






    These calculations, founded on very precarious suppositions,






shew how necessary it is to have authentic recapitulations:






since, precarious as they are, it is from these and the like,






that Dr Halley, and others, have calculated the value of






annuities, which (at a time when all the states of Europe are






borrowing money at the expence of every man's private industry or






property) ought to be valued at their real worth. Now, in all






these calculations of mortality, it appears that what we have






called the abuse of marriage or mere procreation is included.






    If it be true, as I think it is, from what I have seen and






observed, that numbers, especially of children, among the lower






classes, perish from the effects of indigence; either directly by






want of food, or by diseases contracted gradually from the want






of convenient ease; and that others perish for want of care, when






the slightest assistance of a surgeon to let them blood, would be






sufficient to preserve them against the inflammatory distempers






to which they are chiefly exposed: If these things be so, must we






not infer, that calculations formed upon a conclusion drawn from






the births and deaths of mankind in general, cannot possibly be






so exact as if the like were drawn from those of every class of






inhabitants taken separately.






    It may here be answered, that among the rich and easy, there






are found diseases which sweep off numbers, in as great a






proportion as other distempers do among the poor: that we see






very large families brought up among the lowest classes, while a






great man has all the pains in the world to preserve one boy from






the wreck of a number of children.






    All this I agree may be true; but I should be glad to see in






what proportion it is so, and to be made certain of the fact. I






want to know the diseases of the rich and of the poor; I want to






have as particular details of the births and deaths of every






class, as I can have of those of the cities of Paris, London, or






Breslaw. I want to know from what parents are sprung those






multitudes of poor which I find every where; and most of all to






have such accounts from different countries, where different






manners prevail. For no just conclusion can be drawn from the






comparison of facts, without examining circumstances. The most






barren class in one country, may be the most fruitful in another.






As an example of this, let any one compare the state of marriage






among the footmen of London where most of them are single, and of






Paris where most of them have families.






    I find error concealed every where under general






propositions. The children of the poor, says one, thrive better






than those of the rich. If it be so, it ought not to be so in






common reason. But the same person will tell you, I have made my






son a merchant; he will be a rich man Why? Because (A B) was a






merchant, who, from nothing, died worth a hundred thousand






pounds. But if you go through all the letters of the alphabet






following (A B), among those who set out as he did, you will






find, that perhaps every one of them died a bankrupt. Those who






prove successful are remarkable: those who miscarry are never






heard of. It is just so with respect to the question before us.






But to return to our tables, and what are called calculations.






    In England, one marriage produces four children at a medium.






If you reckon 6,000,000 of people in that country, and that 1/30






part dies annually, then to keep up the stock it is sufficient






that 200,000 be annually born; add to this the yearly increase of






9000, the total of births will then be 209,000: for if 200,000






die this year, and if 209,000 be born, this must certainly imply






an increase of 9000, provided we suppose the acquisition of






foreigners to be equal to the exportation of the natives. As this






is meant as an illustration only, I need not examine the matter






of fact. The next question is, How many marriages, properly






contracted or encouraged as above, will give this increase? For






we may know that these subsisting in that kingdom, joined with






the effects of extramatrimonial conjunctions, is just sufficient






to produce it. I imagine that nothing but experiment can give the






solution of this question. Mr King supposes every 104th person in






England to marry yearly, that is, 57,682 persons, or 28,841






couples. If this number of marriages be supposed to subsist with






fertility for seven years, producing a child every year, the






number of 200,000 births would be procured; but I apprehend that






marriages, rightly contracted, subsist much longer in general






than seven years, even with fertility, though not in proportion






to a child every year: consequently the number of marriages






constantly subsisting with fertility in England, where it is






supposed that 28,841 are yearly contracted, must be much greater






than seven times that number, or than 201,887. If we suppose the






whole of the 209,000 births to be produced by marriages, at three






marriages to every child annually produced, then the number of






marriages subsisting will be 627,000. From these speculations






(for I do not pretend to call them calculations) I conclude, that






the more fruitful marriages are rendered, (not with regard to






procreation, merely, but to multiplication, which I have above






distinguished,) the fewer become necessary; and the fewer






unnecessary marriages are contracted, the better for the state,






and the less misery for those who contract them. I shall here






stop, and leave to the reader to draw his conclusions, putting






him in mind of the wide difference that is always found between






theory and practice.






    From this reasoning I infer, that no exact judgement can be






formed, as to the numbers in any society, from the single datum






of the annual number of deaths among them; and although the just






proportion between numbers and deaths may exactly be determined






in one particular place, yet that proportion will not serve as a






general standard, and being taken for granted may lead to error.






    Here are the reasons for my opinion:






    Were nobody to marry but such as could maintain their






children, the bills of births and burials would, I apprehend,






diminish, and yet numbers might remain as before; and were every






body to marry who could procreate, they certainly would increase,






but still numbers would never exceed the proportion of






Subsistence. Could we but see bills of births and deaths for the






city of Rome, while in all its glory or indeed for the






sugar-colonies in America, where slaves are imported, adding the






number of those imported to that of births, and suppossing the






colony neither upon the growing or the declining hand, then the






deaths and births would be equal; but the proportion of them to






all in the colony, I apprehend, would be far less than in any






state in Europe, where slavery does not prevail.






    It may be alleged that, were all to marry, the consequence






would be a great multiplication. I say not; or if it were, what






sort of multiplication would it be? A multitude of children who






never could come to manhood; or who would starve their parents,






and increase misery beyond expression. All therefore that can be






learned from bills of mortality, &c. is, that if the births






exceed the deaths, and that all remain in the country, numbers






are increasing; that if the deaths exceed the births, numbers are






diminishing; but, while they stand at par, no conclusion can be






drawn as to numbers in general: these will be in a less






proportion as abusive procreation goes forward: and, vice versa,






they will be in a greater.






    There still hangs a cloud upon this subject: let me therefore






reason upon an example. Suppose the inhabitants of a country to






stand at 6,000,000; one thirtieth to die every year, and as many






to be born, that is, the births and burials to stand at 200,000;






that every three marriages subsisting produce one child every






year, that is 600,000 marriages; let the quantity of food be






supposed the same, without a possibility of being augmented.






Would not the consequence be, that numbers could not increase?






Now let me suppose marriages carried to 1,000,000, I say the






effect would be, either that they would become in general less






fruitful, or if they suffered no diminution in this particular,






that the bills of births and deaths would rise to 333,333; that






is to say, they would be to the number of inhabitants as 1 to 18,






instead of being as 1 to 30. Now this increase of mortality






proceeding from want of food, either the old would starve the






young, or the young would starve the old; or a third case, more






probable than either, would happen; those who could purchase






subsistence, would starve those who could not. What would be the






consequences in all these three suppositions? In the first, the






number of 6,000,000 would be found to diminish; because the






proportion of large consumers would rise, and mortality would






increase among the children. In the second, the standard number






would augment, because the proportion of small consumers would






rise, and mortality would increase among the parents. In the






third, misery and distress would lay all the lower classes waste.






It is computed that one half of mankind die before the age of






puberty in countries where numbers do not augment; from this I






conclude, that too many are born. If methods therefore are fallen






upon to render certain diseases less mortal to children, all the






good that will be got by it, in general, will be to render old






people of the lower classes more wretched; for if the first are






brought to live, the last must die.






    From these speculations I cannot help wishing to see bills of






mortality made out for different classes, as well as for






different ages. Were this executed, it would be an easy matter to






perceive, whether the mortality among children proceeds from






diseases to which infancy is necessarily exposed, or from abusive






procreation. I am pretty much convinced, before I see the






experiment, that it proceeds from the latter; but should






experience prove it, the principles I have laid down would






acquire an additional force. In the mean time, I must conclude,






that it is not for want of marrying that a people does not






increase, but from the want of subsistence; and it is miserable






and abusive procreation which starves so many, and is the






fountain of so much wretchedness.






    Upon the whole, I may say, that were it possible to get a






view of the general state of births and burials in every class of






the inhabitants of a country, marriage might surely be put upon a






better footing than ever it has been, for providing every year a






determinate number of good and wholesome recruits towards






supporting national multiplication. This is walking in the light,






and is a means of procuring whatever augmentation of hands you






wish for. What difficulties may be found in the execution,






nothing but experience can shew. and this, to a judicious eye,






will point out the remedy. This, in my opinion, will be far






better than a general naturalization, which I take to be a leap






in the dark. For, however easy it may be to naturalize men, I






believe nothing is so difficult as to naturalize customs and






foreign habits; and the greatest blessing any nation can enjoy,






is an uniformity of opinion upon every point which concerns






public affairs and the administration of them.






    When God blesses a people, he makes them unanimous, and






bestows upon them a governor who loves them, and who is beloved,






honoured, and respected by them; this, and this only, can create






unanimity.






    Let this suffice at present, as to the distribution,






employment, and increase of a people. Upon the proper employment






of the free hands, the prosperity of every state must depend:






consequently the principal care of a statesman should be, to keep






all employed, and for this purpose he must acquire an exact






knowledge of the state of every denomination, in order to prevent






any one from rising above, or sinking below that standard which






is best proportioned to the demand made for their particular






industry. As the bad consequences resulting from the loss of this






exact balance are not immediate, a moderate attention, with the






help of the proper recapitulations, will be sufficient to direct






him.






    This and the two preceding chapters have in a manner wholly






treated of the employment of the free hands: I must now consider






the effects of an overcharge of those employed in agriculture.






Here we shall still discover inconveniences, resulting from the






want of that just proportion in the distribution of classes,






which gives health and vigour to a state; and we shall see how it






may happen, that even an overcharge of inhabitants in general may






become a political disease; as an abundance of blood, however






rich and good, may affect the health of the human body.




















Chap. XIV













Of the Abuse of Agriculture and Population













    I have taken above of two performances, wherein the authors






with equal ability, have treated of the numbers of manors, with






notice a subject which has a very close connection with political






oeconomy.






    Although (as I have said) I do not pretend to decide between






them as to the point in dispute, I find that in this chapter I






shall be naturally led into a chain of reasoning very






unfavourable to that of Mr Wallace, which is a thing I should






have dispensed with, did not the merit of his performance in the






eyes of the learned world appear sufficient to draw my attention.






    Agriculture is, without all doubt, the foundation of






multiplication, which must ever be in proportion to it; that is,






to the earth's productions, as has been said. But it does not






follow, that in proportion to multiplication those produced must






of course become useful to one another, and useful to the society






in general. Now I consider multiplication as no otherwise useful






to a state, than so far as the additional number becomes so to






those who are already existing, whom I consider as the






body-politic of the society. When it therefore happens, that an






additional number produced do no more than feed themselves, then






I perceive no advantage gained to the society by their






production. If, without rendering any equivalent service, they






are fed by others, there is a loss.






    Agriculture may be said to be carried to its utmost extent,






when the earth is so laboured as to produce the greatest quantity






of fruits possible for the use of man; and in judging of the






improvement of two spots of ground of the same extent, that may






be said to be most improved which produces the greatest quantity






of food: but as to population, the question does not stop here;






for let the quantity be equal on both, yet if the inhabitants of






the one be more frugal livers than those of the other, this






circumstance alone will make an inequality. If agriculture






therefore be considered with respect to population only, we must






consider that country as the best peopled, where productions are






the most abundant, and where the inhabitants are the most sober.






Thus much with regard to the extent of agriculture and






population: we come now to consider the inconveniences which may






result to a society from an over-stretch, or from what I call an






abuse of either the one or the other.






    I call every thing an abuse in society which implies a






contradiction to the spirit of it, or which draws along with it






an inconvenience to certain classes, which is not compensated by






the general welfare.






    The political oeconomy of government is brought to






perfection, when every class in general, and every individual in






particular, is made to be aiding and assisting to the community,






in proportion to the assistance he receives from it. This conveys






my idea of a free and perfect society, which is, a general tacit






contract, from which reciprocal and proportional services result






universally between all those who compose it.






    Whenever therefore any one is found, upon whom nobody






depends, and who depends upon every one, as is the case with him






who is willing to work for his bread, but who can find no






employment, there is a breach of the contract, and an abuse. For






the same reason, if we can suppose any person entirely taken up






in feeding himself, depending upon no one, and having nobody






depending on him, we lose the idea of society, because there are






no reciprocal obligations between such a person and the other






members of the society.






    Those who are for employing the whole of a people in






agriculture may answer, that all their time cannot be employed in






this occupation, and that in the intervals they may apply






themselves to supply reciprocal wants.






    I very readily agree, that any person, who would calculate






his labour in agriculture, purely for his own subsistence, would






find abundance of idle hours. But the question is, whether in






good oeconomy such a person would not be better employed in






providing nourishment for others, than in prodding for any other






want. When he provides food, he surely provides for a want; and






experience shews, that it is better for a man to apply close to






one trade, than to turn himself to several.






    Hence I conclude, that the best way of binding a free society






together is by multiplying reciprocal obligations, and creating a






general dependence between all its members. This cannot be better






effected, than by appropriating a certain number of inhabitants,






for the production of the quantity of food required for all, and






by distributing the remainder into proper classes for supplying






every other want. I say farther, that this distribution is not






only the most rational, but that mankind fall naturally into it;






and misery attends and has ever attended those who have been






found without a particular employment.






    It must not be concluded from this reasoning that abuse is






always implied when we find any of the classes of the free hands






of a state casually employed in agriculture.






    There is such a variety of circumstances in every country,






that without a peculiar talent of laying principles together, so






as to answer every combination, the most perfect theory which can






be proposed must appear defective.






    In countries ill-improved, where industry begins only to take






root, we are not to conclude, that good policy requires a sudden






and immediate separation between the dwellings of the husbandmen






and free hands. Sudden revolutions are constantly hurtful, and a






good statesman ought to lay down his plan for arriving at






perfection by gradual steps.






    If he find, as is the case of rude and uncivilized societies,






that many are occupied, partly, in providing subsistence for






their own family, partly, in other useful pursuits, he may by






degrees attach as many as he can to agriculture alone. The most






wealthy are the most proper to carry this branch to any degree of






perfection. The landed men ought to be encouraged by every means






to apply to the study of farming. This employment has been






considered as honourable in all ages of the world, and very well






suits the rank, the interest, and the amusement of gentlemen.






    The next step is to introduce manufactures into the country,






and to provide a ready market abroad for every superfluous part






of them. The allurement of gain will soon engage every one to






pursue that branch of industry which succeeds best in his hands.






By these means many will follow manufactures and abandon






agriculture; others will prosecute their manufactures in the






country, and avail themselves, at the same time, of small






portions of land, proper for gardens, grass for cows, and even






for producing certain kinds of fruit necessary for their own






maintenance.






    This I do not consider as a species of farming. It is more






properly, in a political light, a sort of village-life; the






village here appears dispersed only over a large extent; and I






call it a village-life, because here the occupation of the






inhabitants is principally directed towards the prosecution of






their trades: agriculture is but a subaltern consideration, and






will be carried on so far only, as it occasions no great






avocation from the main object. It will however, have the effect






to parcel out a small part of the lands into small possessions: a






system admirably calculated for the improvement of a barren soil,






and advantageous to industry is not thereby checked. This is






population, when the spirit of not the case when the possessors






of small lots apply totally to agriculture, and content






themselves with a bare subsistence from it, without industry, or






forming any plan which prosecuting any other branch of may enable






themselves or their children to emerge from so circumscribed a






sphere of life: from this alone proceeds, in most countries, the






inconvenience of a minute subdivision of land-property.






    We shall presently see, by various examples, the truth of






this proposition; and, from what observations I have been able to






make, it appears, that a great inconvenience flows from it; the






property of the lands, and not the bare possession of them, is






vested in the lower classes. While they remain as tenants only,






the interest of the proprietor, on one hand, will lead him to






incorporate these small possessions into larger farms, the moment






the possessors are no longer able to pay a rent above the value






of the grounds when let in farms; and the interest of these






tenants, on the other hand, will frequently lead them to abandon






such small possessions, when the prosecution of their trades,






which ought to be their principal occupation, demands a change of






habitation. Thus the interest of agriculture will go hand in hand






with that of industry, and classes will separate their






habitations according as their respective interests require.






    It is certainly the interest of every landlord whose lands






are ill improved, to multiply the habitations on them; provided






the possessors can be made to live by some other branch of






industry than bare agriculture: and in many cases, it may be his






advantage to incorporate such small possessions into farms, as






soon as they have been sufficiently improved by the possessors;






whose habitations may then be removed to other barren lands. By






following this plan he will improve his estate; he will multiply






the useful inhabitants; and he will, at the same time, share the






profits of their industry beyond the value which any farmer can






pay for the lands which he gives them to possess.






    By these means has the woollen manufacture in England, and






the linen in Ireland and Scotland been greatly augmented. But as






the improvement of land goes on, this oeconomy will decline:






towns will swell in consequence of the principles we are now






going to deduce; the lands will become more thinly inhabited; and






farms will by degrees grow more extensive. I appeal to experience






for the justness of this observation.






    Hence it plainly appears, that, in every light this matter






can be represented, we still find it impossible usefully to






employ in agriculture above a certain part of a people. The next






question is, how to determine the just proportion. For this






purpose we must have recourse to facts, not to theory. We have,






in a former chapter, examined the state of this question with






regard to one country. I shall here only add, that, in proportion






to the culture of the soil, and to the number of crops it is made






to produce, a greater or less number will be required; and in






proportion to the surplus of food above what is necessary to






maintain the labourers, will a number of free hands be provided






for. If therefore a species of agriculture can be found






established, which produces little or no surplus, there little or






no industry can be exercised; few wants can be supplied: this






will produce a wonderful simplicity of manners, will ruin the






system of modern policy, and produce what I must call an abuse.






Let me look for some examples of this, in order to set the






question in a clearer light.






    In the wine-provinces of France, we find the lands which lie






round the villages divided into very small lots, and there






cultivation is carried to a very extraordinary height. These






lands belong, in property, (not by lease,) to the peasants who






cultivate the vines. No frugality can be greater than in the






consumption of this produce, and the smallest weed which comes up






among the grain, is turned to account, for the food of animals.






The produce of such lands, I may say, is entirely consumed by the






proprietor and his family, who are all employed in the






cultivation, and there is no superfluous quantity here produced






for the maintenance of others. Does not this resemble the






distribution of lands made by the Romans in favour of 5000 Sabine






families, where each received two plethra of ground. (See Numbers






of Mankind, p. 117) Now let me examine the political state of






agriculture, and of other labour performed by my French






vine-dresser.






    By the supposition we imply, that the bit of land is






sufficient for maintaining the man and his family, and nothing






more; he has no grain to sell, no food can by him be supplied to






any other person whatever; but the state of other lands capable






of yielding a surplus, such as the vineyard, produces a demand






for his labour. This labour, considered with respect to the






vine-dresser, is a fund for providing all his wants in






manufactures, salt, &c. and what is over must be considered as






his profits, out of which he pays the royal impositions. The same






labour, considered with regard to the proprietor of the vineyard,






enters into that necessary deduction out of the fruits, which,






when deducted, leaves the remainder, which we call surplus, or






what answers to the land-rent. This belongs to the proprietor,






and becomes a fund for supplying all his wants.






    Here we have an idea of society. The vine-dresser depends






upon the proprietor for the price of his labour, the proprietor






upon the vinedresser for his surplus. But did we suppose all the






kingdom parcelled out, and laboured, as the spot which lies round






the village, what would become of the vine-dresser with regard to






all his other wants; there would be no vines to dress, no surplus






nourishment any where to be found, consequently no employment,






not even life, for those who had no land. From this example we






discover the difference between agriculture exercised as a trade






and as a direct means of subsisting: a distinction to be attended






to, as it will very frequently occur in the prosecution of our






subject. We have the two species in the vine-dresser: he labours






the vineyard as a trade, and his spot of ground for subsistence.






We may farther conclude, that, as to the last part, he is useful






to himself only; but, as to the first, he is useful to the






society, and becomes a member of it: consequently, were it not






for his trade, the state would lose nothing, though the






vine-dresser and his land were both swallowed up by an






earthquake. The food and the consumers would both disappear






together, without the least political harm to any body:






consequently, such a species of agriculture is no benefit to a






state; and consequently, neither is that species of






multiplication, implied by such a distribution of property, any






benefit. Thus an over-extension of agriculture and subdivision of






lands become an abuse, and so, consequently, does an






over-multiplication of farmers.






    Here I am obliged to conclude, that those passages of Roman






authors which mention the frugality of that people, and the small






extent of their possessions, cannot be rightly understood,






without the knowledge of many circumstances relative to the






manners of those times. For if you understand such a distribution






of lands to have extended over all the Roman territory, the






number of the citizens would have far exceeded what they appear






to have been by the Census, and even surpass all belief. But






farther, I may be allowed to ask, whether or no it be supposed






that these frugal Romans laboured this small portion of lands






with their own hands and consumed the produce of it? If I am






answered in the affirmative (which is necessary to prove the






advantages of agriculture's being exercised by all the classes of






a people), then I ask, from whence were the inhabitants of Rome,






and other cities, subsisted? who fed the armies when in the






field? If these were fed by foreign grain imported or plundered






from their neighbours, where was the advantage of this






sub-division of lands, and of this extensive agriculture, which






could not feed the inhabitants of the state? If it be said, that






notwithstanding this frugal distribution of property among the






citizens, there were still found surplus enough to supply both






Rome and the armies, will it not then follow, that there was no






necessity for employing all the people in agriculture, since the






labour of a part might have sufficed?






    That number of husbandmen, therefore, is the best, which can






provide food for all the state; and that number of inhabitants is






the best, which is compatible with the full employment of every






one of them.






    Idle mouths are useful to themselves only, not to the state;






consequently, are not an object of the care of the state, any






farther than to provide employment for them; and their welfare






(while they remain useless to others) is, in a free country,






purely a matter of private concern. Let me take another example






for the farther illustration of this matter.






    Those who travel into the southern provinces of Spain, find






large tracts of land quite uncultivated, producing only a scanty






pasture for herds of the lesser cattle. Here and there are found






interspersed some spots of watered lands, which, from the






profusion of every gift which nature can bestow, strike a






northern traveller with an idea of paradise. In such places






villages are found, and numbers of inhabitants. It must be






allowed that industry and labour do not here go forward as in






other countries; but to supply this want charity steps in.






Charity in Spain (in proportion to its extent) is as powerful a






principle towards multiplication as industry and labour. Whatever






gives food gives numbers: but charity cannot extend beyond






superfluity, and this must ever be in proportion to industry.






These watered lands are well laboured and improved. The value of






them, in one sense, is in proportion to their fertility, and the






surplus of the labourers should naturally be given for an






equivalent in money or work: But this equivalent cannot be found;






because the poor of the village have neither the one or the other






to give; and the charitable farmer considers it to be his duty,






to bestow on them gratis whatever he can spare. If the Spaniards






therefore were not the most charitable people upon earth, it is






very plain that the labouring of those watered spots would






diminish until it came upon a level with the demand of such






people of the village only, as could purchase the farmer's






surplus. But here it is otherwise; labour goes on mechanically;






the farmer never complains of the burden of giving, charity; and






the poor live in ease in proportion to plenty of the year.






    Here then is a third principle of multiplication. The first






is slavery, or a violent method of making mankind labour; the






second is industry, which is a rational excitement to it; the






third is charity, which resembles the manna in the desert, the






gift of God upon a very extraordinary occasion, and when nothing






else could have preserved the lives of his people. Whether, in






all cases, this principle of christianity advances the prosperity






of a modern society (when complied with from obedience to






precept, without consulting reason as to the circumstances of






times and situations), is a question which lies out of my road to






examine. The action, considered in the intention of the agent,






must in every case appear highly beautiful; and we plainly see






how far it contributes to multiplication, though we do not so






plainly perceive how such a kind of multiplication can be






advantageous to society.






    Now if we examine the state of agriculture in this Spanish






village, considered as one large family, we find, upon the whole,






no more surplus of fruits than upon the French vine-dresser's






portion of land; consequently, if all Spain was laboured and






inhabited like this village and its small garden, as it is






called, it would be the most populous country in the world, the






most simple in the manner of living; but it never could






communicate the idea of a vigorous or a flourishing state. It is






the employment alone of the inhabitants which can impress this






character.






    Now in this last example, what a number of free hands do we






find! Are not all the poor of this class? Would it not be better






if all these by their labour could purchase their subsistence,






than be obliged to receive it in the precarious manner they do?






Can one suppose all these people industrious, without implying






what I call superfluity of labour? and does not superfluity of






labour imply luxury, according to my definition of it? Where






would be the harm if the Spanish farmer, who gives a third of his






crop in charity, should in return receive some changes of






raiment, some convenient furniture for his house, some






embellishment to his habitation: these things would cost him






nothing; he would receive them in exchange for what he now gives






from a principle of charity, and those who have a precarious,






would have a certain livelihood. Let us travel a little farther






in search of the abuse of population.






    In Germany, we find many small towns, formed into






corporations, which enjoy certain privileges. The freedom of such






towns is not easily purchased; and one, upon considering outward






circumstances, must be not a little surprized to hear of the sums






refused, when offered, to obtain it. Round these towns there is a






small territory divided into very small portions, and not able to






maintain the inhabitants: these lands therefore are infinitely






over-stocked with husbandmen; for every proprietor, less or more,






concerns himself with the cultivation. Here, one who should






aspire to extend his possession, would, according to the






sentiment of Manius Curius Dentatus, certainly be considered as a






dangerous citizen, and a hurtful member of the society. These






lots are divided among the children of the proprietors, who are






free of the town, by which means they are constantly splitting by






multiplication, and consolidating by death, and by marriage:






these nearly balance one another, and property remains divided as






before. A stranger is at a loss to find out the reason, why the






liberty of so poor a little town should be so valuable. Here it






is; first there are certain advantages enjoyed in common, such as






the privilege of pasture on the town-lands, and others of a like






nature; but I find that the charges which the burgesses are






obliged to pay, may more than compensate them. The principal






reason appears to be, that no one who has not the liberty of a






town, can settle in a way of industry so as to marry and have a






family: because without this, his labour can be directed towards






furnishing the wants of peasants only, who live in villages;






these are few, and little ingenuity is required for it. In towns






there is found a greater diversity of wants, and the people there






have found out mechanically, that if strangers were allowed to






step in and supply them, their own children would starve;






therefore the heads of the corporation, who have an interest to






keep up the price of work, have also an interest to hold the






liberty of their town at a high value. This appears to me a






pretty just representation of the present state of some towns I






have seen, relative to the present object of inquiry.






    But as industry becomes extended, and trade and manufactures






are established, this political oeconomy must disappear.






    Such a change, however, will not probably happen without the






interposition of the sovereign, and a new plan of administration;






what else can give a turn to this spirit of idleness, or rather,






as I may call it, of this trifling industry? Agriculture never






can be a proper occupation for those who live in towns: this






therefore is an abuse of it, or rather indeed an abuse of






employment.






    Ease and plenty never can enter a little town, but by the






means of wealth; wealth never can come in but by the produce of






labour going out; and when people labour purely for their own






subsistence, they make the little money only they have to






circulate, but can acquire nothing new and those who with






difficulty can maintain themselves, never can hope to increase






their numbers.






    If in spite of the little industry set on foot in such towns,






the generative faculty shall work its effect and increase






numbers, this will make the poor parents still divide, and misery






will ensue; this may excite compassion, and this again will open






the chests of those who have a charitable disposition: hospitals






are founded for the relief of the poor, they are quickly filled,






and as many necessitous remain as ever. The reason is plain; the






hospital applies a palliative for the abuse, but offers no cure.






A tree is no sooner discharged of its branches than it pushes new






ones. It has been said, that numbers are in proportion to food;






consequently, poor are in proportion to charity. Let the King






give his revenue in charity, he will soon find poor enough to






consume it. Let a rich man spend 100,000 l. a year upon a table,






he will find guests (the best in the kingdom) for every cover.






These things, in my way of considering them, are all analogous,






and flow from the same principle. And the misery found in these






little German towns, is another modification of the abuse of






population. These examples shew the inconveniences and abuses






which result from a misapplication of agriculture, which produces






a population more burthensome than beneficial to a modern state.






    If the simplicity of the ancients be worthy of imitation, or






if it appear preferable to the present system, which it is not my






business to decide, then either slavery must be introduced to






make those subsist who do not labour, or they must be fed upon






charity. Labour and industry can never, I think, be recommended






on one hand, and the effects of them proscribed on the other. If






a great body of warlike men (as was the case in Sparta) be






considered as essential to the well-being of the state; if all






trade and all superfluity be forbid amongst them, and no






employment but military exercises allowed; if all these warriors






be fed at public tables, must you not either have a set of






Helotes to plow the ground for them, or a parcel of charitable






Spanish farmers to feed them gratis.






    Thus much I have thought might be of use to say to illustrate






the principles I have laid down. I find it very unfavourable to






the reasoning which runs through the whole of the performance






which I mentioned above, and which I have had in my eye. A more






particular examination of it might be useful, and even amusing;






but it would engage me in too long a disquisition for the nature






of this work. I cannot however help, in this place, adding one






observation more, in consequence of our principles, which seems






contrary to the strain of our ingenious author's reasoning. I say






seems, because all difference almost of opinion upon such






subjects proceeds from the defect of language in clearly






transmitting our ideas, when complex or abstract.






    The effect of diseases which sweep off numbers of people does






not essentially diminish population, except when they come






suddenly or irregularly, any more than it would necessarily






dispeople the world if all mankind were to be swept off the stage






at the age of forty-six years. I apprehend that in man, as in






every other animal, the generative faculty is more than able to






repair all losses occasioned by regular diseases; and I have






shewn, I think, more than once, that multiplication never can






stop but for want of food. As long then as the labour of man can






continue annually to produce the same quantity of food as at






present, and that motives are found to make him labour, the same






numbers may be fed, and the generative faculty, which from one






pair has produced so many millions, would certainly do more than






keep up the stock, although no person were to pass the age above






mentioned. Here is the proof; were the life of man confined to






forty-six years, the state of mortality would be increased in the






proportion which those who die above forty-six bear to those who






die under this age. This proportion is, I believe, as 1 to 10;






consequently, mortality would increase 1/10, consequently,






numbers would be kept up by 1/10 upon births; and surely the






generative faculty of man far exceeds this proportion, when the






other requisites for propagation, to wit, food, &c. are to be






found, as by the supposition. 













Chap. XV













Application of the above Principles to the State of Population in






Great Britain













    A letter from Dr Brakenridge, F.R.S. addressed to George






Lewis Scott, Esq; which I found in the Danish Mercury for March






1758, furnishes me with a very good opportunity of applying the






principles we have been laying down to the state of population in






Great-Britain. I shall therefore, according to my plan, pass in






review that gentleman's opinion, without entering upon any






refutation of it. I shall extract the propositions he lays down,






examine the conclusions he draws from them, and then shew wherein






they differ from those which result from the theory established






in this inquiry.






    The author's calculations and suppositions as to matters of






fact shall be taken for granted, as I believe the first are as






good as any that can be made, upon a subject where all the data






required for solving the problem are quite a piece of guess-work.






    I must follow the Mercury, not having the original. 






    Prop. I. After a very close examination, says our author, I






find, that our islands gain, as to population, absolutely no more






than what is requisite for repairing their losses, and that, in






England itself, numbers would diminish, were they not recruited






from Ireland and Scotland.






    Prop. II. Men, able to carry arms, that is from 18 to 56






years, make, according to Dr Halley, the fourth part of a people;






and when a people increase in numbers, every denomination, as to






age, increases in this proportion: consequently in England, where






the number of inhabitants does not exceed six millions, if the






annual augmentation upon the whole do not exceed 18,000, as I am






pretty sure it does not, the yearly augmentation of those fit to






carry arms will be no more than 4,500.






    Prop. III. In England, burials are to births as 100 is to






113. I suppose, that in Scotland and Ireland, they may be as 100






is to 124. And as there may be in these two last kingdoms about






two millions and a half of inhabitants, the whole augmentation






may be stated at 15,000; and consequently that of such as are fit






to carry arms, at 3,750. Add this number to those annually






produced in England, and the sum total of the whole augmentation






in the British isles will be about 8,250.






    Prop. IV. The strangers, who arrive in England, in order to






settle, are supposed to compensate those who leave the country






with the same intent.






    Prop. V. It is out of this number of 8,250, that all our






losses are to be deduced. If the colonies, wars, and navigation,






carry off from us annually 8,000 men, the British isles cannot






augment in people: if we lose more, numbers must diminish.






    Prop. VI. By calculations, such as they are, our author






finds, that, upon an average of 66 years, from 1690 to 1756, this






number of 8,000 has been annually lost, that is, they have died






abroad in the colonies, in war, or on the account of navigation. 






    Prop. VII. That, since the inhabitants of Britain and Ireland






are about 8,000,000, and that the augmentation is annually about






8,000, we may conclude in general for all Europe, that, for every






million of habitants, there is an annual augmentation of 1,000;






consequently, every thousand men slain in war must destroy all






the augmentation of a million of inhabitants during a year.






Consequently France, which contains 14 millions, according to Sir






William Petty, having lost above 14,000 men a-year, during the






same 66 years, cannot have augmented in population.






    Prop. VIII. That the progress of trade and navigation






augmenting the loss of people by sea, must consequently have






diminished population over all Europe.






    Prop. IX. The exportation of our corn proves what the above






propositions have demonstrated. For supposing the progress of






agriculture to compensate the additional quantity distilled of






late years, there is still one-sixth of the crop exported, which






proves that our numbers are small, and that they do not augment.






    From these propositions our author concludes, that what stops






multiplication in the British isles is, first, That living in






celibacy is become a-la-mode: secondly, That wars have been






carried on beyond the nation's force: thirdly, That the use of






spirituous liquors destroys great numbers of inhabitants.






    I shall now shortly apply the principles I have been laying






down, in order to resolve every phenomenon here described, as to






the population of Great Britain. These phenomena I shall






willingly take for granted, as it is of no consequence to my






reasoning, whether they be exact or not: it is enough that they






may be so; and the question here is only to account for them.






    England, says he, would diminish in numbers, were it not






recruited from Scotland and Ireland. This, I say, is a






contingent, not a certain consequence: for did those grown-up






adventurers cease to come in, the inhabitants of England






themselves would undoubtedly multiply, provided an additional






number of breeders could be found, able to bring up their






children. Now the importation of grown men into a country so far






resembles the importation of slaves into our colonies, that the






one and the other diminishes the price of labour, and thereby






prevents marriage among certain classes of the natives, whose






profits are not sufficient for bringing up a family: and when any






such do marry notwithstanding, they do not multiply, as has been






said. Now were the Scots and Irish to come no more into England,






the price of labour would rise; those who now cannot bring up






children, might then be enabled to do it, and this would make the






English multiply themselves; that is, it would augment the number






of their own breeders. On the other hand, did the price of labour






continue too low to prove a sufficient encouragement for an






additional number of English breeders, the contingent consequence






would take place; that is, numbers would diminish, according to






our author's supposition, and the exportation of grain would






increase, in proportion to that diminution; and did foreign






demand for grain diminish also, then agriculture would suffer,






and every thing would decline.






    The representation he gives of the state of population in






these countries, is one modification of what I have called a






moral incapacity of a people's increasing in numbers. It is just






so in Africa, where the inhabitants are sold: just so in






Switzerland, and in many mountainous countries, where inhabitants






desert in order to seek their fortunes elsewhere. The national






stock remains at an equal standard, and the augmentation upon






births above burials is constantly in proportion to the






exportation of inhabitants. Let this proportion rise ever so






high, an increase of national population is noways essentially to






be implied from this phenomenon alone, but must proceed from






other causes.






    I can find nothing advanced by our author to prove, or even






to induce one to believe, that had the lives of those eight






thousands been yearly preserved from extraordinary dangers,






numbers would have augmented. England enjoyed in a manner 26






years peace after the treaty of Utrecht. For many years before






this treaty, a very destructive war had been carried on. Had the






bills of births been produced from 1701 to 1713, had they been






compared with those from this last period to 1739, when the






Spanish war began, had we seen a gradual augmentation from year






to year during those last 26 years, such as might be expected






from the preservation of a considerable number at least of the






8,250 able healthy men, just in the period of life fit for






propagation, one might be tempted to conclude, that the preceding






war had done hurt to population, by interrupting the propagation






of the species. But if, by comparing the bills of births for a






considerable number of years, in war and in peace, one can






discover no sensible difference, it is very natural to conclude,






either that those wars did not destroy many breeders, or that






others must have slipt in directly, and bred in the place of






those who had been killed. What otherwise can be the reason why






the number which our author supposes to have been destroyed






abroad, should so exactly compensate the annual augmentation, but






only that those nations are stocked to the full proportion of






their subsistence: and what is the reason why, after a






destructive war, which, by the suddenness of the revolution,






sweeps off numbers of the grown men, and diminishes the original






stock, numbers should in a few years get up to the former






standard, and then stop a-new?






    From our author's representation of the bills of births and






deaths, I should be apt to suspect, in consequence of my






principles, that upon a proper examination it will be found,






that, in those years of war, the proportion of births to deaths






had been higher than in years of peace, because more had died






abroad. And, had the slaughter of the inhabitants gone gradually






on, increasing every year beyond the 8,250, I am of opinion, that






the proportion of births might very possibly have kept pace with






it. On the contrary, during the years of peace, the proportion






would have diminished, and had nobody died out of the country at






all, the births and deaths would have become exactly equal.






    From what I have here said, the reader may perceive, that it






is not without reason that I have treated in the general, the






principles relating to my subject, and that I avoid as much as






possible to reason from facts alleged as to the state of






particular countries. Those our author builds upon may be true,






and may be false: the proportion of births and deaths in one






place is no rule for another we know nothing exactly about the






state of this question in the British isles; and it may even






daily vary, from a thousand circumstances. War may destroy






population as well as agriculture, and it may not, according to






circumstances. When the calamity falls upon the breeders, and






when these are supposed the only people in the country in a






capacity of bringing up their children, births will soon






diminish. When it destroys the indigent, who cannot bring up






their children, or who do not marry, births will remain the same.






The killing the wethers of a flock of sheep does not diminish the






brood of lambs next year; the killing of old pigeons makes a






pigeon-house thrive. When the calamity falls upon the farmers,






who make our lands produce, agriculture is hurt, no doubt: does






it fall upon the superfluities of cities, and other classes of






the free hands, it may diminish manufacturers, but agriculture






will go on, while there is a demand for its produce; and if a






diminution of consumption at home be a consequence of the war,






the augmentation upon exportation will more than compensate it. I






do not find that war diminishes the demand for subsistence.






    The long wars in Flanders in the beginning of this century






interrupted agriculture now and then, but did not destroy it.






That in the Palatinate in the end of the last ruined the country






so, that it has hardly as yet recovered it. War has different






effects, according to circumstances.






    OBJ. The population of the British isles is not stopt for






want of food, because one-sixth part of the crop is annually






exported. I answer, that it is still stopt for want of food, for






the exportation marks only that the home demand is satisfied; but






this does not prove that the inhabitants are full fed, although






they can buy no more at the exportation price. Those who cannot






buy, are exactly those who I say die for want of subsistence;






could they buy, they would live and multiply, and no grain






perhaps would be exported. This is a plain consequence of my






reasoning; and my principal point in view, throughout this whole






book, is to find out a method for enabling the indigent to buy up






this very quantity which is at present exported. By this






application of our principles, I have no occasion to call in






question our author's facts. It is no matter what be the state of






the case: if the principles I lay down be just, they must resolve






every phenomenon.




















Chap. XVI













Why are some Countries found very populous in respect of others,






equally well calculated for Improvement?













    This question comes immediately under the influence of the






principles already laid down, and must be resolved in consequence






of them. It is with a view to make the application of these, that






I have proposed it; and, in the examination, we shall prove their






justness, or discover their defects.






    It may be answered in general, that every such difference






must proceed from what I call the spirit of the government and of






the people, which will not only decide as to numbers, but as to






many other things. I must however observe, that the question in






itself is of little importance, if nothing but numbers be






considered; for of what consequence is it to know how many people






are in a country, when the employment of them does not enter into






the inquiry? Besides, it is by examining the employment only of a






people, that I can form any judgment as to this particular. But






as the numbers of mankind have been thought a point worthy of






examination, I have chosen this title for a chapter, which might






perhaps have more properly stood under another.






    While slavery prevailed, I see no reason to conclude any






thing against the populousness of the world, as I have said






already: when slavery was abolished, and before industry took






place, if my principles be true, that period, I think, should






mark the time of the thinnest population in Europe; for I believe






it will be found, that there never was an example of a country,






however fertile by nature, where every one was absolutely free;






where there was little or no industry; and where, at the same






time, there were many inhabitants, not beggars, nor living upon






charity. I have mentioned this so often, that I am afraid of






tiring my reader with useless repetitions. I have brought it in






here, to give him only an opportunity of applying this principle






to the solution of the question before us.






    I shall begin my inquiry by asking what is understood by a






country's being populous; for this term presents different ideas,






if circumstances are not attended to. I have heard it said, that






France was a desert, and that there was nobody found in it but in






towns; while in England one cannot travel half a mile without






finding a farm, perhaps two together; and in looking round, one






sees the whole country divided into small possessions. The






difference here found, I apprehend, decides nothing in favour of,






or against the real populousness of the one or the other, but






proceeds entirely from circumstances relative to agriculture, and






to the distribution of free hands. These circumstances will be






better understood from the examination of facts, than from the






best theory in the world. Let one consider the state of






agriculture in Picardy and in Beauce, and then compare it with






the practice in many provinces in England, and the contrast will






appear striking. Were there more forest in England, to supply the






inhabitants with fuel, I imagine many inclosures, useful at first






for improving the grounds, would be taken away, and the country






laid more open; were wolves less common in France, there would be






found more scattered farms. Cattle there must be shut up in the






night, and cannot be left in the fields; this is a great






discouragement to inclosing. Where there are no inclosures, there






are few advantages to be found from establishing the farmhouse






exactly upon the spot of ground to be laboured; and then the






advantages which result to certain classes of inhabitants, from






being gathered together, the farmers with the tradesmen, are






found to preponderate. Thus the French farmers are gathered into






villages, and the English remain upon their fields. But farther;






in Picardy and Beauce agriculture has been long established, and,






I imagine, that, at the time when lands were first broken up, or






rather improved, their habitations must have been closer






together.






    This drawing together of inhabitants must leave many ruinous






possessions, and this, by-the-bye, is one reason why people cry






out upon the desolation of France, because ruinous houses (which






may oftentimes be a mark of improvement, not of desertion) are






found in different places in the country. Paris has grown






considerably in bulk, and from this it naturally happens, that






the country round is purged of idle mouths. If this makes labour






dear in the country, it is the city alone which suffers by it;






the country must certainly be the gainers. So much for the two






species of population in two of the best inhabited countries of






Europe. I now come to another in one of the worst.






    In some countries you find every farm-house surrounded with






small huts, possessed by numbers of people, supposed to be useful






to the farmer. These in Scotland are called cottars (cottagers),






because they live in cottages. If you consider them in a






political light, they will appear to be inhabitants appropriated






for agriculture. In one sense they are so, if by that you






understand the gathering in of the fruits; in another they are






not, if by agriculture you understand the turning up the surface.






I bring in this example, and shall enlarge a little upon it,






because I imagine it to be, less or more, the picture of Europe






400 years ago.






    The Scotch farmer must have hands to gather in a scanty






produce, spread over a large extent of ground. He has six






cottars, I shall suppose; but these cottars must have wives, and






these wives will have children, and all must be fed before the






master's rent can be paid. It never comes into the cottar's head






to suppose that his children can gain money by their industry,






the farmer never supposes that it is possible for him to pay his






rent without the assistance of his cottars to tend his cattle,






and gather in his crop; and the master cannot go against the






custom of the country, without laying his land waste. All these






children are ready at the farmer's disposal; he can, without any






expence, send what parcels of sheep he pleases, to different






distances of half a mile or more, to feed upon spots of ground






which, without the convenience of these children, would be






entirely lost. By this plan of farming, landlords who have a






great extent of country which they are not able to improve, can






let the whole in a very few farms, and at the same time all the






spontaneous produce of the earth is gathered in and consumed. If






you compare the rent of these lands with the extent, it appears






very small; if you compare it with the numbers fed upon the farm,






you will find that an estate in the highlands maintains, perhaps,






ten times as many people as another of the same value in a good






and fertile province. Thus it is in some estates as in some






convents of the begging order, the more mouths the better cheer.






    I shall now suppose our modern policy to inspire an ingenious






or public-spirited lady to set up a weaver or two at a






farm-house. The cottars begin to spin; they will be a long time






in attaining to a dexterity sufficient to appear at the weaver's






house, in competition with others who are accustomed to the






trade; consequently this manufacture will be long in a






languishing condition; but if the undertaking is supported with






patience, these obstacles will be got the better of. Those who






tended herds of cattle for a poor maintenance, will turn






themselves to a more profitable occupation; the farmer will find






more difficulty in getting hands, he will complain, perhaps give






way; the master will lose a year's rent, and nobody will take so






extensive a farm; it must be divided, then it must be improved,






and then it produces more grain upon one tenth, than perhaps






formerly was produced upon the whole. This grain is bought with






the price of spinning; the parents divide with the children, who






are fed, and spin in their turn. When this is accomplished, what






is the revolution? Why, formerly the earth fed all the






inhabitants with her spontaneous productions, as I may call them;






now more labour is exercised upon turning up her surface; this






she pays in grain, which belongs to the strong man for his labour






and toil; women and children have no direct share, because they






have not contributed thereto, as they did in feeding cattle. But






they spin, and have money to buy what they have not force to






produce: consequently they live; but as they become useless as






cottars, they remove from their mother earth, and gather into






villages. When this change is effected, the lands appear less






inhabited; ruinous huts (nay, villages I may call them) are






frequently found, and many would be apt to conclude, that the






country is depopulated; but this is by no means found to be the






case, when the whole is taken together.






    The spirit therefore of the principal people of a country






determines the employment of the lower classes; the employment of






these determines their usefulness to the state, and their






usefulness, their multiplication. The more they are useful, the






more they gain, according to our definition of the contract of






society; the more they gain, the more they can feed; and






consequently, the more they will marry and divide with their






children. This increases useful population, and encourages






agriculture. Compare the former with the present situation, as to






numbers, as to ease, as to happiness!






    Is it not plain, that when the earth is not improved, it






cannot produce so much nourishment for man as when it is? On the






other hand, if industry does not draw into the hands of the






indigent, wherewith to purchase this additional nourishment,






nobody will be at a considerable first expence to break up






grounds in order to produce it. The withdrawing therefore a






number of hands from a trifling agriculture forces, in a manner,






the husbandman to work the harder: and by hard labour upon a






small spot, the same effect is produced as with slight labour






upon a great extent.






    I have said, that I imagined the state of agriculture in the






Scotch farm, was a pretty just representation of the general






state of Europe about 400 years ago: if not in every province of






every country, at least in every country for the most part.






Several reasons induce me to think so: first, where there is no






industry, nothing but the earth directly can feed her children,






little alienation of her fruits can take place. Next, because I






find a wonderful analogy between the way of living in some






provinces of different countries with what I have been






describing. Pipers, blue bonnets, and oat meal, are known in






Swabia, Auvergne, Limousin, and Catalonia, as well as in






Lochaber: numbers of idle, poor, useless hands, multitudes of






children, whom I have found to be fed, nobody knows how, doing






almost nothing at the age of fourteen, keeping of cattle and






going to school, the only occupations supposed possible for them.






If you ask why they are not employed, their parents will tell you






because commerce is not in the country: they talk of commerce as






if it was a man, who comes to reside in some countries in order






to feed the inhabitants. The truth is, it is not the fault of






these poor people, but of those whose business it is to find out






employment for them.






    Another reason I derive from the nature of the old tenures,






where we find lands which now produce large quantities of grain,






granted for a mere trifle, when at the same time others in the






neighbourhood of cities and abbeys are found charged with






considerable rents. This I attribute to the bad cultivation of






lands at that time, from which I infer, a small population. In






those days of trouble and confusion, confiscations were very






frequent, large tracts of lands were granted to the great lords






upon different revolutions, and these, finding them often






deserted, as is mentioned in history, (the vassals of the former






being either destroyed or driven out to make place for the new






comers,) used to parcel them out for small returns in every thing






but personal service. Such sudden and violent revolutions must






dispeople a country; and nothing but tranquility, security,






order, and industry, for ages together, can render it populous.






    Besides these natural causes of population and depopulation






(which proceed, as we have observed, from a certain turn given to






the spirit of a people), there are others which operate with






irresistible force, by sudden and violent revolutions. The King






of Prussia, for example, attempted to people, a country all at






once, by profiting of the desertion of the Saltzburgers. America






is become very poorly peopled in some spots upon the coast, and






in some islands, at the expence of the exportation of millions






from Europe and from Africa; such methods never can succeed in






proportion to the attempt. Spain, on the other hand, was






depopulated by the expulsion of its antichristian inhabitants.






These causes work evident effects, which there is little occasion






to explain, although the more remote consequences of them may






deserve observation. I shall, in another place, have occasion to






examine the manner of our peopling America. In this place, I






shall make a few observations upon the depopulation of Spain, and






finish my chapter.






    That country is said to have been anciently very populous






under the government of the Moors. I am not sufficiently versed






in the politics, oeconomy, and manners of that people, to judge






how far these might be favourable to population: what seems,






however, to confirm what we are told, is, the large repositories






they used for preserving grain, which still remain entire, though






never once made use of. They watered the kingdoms of Valencia,






Murcia, and Granada. They gathered themselves into cities, of






which we still can discover the extent. The country which they






now possess (though drier than Spain) furnishes Europe with






considerable quantities of grain. The palace of the Moorish King






at Granada shews a taste for luxury. The mosque of Cordoua speaks






a large capital. All these are symptoms of population, but they






only help one to guess. The numbers which history mentions to






have been driven out, is a better way still of judging; if the






fidelity of historians could be depended upon, when there is any






question about numbers.






    Here was an example of a country depopulated in a very






extraordinary manner: yet I am of opinion, that the scarcity of






inhabitants complained of in that country, for a long time after






the expulsion, did not so much proceed from the effects of the






loss sustained, as from the contrast between the spirit of those






christians who remained after the expulsion, and their catholic






deliverers. The christians who lived among the Moors, were really






Moors as to manners, though not as to religion. Had they adopted






the spirit of the subjects of Castile, or had they been governed






according to their own, numbers would soon have risen to the






former standard. But as the christian lord governed his Murcian,






Andalousian, and Granada subjects, according to the principles of






christian policy, was it any wonder that in such an age of






ignorance, prejudice, and superstition, the country (one of the






finest in the world) should be long in recovering? Recover,






however, it did; and sooner perhaps than is commonly believed:






for I say it was recovered so soon as all the flat and watered






lands were brought into cultivation; because I have reason to






believe that the Moors never carried their agriculture farther in






these southern provinces.






    From this I still conclude, that no destruction of






inhabitants by expulsion, captivity, war, pestilence or famine,






is so permanently hurtful to population, as a revolution in that






spirit which is necessary for the increase and support of






numbers. Let that spirit be kept up, and let mankind be well






governed, numbers will quickly increase to their former standard,






after the greatest reduction possible: and while they are upon






the augmenting hand, the state will be found in more heart and






more vigour, than when arrived even at the former height; for so






soon as a state ceases to grow in prosperity, I apprehend it






begins to decay both in health and vigour.













Chap. XVII













In what Manner and according to what Proportion do Plenty and






Scarcity affect a People













    In a former chapter I have examined this question, relatively






to mankind fed by the hand of nature: I now come nearer home, and






shall keep close to modern times, considering circumstances and






effects which by daily experience we see and feel.






    I have often said, that numbers are in proportion to the






produce of the earth. I now say, that in most countries of






Europe, the food produced in the country is nearly consumed by






the inhabitants: and by nearly I understand, that the part






exported bears a small proportion to the home-consumption. I do






by no means establish this as an universal proposition; but I say






it is true for the most part: and the intention of this chapter






is to enable us to judge how far these limitations should extend.






I allow, for example, that Holland, not producing food for its






inhabitants, must draw it from some country which produces a






superfluity, regularly. but let it be observed that Poland,






Germany, Flanders, and England, with many other countries,






contribute their contingents to supply the demand of the Dutch;






and of several large trading towns which have small territories.






This being the case, the quota furnished by each country, must be






in a small proportion to the respective quantity growing in it.






But these are general conclusions upon vague suppositions, which






throw no light on the question. I shall therefore endeavour to






apply our reasoning to facts, and then examine consequences.






    There are few countries, I believe, in Europe more abounding






in grain than England: I shall therefore keep that kingdom in my






eye while I examine this matter. Nothing is more common than to






hear that an abundant crop furnishes more than three years'






subsistence: nay, I have found it advanced by an author of






consideration, (Advantages and Disadvantages of France and Great






Britain, &c. article Grain,) that a plentiful year produces five






years' nourishment for the inhabitants. If this be a mistake, it






may prove a very hurtful one in many respects. I am, on the






contrary, apt to believe, that no annual produce of grain ever






was so great in England as to supply its inhabitants fifteen






months, in that abundance with which they feed themselves in a






year of plenty. If this be the case, at what may we compute the






surplus in ordinary good years? I believe it will be thought a






very good year which produces full subsistence for fourteen






months; and crops which much exceed this are, I believe, very






rare. Here follow my reasons for differing so widely from the






gentleman whom I have cited. If I am in the wrong, I shall have






the most sensible pleasure in being set right; and nothing will






be so easy to any one who has access to be better informed as to






facts than I can pretend to be.






    I consider all the yearly crop of grain in England as






consumed at home, except what is exported; for I cannot admit






that any considerable quantity is lost: that it may be abused,






misapplied, drunk when it should be eat, I do not deny. These are






questions which do not regard the present inquiry. Whether






therefore it be consumed in bread, beer, spirits, or by animals,






I reckon it consumed; and in a year when the greatest consumption






is made at home, this I call the abundance with which the






inhabitants feed themselves in years of plenty. Now I find in the






performance above cited, a state of exportations for five years,






from 1746 to 1750 inclusive, where the quantity exported amounts






in all to 5,289,847 quarters of all sorts of grain. This is not






one year's provision, according to Sir William Petty's






calculation, of which we have made mention above. The bounties






upon corn (continues the author above mentioned) have amounted in






one year to 500,000l, sterling. He does not mention the year, and






I am little able to dispute that matter with him. I suppose it to






be true; and still farther, let it be understood that the whole






exportation was made out of the produce of one crop. I do not






find that this sum answers to the bounty upon 3,000,000 of






quarters, which, according to Sir William Petty, make six months'






provision. I calculate thus: The bounty upon wheat is 5s. a






quarter, that upon rye 3s. 6d. that upon barley 2s. 6d. these are






the species of grain commonly exported: cast the three premiums






together, and divide by three, the bounty will come to 3s. 8d. at






a medium; at which rate 500,000l. sterling will pay the bounty of






2,727,272 quarters of grain. An immense quantity to be exported!






but a very inconsiderable part of a crop supposed capable to






maintain England for five years. It may be answered, that the






great abundance of a plentiful year is considerably diminished






when a scanty crop happens to precede it, or to follow upon it.






In the first case, it is sooner begun upon; in the last, it






supplies the consumption in the year of scarcity, considerably.






This I allow to be just; but as it is not uncommon to see a






course of good years follow one another, the state of exportation






at such times must certainly be the best, nay, the only method of






judging of the real extent of superfluity.






    On the other hand, I am apt to believe, that there never was






a year of such scarcity as that the lands of England did not






produce greatly above six months, subsistence, such as the people






are used to take in years of scarcity. Were six months of the






most slender subsistence to fail, I imagine all Europe together






might perhaps be at a loss to supply a quantitY sufficient to






prevent the greatest desolation by famine.






    As I have no access to look into records, I content myself






with less authentic documents. I find then by the London






news-papers, that, from the 9th of April to the 13th of August






1757, while great scarcity was felt in England, there were






declared in the port of London no more than 71,728 quarters of






wheat, of which 15,529 were not then arrived. So that the whole






quantity there imported to relieve the scarcity, was 56,199






quarters. Not one month's provision for the inhabitants of that






city, reckoning them at 800,000 souls! One who has access to look






into the registers of the trade in grain, might in a moment






determine this question.(8*)






    Another reason which induces me to believe what the above






arguments seem to prove, I draw from what I see at present






passing in Germany; I mean the universal complaints of scarcity






in those armies which are now assembled (1757). When we compare






the numbers of an army, let it be of a hundred thousand men, and






forty thousand horses; suppose the suit of it to be as many more,






all strangers (for the others I reckon nothing extraordinary);






what an inconsiderable number does this appear, in proportion to






the inhabitants of this vast country of Germany! Yet let us






observe the quantity of provisions of all sorts constantly coming






down the Rhine, the Moselle, and many other rivers, collected






from foreign provinces on all hands; the numbers of cattle coming






from Hungary; the loads of corn from Poland; and all this in a






year which has produced what at any other time would have been






called an excellent crop. After these foreign supplies, must not






one be astonished to find scarcity complained of in the provinces






where the war is carried on, and high prices every where else.






From such circumstances I must conclude, that people are






generally very much deceived in their estimation of plenty and






scarcity, when they talk of two or three years' subsistence for a






country being found upon their lands at once. I may indeed be






mistaken in my conclusions; but the more I have reflected upon






this subject, the more I find myself confirmed in them, even from






the familiar examples of the sudden rise of markets from very






inconsiderable monopolies, and of their sudden fall by






inconsiderable quantities imported. I could cite many examples of






these vicissitudes, were it necessary, to prove what every one






must observe.






    I come now to resolve a difficulty which naturally results






from this doctrine, and with which I shall close the chapter.






    If it be true, that a crop in the most plentiful year is






nearly consumed by the inhabitants, what becomes of them in years






of scarcity? for nobody can deny, that there is a great






difference, between one crop and another. To this I answer,






first, That I believe there is also a very great deception, or






common mistake, as to the difference between crops: a good year






for one soil, is a bad one for another. But I shall not enlarge






on this; because I have no sufficient proof to support my






opinion. The principal reason upon which I found it, is, that it






is far from being true, that the same number of people consume






always the same quantity of food. In years of plenty every one is






well fed; the price of the lowest industry can procure






subsistence sufficient to bear a division; food is not so






frugally managed; a quantity of animals are fatted for use; all






sorts of cattle are kept in good heart; and people drink more






largely, because all is cheap. A year of scarcity comes, the






people are ill fed, and when the lower classes come to divide






with their children, the portions are brought to be very small;






there is great oeconomy upon consumption, few animals are fatted






for use, cattle look miserably, and a poor man cannot indulge






himself with a cup of generous ale. Add to all these






circumstances that in England the produce of pasture is very






considerable, and it commonly happens, that a bad year for grain,






which proceeds from rains, is for the same reason a good year for






pasture; and in the estimation of a crop, every circumstance must






be allowed to enter.






    From what has been said I must conclude in general, that the






best corn country in the world, provided slavery be not






established, does not produce wherewithal fully to maintain, as






in years of plenty, one third more than its own inhabitants; for






if this should be the case, all the policy of man would not be






able to prevent the multiplication of them, until they arose






nearly up to the mean proportion of the produce in ordinary






years, and it is only what exceeds this standard, and proceeds






from unusual plenty, which can be exported.(9*) Were plentiful






years more common, mankind would be more numerous; were scarcity






more frequent, numbers would be less. Numbers therefore must ever






be, in my humble opinion, in the ratio of food, and






multiplication will never stop until the balance comes to be






nearly even.













Chap. XVIII













Of the Causes and Consequences of a Country's being fully peopled













    In the titles of my chapters, I rather seek to communicate a






rough idea of the subject than a correct one. In truth and in






reason, there is no such thing as a country actually peopled to






the full, if by this term numbers only are meant, without






considering the proportion they bear to the consumption they make






of the productions of their country. I have in a former chapter






established a distinction between the physical and moral






impossibility of increasing numbers. As to the physical






impossibility, the case can hardly exist, because means of






procuring subsistence from other countries, when the soil refuses






to give more, seem, if not inexhaustible, at least very






extensive. A country therefore fully peopled, that is, in a






physical impossibility of increasing their numbers, is a






chimerical and useless supposition. The subject here under






consideration is, the situation of a people, who find it their






interest to seek for subsistence from abroad. This may happen,






and commonly does, long before the country itself is fully






improved: it decides nothing as to the intrinsic fertility of the






soil, and proves no more, than that the industry of the free






hands has made a quicker progress in multiplying mouths, than






that of the farmers in providing subsistence. To illustrate this






idea, let me propose the following question: Is multiplication






the efficient cause of agriculture, or is agriculture that of






multiplication?






    I answer, that multiplication is the efficient cause of






agriculture, though I allow, that, in the infancy of society, the






spontaneous fruits of the earth, which are free to all, are the






efficient cause of a multiplication, which may rise to the exact






proportion of them; as has been said above. This I am now to






explain.






    I have already distinguished the fruits of agriculture from






the earth's spontaneous productions: I must farther take notice,






that when I employ the term agriculture in treating of modern






policy, I always consider it to be exercised as a trade, and






producing a surplus, and not as the direct means of subsisting,






where all is consumed by the husbandman, as has been fully






explained above. We have said that it is the surplus produced






from it, which proves a fund for multiplying inhabitants. Mow






there must be a demand for this surplus. Every person who is






hungry will make a demand, but every such demand will not be






answered, and will consequently have no effect. The demander must






have an equivalent to give: it is this equivalent which is the






spring of the whole machine; for without this the farmer will not






produce any surplus, and consequently he will dwindle down to the






class of those who labour for actual subsistence. The poor, who






produce children, make an ineffectual demand, and when they






cannot increase the equivalent, they divide the food they have






with the newcomers, and prove no encouragement to agriculture. By






dividing, the whole become ill fed, miserable, and thus






extinguish. Now because it is the effectual demand, as I may call






it, which makes the husbandman labour for the sake of the






equivalent, and because this demand increases, by the






multiplication of those who have an equivalent to give, therefore






I say that multiplication is the cause, and agriculture the






effect. On the other hand, I think the spontaneous fruits of the






earth, as in the supposition, may be considered as the cause of a






certain limited multiplication; because in this case there is no






equivalent demanded. The earth produces, whether her fruits be






consumed or not: mankind are fed upon these gratuitously, and






without labour, and the existence of the fruits is anterior to






the production of those who are to consume them. Those who are






first fed, draw their vigour from their food, and their






multiplication from their vigour. Those who are produced, live






freely upon their parent earth, and multiply until all the






produce be consumed: then multiplication stops, as we have said;






but establish agriculture, and multiplication will go on a-new.






Consequently, my reader will say, agriculture is as much the






cause of this new multiplication, as the spontaneous fruits were






of the first. Here is a very natural conclusion, which seems






directly to contradict what we have been endeavouring to prove;






but the knot is easily untied. We have seen how the existence of






agriculture depends upon the industry of man; and how this






industry is the only means of establishing agriculture. Now, as






this industry is chiefly promoted by the motive of providing for






our children, the procreation of them must be considered as the






first, or at least the most palpable political cause of setting






mankind to work, and therefore may be considered as anterior to






agriculture; whereas, on the other hand, the earth's spontaneous






productions being in small quantity, and quite independent of






man, appear, as it were, to be furnished by nature, in the same






way as a small sum is given to a young man, in order to put him






in a way of industry, and of making his fortune. The small sum






sets him a-going, but it is his industry which makes the fortune.






From this illustration it appears, that if the demand for food






can be more readily supplied from abroad than from home, it will






be the foreign subsistence, which will preserve numbers, produced






from industry, not from domestic agriculture; and these numbers






will, in their turn, produce an advancement of it at home, by






inspiring a desire in the husbandman to acquire the equivalent






which their countrymen give to strangers.






    Such nations, whose statesmen have not the talent to engage






the husbandmen to wish for the equivalent, which the labour of






their fellow-citizens can produce, or, in other words, who cannot






create reciprocal wants and dependences among their subjects,






must stand in a moral incapacity of augmenting in numbers. Of






such states we have no occasion to treat in this chapter, any






more than of those who are supposed to be in the physical






incapacity of multiplying: our point of view is, to examine the






natural consequences resulting from a demand for subsistence






extending itself to foreign countries. This I take to be the






mother of industry at home, as well as of trade abroad; two






objects which come to be treated of in the second book.






    A country may be fully peopled (in the sense we understand






this term) in several different ways. It may be fully stocked at






one time with six millions, and at another may maintain perhaps






eight or even nine millions with ease, without the soil's being






better cultivated or improved. On the other hand, a country may






maintain twenty millions with ease, and by being improved as to






the soil, become over-stocked with fifteen millions. These two






assertions come next to be explained.






    The more frugal a people are, and the more they feed upon the






plentiful productions of the earth, the more they may increase in






numbers.






    Were the people of England to come more into the use of






living upon bread, and give over consuming so much animal food,






inhabitants would certainly increase, and many rich grass fields






would be thrown into tillage. Were the French to give over eating






so much bread, the Dutch so much the fish, the Flemish so much






garden stuff, and the Germans so much sourkraut, and all take to






the English diet of pork, beef, and mutton, their respective






numbers would soon decay, even although their lands were better






improved than at present. These are but reflections, by-the-bye,






which the reader may enlarge upon at pleasure. The point in hand






is, to know what are the consequences of a country's being so






peopled, no matter from what cause, that the soil, in its actual






state of fertility, refuses to supply a sufficient quantity of






such food as the inhabitants incline to live upon. These are






different according to the diversity of spirit in the people.






    If they be of an indolent disposition, directed in their






political oeconomy by established habits and old prejudices,






which prevent innovations, although a change of circumstances may






demand them, the effect will be to put a stop to population;






which cannot augment without an increase of food on one hand, and






of industry on the other, to make the first circulate. These must






go hand in hand: the precedence between them is a matter of mere






curiosity and speculation.






    If, on the contrary, a spirit of industry has brought the






country to a certain degree of population, this spirit will not






be stopped by the want of food; it will be brought from foreign






countries, and this new demand, by diminishing among them the






quantity usually produced for their own subsistence, will prompt






the industrious to improve their lands, in order to supply the






new demand without any hurt to themselves. Thus trade has an






evident tendency towards the improvement of the world in general,






by rendering the inhabitants of one country industrious, in order






to supply the wants of another, without any prejudice to






themselves. Farther:






    The country fully stocked can offer in exchange for this






food, nothing but the superfluity of the industry of the free






hands, for that of the farmers is supposed to be consumed by the






society; except indeed some species of nourishment or






productions, which, being esteemed at a higher value in other






countries than in those which produce them, bring a more






considerable return than the value of what is exported, as when






raw silk and delicate wines, &c. are given in exchange for grain






and other provisions.






    The superfluity of industry must, therefore, form the






principal part of exportation, and if the nation fully stocked be






surrounded by others which abound in grain and articles of






subsistence, where the inhabitants have a taste for elegance, and






are eager of acquiring the manufactures and improvements of their






industrious neighbours; it is certain, that a trade with such






nations will very considerably increase the inhabitants of the






other, though fully stocked relatively to the production of their






own soil; and the additional inhabitants will increase the number






of manufacturers only, not of husbandmen. This is the case with






Holland, and with many large trading cities which are free and






have but a small territory.






    If, on the contrary, the nation fully stocked be in the






neighbourhood of others who take the same spirit as itself, this






supply of food will become in time more difficult to be had, in






proportion as their neighbours come to supply their own wants.






They must therefore seek for it at a greater distance, and as






soon as the expence of procuring it comes to exceed the value of






the labour of the free hands employed in producing the






equivalent, their work will cease to be exported, and the number






of inhabitants will be diminished to the proportion of the






remaining food.






    I do not say that trade will cease on this account; by no






means. Trade may still go on, and even be more considerable than






before; but it will be a trade which never can increase






inhabitants, because for this purpose there must be subsistence.






It may have however numberless and great advantages: it may






greatly advance the wealth of the state, and this will purchase






even power and strength. A trading nation may live in profound






peace at home, and send war and confusion among her enemies,






without even employing her own subjects. Thus trade, without






increasing the inhabitants of a country, can greatly add to its






force, by arming those hands which she has not bred, and






employing them for her service.













Chap. XIX













In the Introduction of Machines into Manufactures prejudicial to






the Interest of a State, or hurtful to Population?













    This I find has been made a question in modern times. The






ancients held in great veneration the inventors of the saw, of






the lathe, of the wimble, of the potter's wheel; but some moderns






find an abuse in bringing mechanism to perfection (see Les






Interets de la France mal entendus, p. 272. 3 13.): the great






Montesquieu finds fault with watermills, though I do not find






that he has made any objection against the use of the plough.






    Did people understand one another, it would be impossible






that such points could suffer a dispute among men of sense; but






the circumstances referred to, or presupposed, which authors






always almost keep in their eye, though they seldom express them,






render the most evident truths susceptible of opposition.






    It is hardly possible suddenly to introduce the smallest






innovation into the political oeconomy of a state, let it be ever






so reasonable, nay ever so profitable, without incurring some






inconveniences. A room cannot be swept without raising dust, one






cannot walk abroad without dirtying one's shoes; neither can a






machine, which abridges the labour of men, be introduced all at






once into an extensive manufacture, without throwing many people






into idleness.






    In treating every question of political oeconomy, I






constantly suppose a statesman at the head of government,






systematically conducting every part of it, so as to prevent the






vicissitudes of manners, and innovations, by their natural and






immediate effects or consequences, from hurting any interest






within the commonwealth. When a house within a city becomes






crazy, it is taken down; this I call systematical ruin: were it






allowed to fall, the consequences might be fatal in many






respects. In like manner, if a number of machines are all at once






introduced into the manufactures of an industrious nation, (in






consequence of that freedom which must necessarily be indulged to






all sorts of improvement, and without which a state cannot






thrive,) it becomes the business of the statesman to interest






himself so far in the consequences, as to provide a remedy for






the inconveniences resulting from the sudden alteration. It is






farther his duty to make every exercise even of liberty and






refinement an object of government and administration; not so as






to discourage or to check them, but to prevent the revolution






from affecting the interests of the different classes of the






people, whose welfare he is particularly bound to take care of.






    The introduction of machines can, I think, in no other way






prove it: and I have hurtful by making people idle, than by the






suddenness of frequently observed, that all sudden revolutions,






let them be ever so advantageous, must be accompanied with






inconveniences. A safe, honourable, and lasting peace, after a






long, dangerous, and expensive war, forces a number of hands to






be idle, and deprives them of bread. Peace then may be considered






as a machine for defending a nation, at the political loss of






making an army idle; yet nobody, I believe, will allege that, in






order to give bread to soldiers, sutlers, and undertakers, the






war should be continued. But here I must observe, that it seems






to be a palpable defect in policy, if a statesman shall neglect






to find out a proper expedient (at whatever first expence it may






be procured) for giving bread to those who, at the risk of their






lives, have gone through so many fatigues for the service of






their country. This expence should be charged to the account of






the war, and a state ought to consider, that as their safety






required that numbers should be taken out of the way of securing






to themselves a lasting fund of subsistence, which would have






rendered them independent of every body, (supposing that to have






been the case,) she becomes bound by the contract of society






which ties all together, to find them employment. Let me seek for






another illustration concerning this matter.






    I want to make a rampart cross a river, in order to establish






a bridge, a mill, a sluice, &c. For this purpose, I must turn off






the water, that is, stop the river: would it be a good objection






against my improvement to say, that the water would overflow the






neighbouring lands? as if I could be supposed so improvident as






not to have prepared a new channel for it? Machines stop the






river; it is the business of the state to make the new channel,






as it is the public which is to reap the benefit of the sluice. I






imagine what I have said will naturally suggest an answer to all






possible objections against the introduction of machines; as for






the advantages of them, they are so palpable that I need not






insist upon them. There is, however, one case, in which I think






they may be disapproved of; but it seems a chimerical






supposition, and is brought in here for no other purpose than to






point out and illustrate the principle which influences this






branch of our subject.






    If you can imagine a country peopled to the utmost extent of






the fertility of the soil, and absolutely cut off from any






communication with other nations; all the inhabitants fully






employed in supplying the wants of one another, the circulation






of money going forward regularly, proportionally, and uniformly






through every vein, as I may call it, of the political body; no






sudden or extraordinary demand at any time for any branch of






industry; no redundancy of any employment; no possibility of






increasing either circulation, industry, or consumption. In such






a situation as this, I should disapprove of the introduction of






machines, as I disapprove of taking physic in an established






state of perfect health. I disapprove of a machine for no other






reason but because it is an innovation in a state absolutely






perfect in these branches of its political oeconomy: and where






there is perfection there can be no improvement. I farther






disapprove of it because it might force a man to be idle, who






would be found thereby in a physical impossibility of getting his






bread, in any other way than that in which he is supposed to be






actually employed.






    The present situation of every country in Europe is so widely






distant from this degree of perfection, that I must consider the






introduction of machines, and of every method of augmenting the






produce or assisting the labour and ingenuity of man, as of the






greatest utility. Why do people wish to augment population, but






in order to compass these ends? Wherein does the effect of a






machine differ from that of new inhabitants?






    As agriculture, exercised as a trade, purges the land of idle






mouths, and pushes them to a new industry which the state may






turn to her own advantage; so does a machine introduced into a






manufacture, purge off hands which then become superfluous in






that branch, and which may quickly be employed in another.






    If therefore the machine proves hurtful, it can only be






because it presents the state with an additional number of hands






bred to labour; consequently, if these are afterwards found






without bread, it must proceed from a want of attention in the






statesman: for an industrious man, made idle, may constantly be






employed to advantage, and with profit to him who employs him.






What could an act of naturalization do more, than to furnish






industrious hands, forced to be idle, and demanding employment?






Machines therefore I consider as a method of augmenting






(virtually) the number of the industrious, without the expence of






feeding an additional numbers: this by no means obstructs natural






and useful population, for the most obvious reasons.






    We have shewn how population must go on, in proportion to






subsistence, and in proportion to industry: now the machine eats






nothing, therefore does not diminish subsistence; and industry






(in our age at least) is in no danger of being over-stocked in






any well-governed state: for let all the world copy your






improvements, they still will be the scholars. And if, on the






contrary, in the introduction of machines you are found to be the






scholars of other nations, in that case you are brought to the






dilemma of accepting the invention with all its inconveniences,






or of renouncing every foreign communication.






    In speculations of this kind, one ought not, I think, to






conclude, that experience must of necessity prove what we imagine






our reasoning has pointed out.






    The consequences of innovations in political oeconomy, admit






of an finite variety, because of the infinite variety of






circumstances which attend them: no reasoning, therefore, however






refined, can point out a priori, what upon such occasions must






indispensibly follow. The experiment must be made, circumstances






must be allowed to operate; inconveniences must be prevented or






rectified as far as possible; and when these prove too many, or






too great to be removed, the most rational, the best concerted






scheme in theory must be laid aside, until preparatory steps be






taken for rendering it practicable.






    Upon the whole, daily experience shews the advantage and






improvement acquired by the introduction of machines. Let the






inconveniences complained of be ever so sensibly felt, let a






statesman be ever so careless in relieving those who are forced






to be idle, all these inconveniences are only temporary; the






advantage is permanent, and the necessity of introducing every






method of abridging labour and expence, in order to supply the






wants of luxurious mankind, is absolutely indispensable,






according to modern policy, according to experience, and






according to reason.













Chap. XX













Miscellaneous Observations upon Agriculture and Population













    I have hitherto considered the object of agriculture, as no






more than the raising of grain; the food of mankind has been






estimated by the quantity they consume of this production; and






husbandmen have been supposed to have their residence in the






country. As my subject has but an indirect connection with the






science of agriculture, I have simplified many things complex in






themselves, the better to adapt them to the principal object of






my inquiry, and the better to keep my attention fixed upon one






idea at a time. I am now going to return to some parts of my






subject, which I think I have treated too superficially; and to






examine, as I go along, some miscellaneous questions which will






naturally arise from what is to be said.






    QUEST. I. Every one almost who has written upon population,






and upon agriculture, considered as an essential concomitant of






it, has recommended the equal distribution of the property of






lands as useful to both.. a few reflections upon this question,






after what has been thrown out in the course of the foregoing






chapters, may not be improper; more in order to examine and apply






the principles laid down, than with a view to combat the opinion






of others.






    I have already, upon several occasions, taken notice of the






great difference between the political oeconomy of the ancients,






and that of modern times; for this reason, among others, that I






perceive that the sentiments of the ancients, which were founded






upon reason and common sense, relative to their situation, have






been adopted by some moderns, who have not perhaps sufficiently






attended to the change of our manners, and to the effects which






this change must operate upon every thing relative to our






oeconomy. The ancients recommended strongly an equal distribution






of lands as the best security for liberty, and the best method,






not only to preserve an equality among the citizens, but also to






increase their number.






    In those days, the citizens did not compose one half, perhaps






not one fourth, of the state relatively to numbers; and there was






no such thing almost as an established moneyed interest, which






can nowhere be founded but upon trade, and an extensive industry.






In those days there was no solid income, but in land: and this






being equally divided among the citizens, was favourable to their






multiplication and produced equality. But in our days, riches do






not consist in lands only; nay we sometimes find the most






considerable proprietors of these in very indifferent






circumstances; loaded with debts, and depending upon the






indulgence of men who have not an acre, and who are their






creditors. Let us therefore divide our lands as we please, we






shall never produce equality by it. This, with respect to one






point, is an essential difference between us and the ancients.






Now as to the other; to wit, population.






    The equal division of lands tends greatly, no doubt, to






increase the numbers of one class of inhabitants, to wit, the






landlords. In ancient times, as has been observed, the chief






attention was to increase the citizens, that is, the higher






classes of the state; and the equal division of property so






effectually produced this effect, that some Greek states were






obliged to allow the exposition of children; and Aristotle looked






upon it as a thing indispensably necessary, as M. de Montesquieu






has very judiciously observed. The multiplication of the lowest






classes, that is, of the slaves, never entered into the






consideration of the public, but remained purely a matter of






private concern; and we find it was a question with some, whether






or not it was worth while to breed from them at all. But in our






days the principal object is to support the lower classes from






their own multiplication; and for this purpose, an unequal






division of property seems to me the more favourable scheme;






because the wealth of the rich among us, falls naturally into the






pockets of our industrious poor; whereas the produce of a very






middling fortune does little more than feed the children of the






proprietor, who in course become very commonly and very naturally






an useless burthen upon the land. Let me apply this to an






example. Do we not familiarly observe, that the consolidation of






small estates, and the diminution of gentlemen's families of






middling fortune, do little harm to a modern state. There are






always abundance of this class of inhabitants to be found






whenever there is occasion for them. When a great man buys up the






lands of the neighbouring gentry, or small proprietors, all the






complaints which are heard, turn upon the distress which thence






results to the lower classes, from the loss of their masters and






protectors; but never one word is heard of that made by the






state, from the extinction of the former proprietor's family.






This abundantly shews that the object of modern attention is the






multiplication of the lower classes; consequently it must be an






inconsistency to adopt the practice of the ancients, when our






oeconomy is entirely opposite to theirs.






    QUEST. II. Let this suffice to point out how far the






difference of our manners should influence the division of our






lands. I shall now examine a question relative to the science of






agriculture, not considered as a method of improving the soil,






(this will come in more naturally afterwards,) but of making it






produce to the best advantage, supposing it to be already






improved.






    In treating of the productions of the earth, in consequence






of agriculture, I have all along distinguished them from those






which spontaneously proceed from the force of nature: these are






the immediate gift of God, those are the return of the labour of






his creatures. Every one knows that the labour of mankind is not






in proportion to their numbers, but to their industry. The






produce therefore of agriculture must be estimated, not according






to the quantity of fruits only, but also according to the labour






employed to produce them. These things premised, the question






here proposed to be examined arises, viz. Which species of






agriculture is the most advantageous to a modern society, that






which produces the greatest quantity of fruits absolutely taken,






or that which produces the greatest quantity relatively taken, I






mean to the labour employed?






    This question might easily be resolved, in general, by the






application of principles already deduced; although it cannot






admit of a direct answer, in the manner I have put it. One,






therefore, may say indeterminately, that species is the best






which produces a surplus the best proportioned to the industry,






and to the demands of all the free hands of the state. But as






this solution would not lead me to the object I have in view, I






have thrown in an alternative in order to gain attention to the






principles which I am going to examine, and which influence and






determine the establishment of the one or the other species of






agriculture.






    The principal difficulty I find in the examination of this






question, is to distinguish the effects of agriculture from those






of this spontaneous production of the earth. The returns from






pasture, for example, relatively taken, are, as we have observed,






both from reason and from experience, far greater than those of






corn fields, (vid. supra, chap. 8.) though I little doubt but






that, absolutely taken, the case is quite otherwise; that is to






say, that an acre of the finest corn-land will produce more






nourishment for man, than an equal portion of the finest pasture:






but here we are following the proportion of space and produce,






not of labour; for if the produce of both acres be considered






relatively to the labour necessary for the cultivation, as well






as to the extent, the produce of pasture will be found far






greater, this however I ascribe to the spontaneous operation of






nature, and not to the superior utility of this kind of






agriculture.






    Since therefore it is impossible rightly to separate the






effects of nature from those of art and industry, in this species






of improvement, let us confine our speculations to those only






which have for their object the turning up the surface, and the






sowing or cultivating annual vegetables. For the better conveying






our ideas, let us take an example, and reason from a supposition.






    Let me suppose an island of a small extent and fruitful soil,






suffIciently improved, and cultivated after the manner of the






best lands of England, in the ordinary method of farming.






    In this case we may infer, from what was laid down in the 8th






chapter, that the number of people employed about farming may be






nearly about one half of the whole society. Let the whole






inhabitants of the island be called 1000, that is 500 farmers,






and as many free hands. The 500 farmers must then feed 1000; the






500 free hands must provide for all the other wants of 1000. By






this supposition, and allowing that there is an equal degree of






industry in these two classes, the providing of food will appear






to be an occupation just equal to that of providing for all other






wants.






    One of the society proposes to augment the number of






inhabitants by introducing a more operose species of agriculture,






the produce of which may be absolutely greater, though relatively






less.






    The first question the statesman would naturally put to this






reformer would be: What is your view in increasing the number of






our inhabitants; is it to defend us against our enemies; is it to






supply the wants of strangers, and thereby to enrich ourselves;






is it to supply our own wants with more abundance; or is it to






provide us more abundantly with food? I can hardly find out any






other rational view in wishing for an additional number of people






in any country whatsoever. Let it be answered, that all these






ends may be thereby obtained: and now let us examine how far this






reformation upon agriculture will have the effect of increasing






inhabitants, how far such increase will procure the ends






proposed, and how far the execution of such a plan is a






practicable scheme to an industrious people.






    If the inhabitants be not sufficiently fed, which is the only






thing that can prevent their multiplication, it must proceed from






one of two causes. Either first, that those do procreate who






cannot produce an equivalent for the food of their children; or






secondly, that industry making a quicker progress than






agriculture, the industrious come too strongly in competition






with one another, for the surplus of food to be found; which has






the effect of raising the prices of it, and reducing the portions






too low to suffer a division; and thereby of preventing marriage






and multiplication in the lower classes of the free hands.






    In the first case, it is to no purpose to increase the






produce of agriculture, by rendering it more expensive; for those






who have no equivalent to give when food is cheap, will still be






in greater necessity when it rises in the price. In the second






case, it is hurtful to diminish the surplus of the farmers,






because the supposition proves that the balance is already too






heavy upon the side of the free hands, that is, that the surplus






of the farmers is already become insufficient fully to feed them.






    Two remedies may be proposed for this inconvenience, the one






tending to population, the other to depopulation; and as the end






to be compassed is to set the balance even between husbandmen and






freehands, I shall explain both, and point out how far from






principles it appears, that in either way the end may be






attained.






    The first tending to increase population is the remedy






proposed, and, no doubt, were it possible to introduce a new






system of agriculture of a larger absolute production, although






the relative production should be less, the inhabitants of the






state, becoming thereby better fed, though at a greater cost,






would infallibly multiply. Let me therefore examine this first






part before I say any thing of the other; and for the greater






distinctness I shall return to my example, and examine both the






consequences and the possibility of putting such a plan in






execution.






    Let me suppose, that by using the spade and rake, instead of






the plough and harrow, the lands of our island might be brought






to produce with more abundance; this is a method of increasing






the expence of agriculture, which would require an additional






number of husbandmen.






    Now, by the supposition, 500 farmers fed, though scantily,






the whole of the inhabitants, that is 1000 persons. If therefore






100 of the free hands can be engaged to become farmers, the end






may be attained: more nourishment will be produced; the people






will be better fed; they will multiply. that is, their number






will rise above 1000. Let us next endeavour to form a judgment of






this increase, and of the consequence of the revolution.






    The society will now be composed of 600 farmers and 400 free






hands. The 600 will certainly produce more fruits than formerly;






but as their labour is relatively less productive by the






supposition, it will be impossible for them to furnish a surplus






equal to their own consumption; consequently, the free hands






never will be able to rise to a number equal to theirs; that is,






the society will never get up to 1200. But we supposed, that the






other wants of the society required the industry of one half of






the inhabitants to supply them; that is, of all the 500 free






hands; and, as the number of these has been already reduced, and






can never more rise to the former proportion, as has been said,






must not either the people voluntarily adopt a more simple way of






living; or must not the demand for work rise very considerably?






Let me consider the consequences in both cases. In the first, you






perceive, that if the inhabitants themselves are obliged to






simplify their way of living, for want of hands to supply what






they formerly consumed, three of the four objects proposed by the






reformation become impossible to be attained; to wit, the






defending themselves against their enemies, the supplying the






wants of strangers, and the supplying their own with more






abundance. And with regard to the fourth, the being better fed,






this must cease to be the case, the moment the end is obtained;






that is, the moment the inhabitants are multiplied up to the






proportion of additional food. Consequently, by simplifying their






way of life, and allowing farming to stand upon the new footing,






they compass not any one of the ends they proposed.






    Next, if we suppose, that the inhabitants do not incline to






simplify their way of life, but that the wealthy among them






insist upon purchasing all the instruments of luxury which they






formerly were used to enjoy, must not demand for work greatly






rise, and must not, of consequence, an additional encouragement






be given to that species of labour which had been diminished, in






taking 100 persons from industry, to throw them into the class of






farmers? Will not this make them quickly desert their spade, and






the rather, as they have taken to an employment less lucrative






than that of farming, according to the former system?






    So much for the consequences which would follow, in case the






plan proposed was found practicable; that is, supposing it to be






a thing possible to transport into agriculture a part of an






industrious society, already otherwise employed, and to change






all at once the relative proportion between those who supply






food, and those who purchase it with their industry. We have






begun, by taking this first step for granted; and now I am to






shew what obstacles will be found in the execution.






    We have said, that it is the multiplicity and complexity of






wants which give an encouragement to agriculture, and not






agriculture, or an abundance of food, which inspires mankind with






a disposition to labour. Now, if this principle be true, the






supposition we have proceeded upon is absurd. I am afraid, both






reason and experience will abundantly prove that it is so.






    The natural and necessary effect of industry, in trades and






manufactures, is to promote the increase of relative husbandry;






which by augmenting the surplus, tends of course to increase the






proportion of the free hands relatively to the farmers. A river






may as easily ascend to its source, as a people voluntarily adopt






a more operose agriculture than that already established,






supposing the lands to be fully improved, the spirit of industry






to prevail on one hand, and the farmers to have profit only in






view on the other.






    What farmer could sell the surplus of an expensive






agriculture in competition with another who exercised a species






relatively more productive?






    When lands are improved, the simplification of agriculture is






a necessary concomitant of industry, because diminishing expence






is the only method of gaining a preference at market.






    QUEST. III. When industry is set on foot, it gives






encouragement to agriculture exercised as a trade: and by the






allurements of ease, which a large surplus procures to the






farmers, it does hurt to that species which is exercised as a






method of subsistence. Lands become more generally, and less






thoroughly laboured. In some countries, tillage is set on foot






and encouraged; this is an operose agriculture. While industry






goes forward, and while a people can remain satisfied with a






nourishment consisting chiefly of bread, this system of






agriculture will subsist, and will carry numbers very high. If






wealth increases, and if those who have it begin to demand a much






greater proportion of work than formerly, while they consume no






more food, then I believe numbers may diminish from the






principles I am now going in quest of.






    I return to the council of the island where the proposition






laid down upon the carpet is, The scanty subsistence of the






inhabitants requires redress.






    A Machiavelian stands up (of such there are some in every






country) and proposes, instead of multiplying the inhabitants, by






rendering agriculture more operose, to diminish their number, by






throwing a quantity of corn-fields into grass. What is the






intention of agriculture, says he, but to nourish a state? By our






operose method of plowing and sowing, one half of the whole






produce is consumed by those who raise it; whereas by having a






great part of our island in pasture, one half of the husbandmen






may be saved. Pray what do you propose to do with those whom you






intend to make idle? replies a citizen. Let them betake






themselves to industry. But industry is sufficiently, nay more






than sufficiently, stocked already. If, says Machiavel, the






supernumerary husbandmen be thrown out of a way of living, they






may go where they please; we have no occasion for them, nor for






any one who lives to feed himself alone. But you diminish the






number of your people, replies the citizen, and consequently your






strength; and if afterwards you come to be attacked by your






enemies, you will wish to have those back again for your defence,






whom in your security you despised. To this the other makes






answer: there you trust to the Egyptian reed. If they be






necessary for feeding us at present, how shall we be able to live






while we employ them as soldiers? We may live without many






things, but not without the labour of our husbandmen. Whether we






have our grounds in tillage or in pasture, if this class be






rightly proportioned to the labour required, we never can take






any from it. In those countries where we see princes have






recourse to the land to recruit their armies, we may safely






conclude, that there the land is overstocked; and that industry






has not as yet been able to purge off all the superfluous mouths:






but with us the case is different, where agriculture is justly






proportioned to the number of husbandmen. If I propose a reform,






it is to augment only the surplus, upon which all the state,






except the husbandmen, are fed; if the surplus, after the reform,






is greater than at present, the plan is good, although 250 of our






farmers should thereby be forced to starve for hunger.






    Though no man is, I believe, capable to reason in so inhuman






a style, and though the revolution here proposed be an impossible






supposition, if meant to be executed all at once, the same






effects however must be produced, in every country where we see






corn-fields by degrees turned into pasture: the change is gradual






only, industry is not overstocked anywhere, and subsistence may






be drawn from other countries, where the operose species of






agriculture can be carried on with profit.






    I must now touch again upon another part of my subject, which






I think has been treated too superficially.






    In a former chapter I have shewn how industry has the natural






effect of collecting into towns and cities the free hands of a






state, leaving the farmers in their farms and villages. This






distribution served the purpose of explaining certain principles;






but when examined relatively to other circumstances which at that






time I had not in my eye, it will be found by far too general.






Let me therefore add some farther observations upon this matter.






    The extensive agriculture of plowing and sowing, is the






proper employment of the country, and is the foundation of






population in every nation fed upon its own produce. Cities are






commonly surrounded by kitchen-gardens, and rich grass-fields;






these are the proper objects of agriculture for those who live in






suburbs, or who are shut up within the walls of small towns. The






gardens produce various kinds of nourishment, which cannot easily






be brought from a distance, in that fresh and luxuriant state






which pleases the eye, and conduces to health. They offer a






continual occupation to man, and very little for cattle;






therefore are properly situated in the proximity of towns and






cities. The grass fields again are commonly either grazed by






cows, for the production of milk, butter, cream, &c. which suffer






by long carriage; or kept in pasture for preserving fatted






animals in good order until the markets demand them; or they are






cut in grass for the cattle of the city. They may also be turned






into hay with profit; because the carriage of a bulky commodity






from a great distance is sometimes too expensive. Thus we






commonly find agriculture disposed in the following manner. In






the center stands the city, surrounded by kitchen-gardens; beyond






these lies a belt of fine luxuriant pasture or hay-fields;






stretch beyond this, and you find the beginning of what I call






operose farming, plowing and sowing; beyond this lie grazing






farms for the fattening of cattle; and last of all come the






mountainous and large extents of unimproved or ill improved






grounds, where animals are bred. This seems the natural






distribution, and such I have found it almost every where






established, when particular circumstances do not invert the






order.






    The poorness of the soil near Paris, for example, presents






you with fields of rye-corn at the very gates, and with the most






extensive kitchen-gardens and orchards, even for cherries and






peaches, at a considerable distance from town. Other cities I






have found, and I can cite the example of this which I at present






inhabit (Padoua), where no kitchen-garden is to be found near it,






but every spot is covered with the richest grain; two thirds with






wheat, and the remaining third with Indian corn. The reason of






this is palpable. The town is of a vast extent, in proportion to






the inhabitants; the gardens are all within the walls, and the






dung of the city enables the corn-fields to produce constantly.






Hay is brought from a greater distance, because the expence of






distributing the dung over a distant field, would be greater than






that of transporting the hay by water-carriage. The farm-houses






here appear no larger than huts, as they really are, built by the






farmers, because the space to be laboured is very small, in






proportion to the produce; hence it is, that a farmer here pays






the value of the full half of the crop to the landlord, and out






of the remaining half, not only sows the ground and buys the






dung, but furnishes the cattle and labouring instruments, nay






even rebuilds his house, when occasion requires.






    When first I examined these fertile plains, I began to lament






the prodigal consumption of such valuable lands, in a multitude






of very broad highways, issuing to all quarters; many of which I






thought might be saved, in consideration of the vast advantage






accruing upon such oeconomy. but upon farther rejection I






perceived, that the loss was inconsiderable; for the fertility of






the soil proceeding chiefly from the manure laid upon it, the






loss sustained from the roads ought to be computed at no more






than the value of the land when uncultivated. The case would be






very different, were roads now to be changed, or new ones carried






through the corn-fields; the loss then would be considerable,






though even this would be temporary, and affect particular






persons only; for the same dung, which now supports these lands






in their fertility, would quickly fertilize others in their






place, and in a few years matters would stand as at present.






    These last reflections naturally lead me to examine a






question which has been treated by a very polite French writer,






the author of l'Ami de l'Homme, and which comes in here naturally






enough, before I put an end to this first book. Here it is.






    QUEST. IV. Does an unnecessary consumption of the earth's






productions, either in food, clothing, or other wants; and a






prodigal employment of fine rich fields, in gardens, avenues,






great roads, and other uses which give small returns, hurt






population, by rendering food and necessaries less abundant, in a






kingdom such as France, in its present situation?






    My answer is, That, were France fully cultivated and peopled,






the introduction of superfluous consumption would be an abuse,






and would diminish the number of inhabitants; as the contrary is






the case, it proves an advantage. I shall now give my reasons for






differing in opinion from the gentleman whose performance I have






cited.






    As the question is put, you perceive the end to be compassed






is, to render food and necessaries abundant; because the abuse is






considered in no other light, than relatively to the particular






effect of diminishing the proper quantity of subsistence, which






the king would incline to preserve, for the nourishment and uses






of his people. I shall confine myself therefore chiefly to this






object, and if I shew, that these superfluous employments of the






surface of the earth, and prodigal consumptions of her fruits,






are really no harm, but an encouragement to the improvement of






the lands of France in her present state, I shall consider the






question as sufficiently resolved: because if the abuse, as it is






called, prove favourable to agriculture, it can never prove






hurtful to population; however, from the inattention of






government, it may affect foreign trade: This is an object






entirely foreign to the present question. But before I enter upon






the subject, it is proper to observe, that I am of opinion, that






any system of oeconomy which necessarily tends to corrupt the






manners of a people, ought by every possible means to be






discouraged, although no particular prejudice should result from






it, either to population, or to plentiful subsistence.






    Now in the question before us, the only abuse I can find in






these habits of extraordinary consumption, appears to be relative






to the character of the consumers, and seems in no way to proceed






from the effects of the consumption. The vices of men may no






doubt prove the cause of their making a superfluous consumption;






but the consumption they make can hardly ever be the cause of






this vice. The most virtuous man in France may have the most






splendid table, the richest clothes, the most magnificent






equipages, the greatest number of useless horses, the most






pompous palace, and most extensive gardens. The most enormous






luxury to be conceived, in our acceptation of this term, so long






as it is directed to no other object than the consumption of the






labour and ingenuity of man, is compatible with virtue as well as






with vice. This being premised, I come to the point in hand.






    France, at present, is in her infancy as to improvement,






although the advances she has made within a century excite the






admiration of the world. I shall not go far in search of the






proof of this assertion. Great tracts of her lands are still






uncultivated, millions of her inhabitants are idle. When all






comes to be cultivated, and all are employed, then she will be in






a state of perfection, relatively to the moral possibility of






being improved. The people are free, slavery is unknown, and






every man is charged with feeding himself, and bringing up his






children. The ports of the country are open to receive






subsistence, and this nation, as much as any other, may be






considered as an individual in the great society of the world;






that is, may increase in power, wealth, and ease, relatively to






others, in proportion to the industry of her inhabitants. This






being the case, all the principles of political oeconomy, which






we have been inquiring after, may freely operate in this kingdom.






    France has arrived at her present pitch of luxury, relatively






to consumption, by slow degrees. As she has grown in wealth, her






desire of employing it has grown also. In proportion as her






demands have increased, more hands have been employed to supply






them; for no article of expence can be increased, without






increasing the work of those who supply it. If the same number of






inhabitants in the city of Paris consume four times as much of






any necessary article as formerly, I hope it will be allowed,






that the production of such necessaries must be four times as






abundant, and consequently, that many more people must be






employed in providing them.






    What is it that encourages agriculture, but a great demand






for its productions? What encourages multiplication, but a great






demand for people; that is, for their work? Would any one






complain of the extravagant people in Paris, if, instead of






consuming those vast superfluities, they were to send them over






to Dover, for a return in English gold? Where is the difference






between the prodigal consumption and the sale? The one brings in






money, the other brings in none: but as to food and necessaries,






for providing the poor and frugal, their contingent, in either






case, stands exactly the same.






    But, says one, were it not for this extraordinary






consumption, every thing would be cheaper. This I readily allow;






but will any body say, that reducing the price of the earth's






productions is a method to encourage agriculture; especially in a






country where grounds are not improved, and where they cannot be






improved; chiefly, because the expence surpasses all the profits






which possibly can be drawn from the returns? High prices






therefore, the effect of great consumption, are certainly






advantageous to the extension of agriculture. If I throw my rich






corn fields into gravel-walks and gardens, they will no more, I






suppose, come into competition with those of my neighbour, the






laborious husbandman. Who will then lose by my extravagance? Not






the husbandman. It will perhaps be said, the nation in general






will lose; because you deprive them of their food. This might be






true, were the laying waste the cornfields a sudden revolution,






and extensive enough to affect the whole society and were the






sea-ports and barriers of the kingdom shut: but that not being






the case, the nation, upon the smallest deficiency, goes to






market with her money, and loses none of her inhabitants.






    Obj. But if living is made dear, manufacturers must starve,






for want of employment.






    Answ. Not those who supply home consumption, but those only






who supply foreigners living more cheaply; and of such I know but






few. The interest of this class shall be fully examined in






another place. At present I shall only observe, that the laying






waste corn-fields in an industrious country, where refinement has






set on foot a plan of useful husbandry, will have no other






effect, than that of rendering grain for a while proportionally






dearer: consequently, agriculture will be thereby encouraged; and






in a few years the loss will be repaired, by a farther extension






of improvement. This will make food plentiful and cheap: then






numbers will increase, until it become scarce again. It is by






such alternative vicissitudes, that improvement and population






are carried to their height. While the improvement of lands goes






forward, I must conclude, that demand for subsistence is






increasing; and if this be not a proof of population, I am much






mistaken.






    I can very easily suppose, that a demand for work may






increase considerably, in consequence of an augmentation of






riches only because there are no bounds to the consumption of






work; but as for articles of nourishment, the case is quite






different. The most delicate liver in Paris will not put more of






the earth's productions into his belly, than another: he may pick






and choose, but he will always find, that what he leaves will go






to feed another: victuals are not thrown away in any country I






have ever been in. It is not in the most expensive kitchens where






there is found the most prodigal dissipation of the abundant






fruits of the earth; and it is with such that a people is fed,






not with ortolans, truffles, and oysters, sent from Marenne.






    From what has been said, I must conclude, that while the






consumption of the earth's produce, and of the work of man tends






to excite industry, in providing for extraordinary demands; when






the interest of foreign trade does not enter into the question;






and while there are lands enough remaining unimproved, to furnish






the first matter, namely, subsistence, flax, wool, silk, timber,






etc. there can be no political abuse from the misapplication or






unnecessary destruction of either fruits or labour. The






misapplier, or dissipator, is punished by the loss of his money;






the industrious man is rewarded by the acquisition of it. We have






said, that vice is not more essentially connected with






superfluity, than virtue with industry and frugality. But such






questions are foreign to my subject. I would however recommend it






to moralists, to study circumstances well, before they carry a






pretended reformation so far, as to interrupt an established






system in the political oeconomy of their country.













NOTES:













1. Although in common language we call mimsters of state, and






even such as are eminent for their knowledge in state affairs, by






the name of statesmen, the reader is here advertised to attend






carefully to the definition of this word in the text, because the






term statesman is uniformly taken in the same acceptation through






this whole work.













2. By Roderigo, the last king of the Gothic line.













3. Given by an Austrian officer to a Genoese, which occasioned






the revolt in 1747 by which the Germans were expelled the city.













4. As my subject is different from the doctrine of morals, I have






no occasion to consider the term luxury in any other than a






political sense, to wit, as a principle which produces






employment, and gives bread to those who supply the demands of






the rich. For this reason I have chosen the above definition of






it, which conveys no idea, either of abuse, sensuality, or






excess; nor do I, at present, even consider the hurtful






consequences of it as to foreign trade. Principles here are






treated of with regard to mankind in general, and the effects of






luxury are only considered relatively to multiplication and






agriculture. Our reasoning will take a different turn, when we






come to examine the separate interest of nations, and the






principles of trade.













5. I  beg, therefore, that at present my reasoning may be carried






no farther (from inductions and suppositions) than my intention






is that it should be. I am no patron, either of vice, profusion,






or the dissipation of private fortunes; althogh I may now and






then reason very coolly upon the political consequences of such






diseases in a state, when I consider only the influence they have






as to feeding and multiplying a people. My subject is too






extensive of itself to admit of being confouded with the doctrine






either of morals, or of government, however closely these may






appear connected with it; and did I not begin by simplifying






ideas as nuc as possible, and by banishing combinations of them,






I should quickly lose my way, and involve myself in perplexities






inextricable.













6. Every transition of money from hand to hand, for a valuable






consideration, implies some service done, something wrought by






man, or performed by his ingenity, or some consumption of






something produced by his labour. The quicker therefore the






circulation of money is in any country, the nore strongly it may






be inferred, that the inhabitats are laborious; and vice versa:






but of this more hereafter.













7. Hence we may conclude, that in those countries where the






people live upon the spontaneous fruits, the whole society






(considered in a political light) is found composed of free






hands. Nature there supplies the place of the whole class of






farmers.






    We have said that industry and manufactures are the






occupation of the free hands of a state; consequently, where the






proportion of them is the largest, industry should flourish to






the greatest advantage; that is to say, in countries where the






inhabitants live upon the spontaneous fruits: but this is not the






case. Why? Because there is another circumstance of equal weight






which prevents it. These people are unacquainted with want, and






want is the spur to industry. Let this suffice, in general, as to






the distribution of inhabitants in countries unacquainted with






labour.













8. This question is now with the greatest precision resolved by






the publisher of a pamphlet intitled, Three Tracts on the Corn






Trade and Corn Laws, with a Supplement; Lond. 1766. Second Edit.






(C. Smith).






     We have there, authentic accounts of all the grain exported






from England, or imported into it from abroad, from 1697 to 1765,






from which it appears (p. III.) that the greatest quantity of all






sorts of grain ever exported, viz. of wheat, barley, oats,






oatmeal, and rye, was in the year 1750, and amounted to 1,606,688






English quarters; and (p. 144.) we have an ingenious computation






of the growth, consumption, export, and import of these grains,






upon averages taken from the 68 years above mentioned; where the






ordinary or mean consumption of England is rated at 13,555,850






quarters. So the greatest exportation ever known in one year very






little exceeds 1/8 of the ordinary consumption, and is equivalent






to about 46 days' provision only.






    On the other hand, the greatest importation ever known, was






in the year 1757, when the total quantity inmported, was 151,743






quarters of all sorts of grain as above, which does not amount to






1/89 of the ordinary consumption of the people of England, and is






equivalent to their subsistence for 4 days 2 hours and 24 minutes






(p. 124).






    These facts were unknown to me when I wrote this chapter. I






had at that time been long abroad, and had very little






communication with my own country: and though I very strongly






felt the consequences of my own reasoning, I was so far overawed






by the force of the popular opinion, that I durst not venture to






rate either the surplus or the deficiency otherwise than it is






found in the text.













9. The truth of this, also, is made evident from the tracts cited






in the last note: but to a far greater extent, than I could take






upon me to affirm from theory alone.






    It is there said (p. 144.) that the mean export in England,






is barely 1/33 (1/32) part of the growth exclusive of the seed;






and that the mean import is equal to 1/571 part of the






consumption, and 1/18 part of the export.






    It would be amazing indeed, were a people, so circumstanced






with respect to subsistence, ever found in a real want of foreign






supply. But it is nowise amazing, that those who have no interest






in agriculture, should complain, and cry out for importation,






when a bad policy in the corn trade, and the want of a small






granary, equal to the national consumption during five days only,






make prices occasionally rise, and when the smallest quantity






imported from abroad is found to make them immediately fall,






though at a considerable loss both to the agriculture and the






trade of the nation.






    If it be asked, how so small a deficiency as 1/571 part of






the ordinary consumption, should make so sensible a difference to






a nation, as to raise prices to an exorbitant height? And how an






overplus so small as 1/33 should be considered as great plenty,






and make prices fall universally? I answer, that if in a good






year, after every nman, and every animal has been fully fed,






there shall still remain on hand a quantity equal to 1/33 of what






has been consumed, this overplus, considered by itself, is a very






great quantity, though small if considered relatively to the






total consumption of the kingdom; and were it not exported, it






would sink prices too much and ruin the farmer. That in a bad






year, again, the deficiency of 1/571 part of the ordinary






consumption, though very inconsiderable relatively to the whole,






is still very great when we consider, that before prices can rise






so high as to nmake government think of opening the ports to






importation, the lowest classes of the industrious inhabitants,






whose gains are small, must have been already reduced to the






minimum of their consumption; and when people are brought to the






minimum, a very small diminution upon their food may bring on the






greatest distress.






    In good years, we are therefore to consider the quantity






exported, as that part of the crop which is over and above the






full nourishment for men and cattle: And in bad years, we are to






consider what is imported, to be what is wanting of the scrimply






necessary, for subsisting the lowest classes of our people, at






the price they can afford to pay for it.






    But among all the ingenious inquiries which the English have






made into this subject, I have never seen (till of late in a new






publication intitled the Farmer's Letters) any attempt made, to






compare the prices of subsistence with the rate of the lowest






gains of the industrious who must go to market. From the






exposition of this matter by this ingenious author, it appears






very plain to me, that prices have never risen so high in






England, as to make importation necessary. The very lowest






manufacturer and day-labourer there, may live better at the






highest price of subsistence in any year since the beginning of






this century, than the generality of such of their order actually






do, in any country in Europe which I have seen. From which I






conclude that as long as matters stand in this situation, all






importation of subsistence from foreign nations, not under the






dominion of Great Britain should be intirely suspended.























An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy













Book III













Of Money and Coin













Part I













The Principles of Money Deduced, and Applied to the Coin of Great






Britain













                Advertisement




















    This book, which treats of money, contains such variety of






matter, that I have found an advantage in dividing it into two






parts. In the first, the principles are deduced and applied






principally to the domestic circumstances of Great Britain in the






year 1760, when this book was written. In the second, the






interests of foreign trade, and state of coin in the two great






commercial nations with whom we are in correspondence are taken






in.






    Instead of a chapter of recapitulation at the end of the






book, I found here that a full table of contents would give the






reader a general view of the subject, and serve the purpose of






recollection better.













Introduction













    In an inquiry like this, where, at almost every step, we find






it branching out into new relations, which lead to different






chains of consequences, it is of use to have recourse to every






expedient for connecting the whole together.






    For this purpose, an introductory chapter at the beginning of






a new subject seems necessary.






    The reader will have observed that the last chapters of the






preceding book (those I mean which treat of the vibration of the






balance of wealth and of circulation) have been written with a






view to introduce the subject of money.






    I thought it better to anticipate some principles by






connecting them directly with those of trade, than to introduce






this part of my subject as a new treatise.






    The assistance our memory receives from such a distribution






must compensate the inconvenience of a few repetitions.






    I have, in the last chapters of the second book here referred






to, had occasion to mention, and slightly to point out some






essential differences between coin and paper money. I have shewn






the great usefulness of the latter in supporting circulation.






    Although, in giving the definition of paper money in the






twenty-sixth chapter of the second book, I mentioned credit as






being a term synonimous with it; yet this was done merely for the






sake of simplifying our ideas: one of the best expedients for






casting light upon an intricate subject. It is now requisite to






point out the difference between them.






    Symbolical or paper money is but a species of credit: it is






no more than the measure by which credit is reckoned. Credit is






the basis of all contracts between men: few contracts can operate






so instantaneously as not to leave some performance, or






prestation, as the civilians call it, on one side or other, at






least for a short time, in suspence. He therefore who fulfils his






part, gives credit to the party who promises only to fulfil, and






according to the variety of contracts, the nature of the






prestations or performances, therein stipulated, and the security






given for fulfilling what is not performed, credit assumes






different forms, and communicates to us different ideas. Paper






credit or symbolical money, on the other hand, is more simple. It






is an obligation to pay the intrinsic value of certain






denominations of money contained in the paper. Here then lies the






difference between a payment made in coin, and another made in






paper. He who pays in coin, puts the person to whom he pays in






the real possession of what he owed; and this done, there is no






more place for credit. He who pays in paper puts his creditor in






possession only of another person's obligation to make that value






good to him: here credit is necessary even after the payment is






made.






    Some intrinsic value or other, therefore, must be found out






to form the basis of paper money: for without this it is






impossible to fix any determinate standard-worth for the






denominations contained in the paper.






    I have found no branch of my subject so difficult to reduce






to principles, as the doctrine of money: this difficulty,






however, has not deterred me from undertaking it. It is of great






consequence to a statesman to understand it thoroughly; and it is






of the last importance to trade and credit, that the money of a






nation be kept stable and invariable.






    To keep my ideas as distinct as the nature of this subject






will admit, I have in the first part adhered to a deduction of






general principles, taking by way of illustration, as I go along,






the present state of the British currency.






    In the second part, I shall examine the effects of turning






coin into a manufacture, by superadding the price of fabrication






to its value; and point out the consequences of this additional






combination upon exchange, and the interest of trading nations.













Chap. I













Of Money of Account













    The metals have so long performed the use of money, that






money and coin are become almost synonimous, although in their






principles they be quite different.






    The first thing therefore to be done in treating of money,






is, to separate two ideas, which, by being blended together, have






very greatly contributed to throw a cloud upon the whole subject.






Money, which I call of account, is no more than an arbitrary






scale of equal parts, invented for measuring the respective value






of things vendible.






    Money of account therefore, is quite a different thing from






money-coin, and might exist, although there was no such thing in






the world as any substance, which could become an adequate and






proportional equivalent for every commodity.






    The subject therefore of the first chapter shall be, 1. To






point out the principles which determine the value of things; 2.






The use of an invariable scale to measure their value; 3. How the






invention of money of account is exactly adapted for measuring






the value on the one hand, and measuring the price on the other;






and 4. How it preserves itself invariable amidst all the






fluctuations, not only of the value of things themselves, but of






the metals which are commonly considered as the measures of their






value.






    First, Money of account, which I shall here call money,






performs the same office with regard to the value of things, that






degrees, minutes, seconds, &c. do with regard to angles, or as






scales do to geographical maps, or to plans of any kind.






    In all these inventions, there is constantly some






denomination taken for the unit.






    In angles, it is the degree; in geography, it is the mile, or






league; in plans, the foot, yard, or toise; in money, it is the






pound, livre, florin, &c.






    The degree has no determinate length, so neither has that






part of the scale upon plans which marks the unit: the usefulness






of all those inventions being solely confined to the marking of






proportion.






    Just so the unit in money can have no invariable determinate






proportion to any part of value, that is to say, it cannot be






fixed to perpetuity to any particular quantity of gold, silver,






or any other commodity whatsoever.






    But it may be ascertained for a time, and then we can, by






multiplying it, ascend to the greatest value; and when we descend






below the subaltern divisions of this unit, we have the






assistance of measures and weights, which render the operation






easy. Thus in England, where a farthing is the lowest






denomination of money, the grains of wheat are bought by measure,






and cherries by the pound.













    II. The value of things depends upon many circumstances,






which however may be reduced to four principal heads:













    First, The abundance of the things to be valued.






    Secondly, The demand which mankind make for them.






    Thirdly, The competition between the demanders; and






    Fourthly, The extent of the faculties of the demanders.













    The function therefore of money is to publish and make known






the value of things, as it is regulated by the combination of all






these circumstances.






    This proposition I think is self-evident, and it is






susceptible of a thousand proofs; I shall mention only one.






    Were there a determinate proportion between certain






quantities of gold and silver, and certain quantities of other






things vendible, I do not see how prices could vary while the






proportion of quantity to quantity between metals and things






remained the same.






    But if the desires of men to possess any particular commodity






and the competition between them to acquire it be capable to






raise a thing, formerly of the lowest value, to any height, and






if the absence of these circumstances can debase a thing formerly






of great value, to the lowest rate, is it not evident, that the






price, that is, the gold and silver people possess (even allowing






that it may upon many occasions promote a competition among them)






can never be the measure of their fancies or caprices, which are






what constitutes the value of things.






    Substances are valued either according to their weight, their






superficial measure, the measure of their bulk, or by the piece.






These may be considered as the four classes of vendible corporeal






commodities.






    All the species of each class according to their different






qualities of goodness, may be reduced to a proportion of value. A






pound of gold, of lead, of different grains, of different






butters, or of what you will, valued by the pound, may at any






precise time, be reduced to a scale of proportional values, which






the wants, demands, competition and faculties of buyers and






sellers, keep in a perpetual fluctuation.






    As far therefore, as an increase of the metals and coin shall






produce an increase of demand, and a greater competition than






before, so far will this circumstance influence the rise of






prices, and no farther.






    The value of commodities therefore, depending upon






circumstances relative to themselves and to the fancies of men,






their value ought to be considered as changing with respect to






one another only: consequently, any thing which troubles or






perplexes the ascertaining these changes of proportion by the






means of a general, determinate and invariable scale, must be






hurtful to trade, and a clog upon alienation. This trouble and






perplexity is the infallible consequence of every vice in the






policy of money or of coin.













    III. It may here be demanded what necessity there is to have






recourse to such a metaphysical deduction upon so familiar a






subject. Do we not see every where that things are valued by






silver and gold coin, and that there is no occasion to reject






them at this time, in order to introduce an imaginary scale.






    I answer, that nothing but necessity obliges me to introduce






this imaginary scale, and that not with any intention to reject






the service of the metals in performing the office of a measure,






but as an assistance to our understanding for comprehending the






doctrine of money, and for rightly distinguishing the ideas which






are daily proposed to us by those who write and speak concerning






its theory.






    Could gold and silver coin exactly perform the office of






money, it would be absurd to introduce any other measure of






value; but there are moral and physical incapacities in the






metals, which prevent their performing the function of a scale:






and the common opinion being, that there are no such






incapacities, makes it necessary to expose them in the clearest






light, by shewing the exact difference between price (that is






coin) considered as a measure, and price considered as an






equivalent for value.






    The inconsistencies which follow, when we depend blindly upon






the infallibility of the metal's discharging this double office,






tend to confound the whole system of our ideas concerning those






matters.






    The moral as well as physical incapacities inherent in the






metals, which prevent their performing exactly the office of






money, shall be afterwards pointed out. I must at present explain






a little farther the nature of ideal money.













    IV. Money, strictly and philosophically speaking, is, as has






been said, an ideal scale of equal parts. If it be demanded what






ought to be the standard value of one part? I answer, by putting






another question; What is the standard length of a degree, a






minute, a second?






    It has none, and there is no necessity of its having any






other than what by convention mankind think fit to give it. But






so soon as one part becomes determined, by the nature of a scale,






all the rest must follow in proportion.






    The first step being perfectly arbitrary, people may adjust






one or more of those parts to a precise quantity of the precious






metals; and so soon as this is done, and that money becomes






realized, as it were, in gold and silver, then it acquires a new






definition: it then becomes the price, as well as the measure of






value.






    It does not follow from this adjusting of the metals to the






scale of value, that they themselves should therefore become the






scale, as any one must readily perceive.






    But in former times, before the introduction of commerce,






when mankind had less occasion to measure value with a scrupulous






exactness, the permanent nature of the metals rendered them






sufficiently correct, both to serve as the scale, and as the






price in every alienation. Since the introduction of commerce,






nations have learned the importance of reducing their respective






interests and debts, to the nicest equations of value; and this






has pointed out the inconvenience of admitting the metals, as






formerly, to serve both as the measure and the price in such






operations.






    Just so geographers and astronomers were long of opinion,






that a degree of the equator was a determinate length to measure






every degree of latitude upon the globe.






    They then considered the earth as a sphere, and no great






inconveniency was found to result from this supposition. But as






accuracy made a progress, this measure was found to be incorrect.






Degrees of latitude are now found to be of different lengths in






different climates; and perhaps in time it will be found that no






two degrees of any great circle described upon the globe, are in






a geometrical equality.






    That money, therefore, which constantly preserves an equal






value, which poises itself, as it were, in a just equilibrium






between the fluctuating proportion of the value of things, is the






only permanent and equal scale, by which value can be measured.






    Of this kind of money, and of the possibility of establishing






it, we have two examples: the first, among one of the most






knowing; the second, among the most ignorant nations of the






world. The Bank of Amsterdam presents us with the one, the coast






of Angola with the other.






    A florin banco has a more determinate value than a pound of






fine gold, or silver; it is an unit which the invention of men,






instructed in the arts of commerce, have found out.






    This bank money stands invariable like a rock in the sea.






According to this ideal standard are the prices of all things






regulated; and very few people can tell exactly what it depends






upon. The precious metals with their intrinsic value, vary with






regard to this common measure, like every other thing. A pound of






gold, a pound of silver, a thousand guineas, a thousand crowns, a






thousand piastres, or a thousand ducats, are sometimes worth






more, sometimes worth less of this invariable standard; according






as the proportion of the metals of which they are made vary






between themselves.






    No adulterations in the weight, fineness, or denominations of






coin have any effect upon bank money. These currencies which the






bank looks upon as merchandise, like every other thing, are






either worth more or less bank money, according to the actual






value of the metals they are made of. All is merchandise with






respect to this standard; consequently, it stands unrivalled in






the exercise of its function of a common measure.






    The second example is found among the savages upon the






African coast of Angola, where there is no real money known. The






inhabitants there reckon by macoutes; and in some places this






denomination is subdivided into decimals, called pieces. One






macoute is equal to ten pieces. This is just a scale of equal






parts for estimating the trucks they make. If a sheep, e.g. be






worth 10 macoutes, an ox may be worth 40, and a handful of gold






dust 1000.






    Money of account, therefore, cannot be fixed to any material






substance, the value of which may vary with respect to other






things. The operations of trade, and the effects of an universal






circulation of value, over the commercial world, can alone adjust






the fluctuating value of all kinds of merchandise, to this






invariable standard. This is a representation of the bank money






of Amsterdam, which may at all times be most accurately specified






in a determinate weight of silver and gold; but which can never






be tied down to that precise weight for twenty-four hours, any






more than to a barrel of herrings.













Chap. II













Of Artificial or Material Money













    From the infancy of the world, at least as far back as our






accounts of the transactions of mankind reach, we find they had






adopted the precious metals, that is silver and gold, as the






common measure of value, and as the adequate equivalent for every






thing alienable.






    The metals are admirably adapted for this purpose; they are






perfectly homogeneous: When pure, their masses, or bulks, are






exactly in proportion to their weights: No physical difference






can be found between two pounds of gold, or silver, let them be






the production of the nines of Europe, Asia, Africa, or America:






they are perfectly malleable, fusible, and suffer the most exact






division which human art is capable to give them: They are






capable of being mixed with one another, as well as with metals






of a baser, that is, of a less homogeneous nature, such as






copper. By this mixture they spread themselves uniformly it be






through the whole of the compound mass, so that every atom of






comes proportionally possessed of a share of this noble mixture;






by which means the subdivision of the precious metals is rendered






very extensive.






    Their physical qualities are invariable; they lose nothing by






keeping; they are solid and durable; and though their parts are






separated by friction, like every other thing, yet still they are






of the number of those which suffer least by it.






    If money, therefore, can be made of any thing, that is, if






the proportional value of things vendible can be measured by any






thing material, it may be measured by the metals.













    II. The two metals being pitched upon as the most proper






substances for realizing the ideal scale of money, those who






undertake the operation of adjusting a standard must constantly






keep in their eye the nature and qualities of a scale, as well as






the principles upon which it is formed.






    The unit of the scale must constantly be the same, although






realized in the metals, or the whole operation fails in the most






essential part. This realizing the unit is like adjusting a pair






of compasses to a geometrical scale, where the smallest deviation






from the exact opening once given must occasion an incorrect






measure. The metals, therefore, are to money what a pair of






compasses is to a geometrical scale.






    This operation of adjusting the metals to the money of






account, implies an exact and determinate proportion of both






metals to the money-unit, realized in all the species and






denominations of coin, adjusted to this standard.






    The smallest particle of either metal added to, or taken away






from any coin, which represents certain determinate parts of the






scale, overturns the whole system of material money. And if,






notwithstanding such variation, these coins continue to bear the






same denominations as before, this will as effectually destroy






their usefulness in measuring the value of things, as it would






overturn the usefulness of a pair of compasses, to suffer the






opening to vary, after it is adjusted to the scale representing






feet, toises, miles, or leagues, by which the distances upon the






plan are to be measured.













    III. Debasing the standard is a good term; because it conveys






a clear and distinct idea. It is diminishing the weight of the






pure metal contained in that denomination by which a nation






reckons, and which we have called the money-unit. Raising the






standard requires no farther definition, being the direct






contrary.













    IV. Altering the standard (that is raising or debasing the






value of the money-unit) is like altering the national measures






or weights. This is best discovered by comparing the thing






altered with things of the same nature which have suffered no






alteration. Thus if the foot of measure was altered at once over






all England, by adding to it, or taking from it, any proportional






part of its standard length, the alteration would be best






discovered, by comparing the new foot with that of Paris, or of






any other country, which had suffered no alteration. Just so, if






the pound sterling which is the English unit, shall be found any






how changed, and if the variation it has met with be difficult to






ascertain, because of a complication of circumstances, the best






way to discover it will be to compare the former and the present






value of it with the money of other nations which has suffered no






variation. This the course of exchange will perform with the






greatest exactness.













    V. Artists pretend, that the precious metals, when absolutely






pure from any mixture, are not of sufficient hardness to






constitute a solid and lasting coin. They are found also in the






mines mixed with other metals of a baser nature, and the bringing






them to a state of perfect purity occasions an unnecessary






expence. To avoid, therefore, the inconvenience of employing them






in all their purity, people have adopted the expedient of mixing






them with a determinate proportion of other metals, which hurts






neither their fusibility, malleability, beauty, or lustre. This






metal is called alloy, and being considered merely as a support






to the principal metal, is accounted of no value in itself. So






that eleven ounces of gold, when mixed with one ounce of silver,






acquires, by that addition, no augmentation of value whatever.






    This being the case, we shall, in speaking of money,






overlook, as much as possible, the existence of alloy, in order






to render language less subject to ambiguity. I must except such






cases, where the considering the mass of the compound metal,






according to its weight, can be accompanied with no






inconvenience.













Chap. III













Incapacities of the Metals to perform the Office of an invariable






Measure of Value













    Were there but one species of such a substance as we have






represented gold and silver to be: were there but one metal






possessing the qualities of purity, divisibility, and durability:






the inconveniences in the use of it for money would be fewer by






far than they are found to be as matters stand.






    Such a metal might then, by an unlimited division into parts






exactly equal, be made to serve as a tolerably steady and






universal measure. But the rivalship between the metals, and the






perfect equality which is found between all their physical






qualities, so far as regards purity, and divisibility, render






them so equally well adapted to serve as the common measure of






value, that they are universally admitted to pass current as






money.






    What is the consequence of this? That the one measures the






value of the other, as well as that of every other thing. Now the






moment any measure begins to be measured by another, the






proportion of which to it is not physically, perpetually, and






invariably the same, all the usefulness of such a measure is






lost. An example will make this plain.






    A foot of measure is a determinate length. An English foot






may be compared with the Paris foot, or with that of the Rhine;






that is to say, it may be measured by them; and the proportion






between their lengths may be expressed in numbers; which






proportion will be the same perpetually. The measuring the one by






the other will occasion no uncertainty; and we may speak of






lengths by Paris feet, and be perfectly well understood by others






who are used to measure by the English foot, or by the foot of






the Rhine.






    But suppose that a youth of twelve years old should take it






into his head to measure from time to time, as he advances in






age, by the length of his own foot, and that he should divide






this growing foot into inches and decimals: what could be learned






from his account of measures? As he increases in years, his foot,






its inches, and subdivisions, will lengthen gradually; and were






every man to follow his example, and measure by his own foot,






then the foot of measure now established would totally cease to






be of any utility.






    This is just the case with the two metals. There is no






determinate invariable proportion between their value; and the






consequence of this is, that when they are both taken for






measuring the value of other things, the things to be measured,






like the lengths to be measured by the young man's foot, without






changing their relative proportion between themselves, change






however with respect to the denominations of both their measures.






An example will make this plain.






    Let us suppose an ox to be worth three thousand pounds weight






of wheat, and the one and the other to be worth an ounce of gold,






and the ounce of gold to be worth exactly fifteen ounces of






silver: if the case should happen, that the proportional value






between gold and silver should come to be as 14 is to 1, would






not the ox, and consequently the wheat, be estimated at less in






silver, and more in gold, than formerly? I ask farther, if it






would be in the power of any state to prevent this variation in






the measure of the value of oxen and wheat, without putting into






the unit of their money less silver and more gold than formerly?






    If therefore any particular state should fix the standard of






the unit of their money to one species of the metals, while in






fact both the one and the other are actually employed in






measuring value; would not such a state resemble the young man,






who measures all by his growing foot? For, if silver, for






example, be retained as the standard, while it is gaining upon






gold one fifteenth additional value; and if gold continue all the






while to determine the value of things as well as silver, it is






plain that, to all intents and purposes, this silver measure is






lengthening daily, like the young man's foot, since the same






weight of it must become every day equivalent to more and more of






the same commodity; notwithstanding we suppose the same






proportion to subsist, without the least variation between this






commodity and every other species of things alienable.






    After having exposed the matter in this light, I think it can






hardly, with reason, be urged, that notwithstanding it be






admitted that gold and silver may change their proportion of






value with regard to one another, yet still this does not prevent






silver from remaining the standard, without any inconvenience;






for the following reasons.






    First, Because, when it is considered as a standard, it never






ought to be looked upon as changing its value with regard to






gold; but that gold ought to be considered as changing its value






with regard to silver.






    Secondly, Because being the measure itself, it is absurd to






consider it as the thing measured; that therefore it retains all






the requisites of an invariable scale; since it measures all






things according to the proportion they bear to itself, which






physically can never vary. And,






    Thirdly, That a person who has borrowed a certain weight of






silver from another, is obliged to repay the same weight of






silver he had borrowed; although at that time silver should be of






greater value than when he borrowed it.






    I answer to the first argument: That if in fact silver should






become of more or less value with respect to merchandize, with






respect to gold, and with respect to bank money, by there being a






greater or less demand for it than there was before; I cannot see






how calling it a standard, can remove this inconvenience, which






is inseparable from the nature of the thing; nor how we can






change a matter of fact, by changing our language, and by saying,






that merchandize, gold, and bank money, become of more value, or






of less value, with respect to silver, in proportion as the






demand for them is greater or less. This language we must use,






although we know for certain that these things remain in the






exact relative proportion of quantity and demand as before: And






although it should evidently appear, that a demand for silver has






raised the price of it, with respect to every thing it measured






the day before.






    If the yard in a mercer's shop should be subject to such






revolutions, in consequence of the wood it was made of; and if in






measuring a piece of stuff to a customer, which the mercer had






bought by this yard the day before for 50 yards, he should find






the piece measure but 40, it would not be easy to persuade him, I






believe, that his piece was become shorter; but suppose he should






have the curiosity to measure over again all the pieces in his






shop, and that he should find exactly one fifth diminution upon






the length of every one, would he not very rationally conclude






that his yard was grown longer, and would he not run immediately






to his neighbour's shop and compare it?






    As to the second argument, I agree that silver may at all






times very exactly measure the value of things with respect to






itself; but this gives us no idea of an universal measure.






    I can measure the proportion of the length of things, with






any rod or with any line, the length of which I know nothing






about; but no body calls this measuring, because I cannot compare






the things measured, with any other thing which I have not






measured with the same rod or line, as I might easily do, had I






measured with a foot, yard, or toise; consequently the intention






of measuring in such a case is almost entirely lost.






    To the third argument, I answer, that I subscribe very






willingly to the truth of that proposition; provided that by






silver is understood the bare measure, without attending to its






additional quality of the universal standard measure of value.






But if I borrow the silver not as bullion, but as coin (the






common measure of value), then I say, that I overpay in giving






back the same weight I had received. Is there any thing more






familiar than such examples? I borrow 100 l. from my neighbour,






he proposes to give so much of the value in grain; I accept. The






price of grain rises about the term of payment; can I be obliged






to repay an equal quantity of grain in payment of a proportional






part of what I owe? By no means; because I did not receive the






grain as any thing but as a species of money. But if I borrow






some quarters of grain to be repaid in harvest, then I am obliged






to restore grain for grain, because in this case I did not






receive the grain as money, but as a commodity.






    Buying and selling are purely conventional, and no man is






obliged to give his merchandize at what may be supposed to be the






proportion of its worth. The use, therefore, of an universal






measure, is, to mark, not only the relative value of the things






to which it is applied as a measure, but to discover in an






instant the proportion between the value of these, and of every






other commodity valued by a determinate measure in all the






countries of the world.






    Were pounds sterling, livres, florins, piastres, &c. which






are all money of account, invariable in their values, what a






facility would it produce in all conversions, what an assistance






to trade! But as they are all limited or fixed to coins, and






consequently vary from time to time, this example shews the






utility of the invariable measure which we have described.






    There is another circumstance which incapacitates the metals






from performing the office of money. the substance of which the






coin is made, is a commodity, which rises and sinks in its value






with respect to other commodities, according to the wants,






competition, and caprices of mankind. The advantage, therefore,






found in putting intrinsic value into that substance which






performs the function of money of account, is compensated by the






instability of that intrinsic value; and the advantage obtained






by the stability of paper, or symbolical money, is compensated by






the defect it commonly has of not being at all times susceptible






of realization into solid property, or intrinsic value.






    In order, therefore, to render material money more perfect,






this quality of metal, that is of a commodity, should be taken






from it; and in order to render paper money more perfect, it






ought to be made to circulate upon metallic or land security. The






expedient with regard to the metals shall find a place in this






inquiry (in the chapter of miscellaneous questions at the end of






this book, article 4th). What regards the paper is foreign to our






purpose, and belongs to the doctrine of credit.













    II. There are several smaller inconveniences accompanying the






use of the metals, which we shall here shortly enumerate,






reserving the discussion of all the consequences they draw along






with them, until we come to consider the operations of trade and






money, upon the complicated interests of mankind.






    First, No money made of gold or silver can circulate long,






without losing its weight, although it all along preserves the






same denomination. This represents the contracting a pair of






compasses which had been rightly adjusted to the scale. Such a






defect must appear striking, when we reflect upon the principles






(already laid down) which necessarily influence the fixing of a






standard.






    Secondly, Another inconvenience proceeds from the fabrication






of money. Supposing the faith of Princes who coin money to be






inviolable, and the probity, as well as capacity, of those to






whom they commit the inspection of the fineness of the metals to






be sufficient, it is hardly possible for workmen to render every






piece exactly of a proper weight, or to preserve the due






proportion between pieces of different denominations; that is to






say, to make every ten six-pences exactly of the same weight with






every crown piece and with every five shillings struck in a






coinage. In proportion to such inaccuracies, the parts of the






scale become unequal.






    Thirdly, Another inconvenience, and far from being






inconsiderable, flows from the expence requisite for the coining






of money. This expence adds to its value as a manufacture,






without adding any thing to its weight. I shall take notice, in






the proper place, of the consequences which attend this






inconvenience, even to nations where coinage is free.






    Fourthly, The last inconvenience I shall mention, is, that by






fixing the money of account entirely to the coin, without having






any independent common measure (to mark and control these






deviations from mathematical exactness, which are either






inseparable from the metals themselves, or from the fabrication






of them) the whole measure of value, and all the relative






interests of debtors and creditors, become at the disposal not






only of workmen in the mint, of Jews who deal in money, of






clippers and washers of coin, but they are also entirely at the






mercy of Princes, who have the right of coinage, and who have






frequently also the right of raising or debasing the standard of






the coin, according as they find it most for their present and






temporary interest.






    Several of the inconveniences we have here enumerated, may






appear trifling, and so they are found to be in countries where






commerce is little known; but the operations of trade surpass in






nicety the conceptions of any man but a merchant; and as a proof






of this, it may be affirmed with truth, that one shilling can






hardly lose a grain of its weight, either by fraud or






circulation, without contributing, by that circumstance, towards






the diminution of the standard value of the money-unit, or pound






sterling, over all England, as I hope to be able to shew both by






reason and facts.






    All and every one of these inconveniences to which coin is






exposed, disappear in counties where the use of pure ideal money






of account is properly established.













Chap. IV













Methods which may be proposed for lessening the several






inconveniences to which material Money is liable













    In this chapter, I shall point out the methods which may be






proposed for lessening the inconveniences to which all coin is






liable, in order thereby to make it resemble as much as possible






the invariable scale of ideal money of accompt.






    To propose the throwing out of coin altogether, because it is






liable to inconveniences, and the reducing all to an ideal






standard, is acting like the tyrant who adjusted every man's






length to that of his own bed, cutting from the length of those






who were taller than himself, and racking and stretching the






limbs of such as he found to be of a lower stature. The use of






theory in political matters is not merely to discover the methods






of removing all abuses, it must also lend its aid towards






palliating inconveniences which are not easily cured.






    The inconveniences from the variation in the relative value






of the metals to one another, may in some measure be obviated by






the following expedients.






    First, By considering one only as the standard and leaving






the other to seek its own value, like any other commodity.






    Secondly, By considering one only as the standard, and fixing






the value of the other from time to time by authority, according






as the market price of the metals shall vary.






    Thirdly, By fixing the standard of the unit according to the






mean proportion of the metals, attaching it to neither;






regulating the coin accordingly; and upon every considerable






variation in the proportion between them, either to make a new






coinage, or to raise the denomination of one of the species, and






lower it in the other, in order to preserve the unit exactly in






the mean proportion between the gold and silver.






    In order to explain this thought, let me observe, that the






consequence of every variation in the proportion between the






value of gold and silver, has this effect; namely, that the same






weight of silver acquires upon every change a different value in






gold, from what it had before; and the same weight of gold






acquires, upon the change, a different value in silver from what






it had before. Let me illustrate this by an example.






    Suppose, then, the value of gold to be to the value of






silver, as 1 to 14. Then 100 grains of gold will be worth 1400






grains of silver.






    Suppose, that next year, the proportion shall change, and






that it shall come to be as 1 to 15; then 100 grains of gold will






be worth 1500 grains of silver.






    Here then, are two different values in silver for the same






quantity of gold, namely at one time 100 grains gold = 1400






grains silver; at another time 100 ditto = 1500 ditto. Add these






two quantities of silver together, they make 2900 grains. Take






one half of the sum, or 1450. This I call the mean proportion of






the silver. On the other hand, as to the gold;













    1400 grs silver at one time are worth....  100 grs of gold






    1400 grs ditto at another time are worth






       1400 or.......                           93 1/3






        15






                                together       193 1/3













one half of which is 96 2/3 grs. or the mean proportion of gold.






    Supposing, therefore, the unit to have been determined at 100






grs of gold, and at 1400 grains of silver, as soon as the






proportion comes to 15 it must be changed to 93 5/6 grs of gold,






and to 1450 grs of silver.






    This shall be fully explained and the usefulness of it






pointed out in the XIIIth and XVth Chapters.






    Fourthly, To have two units, and two standards, one of gold,






and one of silver, and to allow every body to stipulate in






either.






    Fifthly, Or last of all, to oblige all debtors to pay, when






required, one half in gold and one half in the silver standard.






    I have here proposed the attaching the standard to one of the






species, as a remedy against the effects of variation between the






metals, because when this is done, the consequences are not so






hurtful as when the unit is affixed to both, as I shall prove in






its proper place.






    The regulating the proportion of that metal, which is






considered as merchandize, to the other which is considered as






the standard, upon every variation in the market price of






bullion, as well as the other expedient, of establishing two






units, the one of gold, and the other of silver, does not render






the unit of money any more invariable than before; all that can






be said for this expedient, is, that money becomes thereby more






determinate, and that people who enter into permanent contracts






are, at least, apprised of the consequences of the varying of the






proportion of the metals, and may regulate their interests






accordingly.






    Fixing the standard to the mean proportion of the metals, is






a certain method of preserving the value of the unit invariably






in time to come; but upon subsequent variations in the






proportion, it implies either the necessity of a recoinage, or of






changing the denominations of the coin, by which fractions of






farthings, deniers and other such small denominations will be






incurred, unless such a duty upon coinage be imposed, as may






raise the value of the coins above that of common bullion, beyond






the value of such fractions of farthings, &c., which then may be






thrown out. Example upon changing the denomination of a shilling;






supposing the exact proportion of its new denomination should be






12 28d.; the legal denomination may be made 12 1/4 which is 12






25d. and the three additional hundredth parts of a penny may be






neglected; because the duty on coinage will give an advanced






value to the shilling price, beyond the three hundredth part of






one penny; which, as a metal, it will have more than in






proportion to its denomination.






    The last expedient of making debtors pay half in gold and






half in silver, would remove every inconvenience, provided that a






similar regulation were made at the mint and at the Bank of






England, appointing all bullion to be delivered in both species






at the Mint; and all payments to be made in both species at the






Bank: and also provided that the same regulation should be






observed in all bargains of sale, as often only as required. This






would so blend the value of the two metals together, as to make






them virtually but one.













    II. The other imperfections of coin have been already






enumerated. They relate either to its wear, to the want of






exactness in the fabrication, to the price of coinage, or to the






opportunity thereby afforded to princes to adulterate and change






the standard.






    First, As to the first the best expedients are, to strike the






greatest part of the coin in large solid pieces, having as little






surface as possible, consistently with beauty and ease of






fabrication.






    To order large sums (of silver at least) to circulate in bags






of determinate sums, and determinate weights, all in pieces of






the larger denominations.






    And to make all light coin whatsoever go by weight, upon the






requisition of the person who is to receive it.






    Secondly, As to the inaccuracy of the fabrication, there is






no other remedy than a strict attention in government to a matter






of so great consequence.






    Thirdly, The price of coinage principally affects the






interest of nations with regard to foreign trade; consequently,






trading states should endeavour, as nearly as possible, to






observe the same regulations with their neighbours, in every






thing which regards the coin. The consequence of this






inconvenience to those within the society is unavoidable, and






therefore no remedy can be proposed.






    Fourthly, The establishment of public credit is the best






security against all adulterations of the standard. No






fundamental law can bind up a prince's hands so effectually as






his own interest. While a Prince lives within his income, he will






have no occasion to adulterate the coin; when he exceeds it, he






will (in a trading nation) have recourse to credit, and if once






he establish this, he must give over meddling with the standard






of his coin, or he will get no body to lend him any more. The






only Prince who can gain by adulterating the standard, is he who






seeks for extraordinary supplies out of a treasure already






formed.






    These are, briefly, the expedients to be put in practice by






those governments which have the prosperity of their subjects at






heart. The infinite variety of circumstances relating to every






state can alone decide as to those which are respectively proper






to be adopted by each. Our business at present is to point out






the variations to which the value of the money-unit is exposed,






from every disorder in the coin; and to shew that as far as the






value of the unit shall be affected by them, so far must material






money in such a case be defective.













Chap. V













Variations to which the Value of the Money-unit is exposed from






every Disorder in the Coin













    Let us suppose, at present, the only disorder to consist in a






want of the due proportion between the gold and silver in the






coin.






    This proportion can be established by the market price of the






metals only. because an augmentation and rise in the demand for






gold or silver has the effect of augmenting the value of the






metal demanded. Let us suppose that to-day one pound of gold may






buy fifteen pounds of silver; if to-morrow there be a high demand






for silver, a competition among merchants, to have silver for






gold, will ensue, they will contend who shall get the silver at






the rate of fifteen pounds for one of gold: this will rise the






price of it, and in proportion to their views of profit, some






will accept of less than the fifteen pounds. This is plainly a






rise in the silver, more properly than a fall in the gold;






because it is the competition for the silver which has occasioned






the variation in the former proportion between the metals. Had






the competition for gold carried the proportion above 1 to 15, I






should then have said that the gold had risen.






    As it is, therefore, the active demand for either gold or






silver, which makes the price of the metals to vary, I think






language would be more correct (in speaking concerning the metals






only) never to mention the sinking of the price of either gold or






silver. As to every other merchandize, the expression is very






proper; because the diminishing of the price of one commodity,






does not so essentially imply the rise of any other, as the






sinking of one of the metals must imply the rising of the other,






since they are the only measures of one another's worth. I would






not be here understood to mean that the term sinking of the price






of gold or silver is improper; all I say is, that the other being






equally proper, and conveying with it the cause of the variation






(to wit, the competition to acquire one metal preferably to the






other), may be preferred, and this the rather, that from using






these terms promiscuously (gold has fallen, instead of silver has






risen) we are apt to believe, that the falling of the price of






the metal, must proceed from some augmentation of the quantity of






it; whereas it commonly proceeds from no other cause than a






higher demand than formerly for the other.






    Let us now suppose that a state having, with great exactness,






examined the proportion of the metals in the market, and having






determined the precise quantity of each for realizing or






representing the money-unit, should execute a most exact coinage






of gold and silver coin. As long as this proportion continues






unvaried in the market, no inconvenience can result from that






quarter, in making use of the metals for money of account.






    But let us suppose the proportion to change; that the silver,






for example, should rise in its value with regard to gold; will






it not follow, from that moment, that the unit realized in the






silver, will become of more value than the unit realized in the






gold coin.






    But as the law has ordered them to pass as equivalents for






one another and as debtors have always the option of paying in






what legal coin they think fit, will they not all choose to pay






in gold, and will not then the silver coin be melted down or






exported, in order to be sold as bullion, above the value it






bears when it circulates in coin? Will not this paying in gold






also really diminish the value of the money-unit, since upon this






variation every thing must sell for more gold than before, as we






have already observed?






    Consequently, merchandize which has not varied in its






relative value to any other thing but to gold and silver, must be






measured by the mean proportion of the metals, and the






application of any other measure to it is altering the standard.






If it is measured by the gold, the standard is debased; if by






silver, it is raised, as shall presently be proved.






    If, to prevent the inconvenience of melting down the silver,






the state should give up affixing the value of their unit to both






species at once, and should fix it to one, leaving the other to






seek its price as any other commodity, in this case no doubt the






melting down of the coin will be prevented; but will this ever






restore the value of the money-unit to its former standard? Would






it, for example, in the foregoing supposition, raise the debased






value of the money-unit in the gold coin, if this species were






declared to be the standard? It would indeed render silver coin






purely a merchandise, and by allowing it to seek its value, would






certainly prevent it from being melted down as before; because






the pieces would rise conventionally in their denomination; or an






agio, as it is called, would be taken in payments made in silver;






but the gold would not, on that account, rise in its value, or






begin to purchase any more merchandise than before. Were






therefore the standard fixed to the gold, would not this be an






arbitrary and a violent change in the value of the money-unit,






and a debasement of the standard?






    If, on the other hand, the state should fix the standard to






the silver, which we suppose to have risen in its value, would






this ever sink the advanced value which the silver coin had






gained above the worth of the former standard unit, and would not






this be a violent and an arbitrary change in the value of the






money-unit, and a raising of the standard?






    The only expedient, therefore, as has been said, is in such a






case to fix the numerary unit to neither of the metals, but to






contrive a way to make it fluctuate in a mean proportion between






them; which is in effect the introduction of a pure ideal money






of account. This shall be farther explained as we go along.






    I have one observation only to make in this place, to wit,






that the regulation of fixing the unit by the mean proportion,






ought to take place at the instant the standard unit is affixed






with exactness both to the gold and silver. If it be introduced






long after the market proportion between the metals has deviated






from the proportion established in the coin, and if the new






regulation is made to have a retrospect, with regard to the






acquitting of permanent contracts entered into, while the value






of the money unit had attached itself to the lower currency, in






consequence of the principle above laid down, then the restoring






the money-unit to that standard where it ought to have remained






(to wit, to the mean proportion) is an injury to all debtors who






have contracted since the time the proportion of the metals began






to vary.






    This is clear from the former reasoning. The moment the






market price of the metals differs from that in the coin, every






one who has payments to make, will pay in that species which is






rated highest in the coin; consequently, he who lends, lends in






that species. If, after the contract, therefore, the unit be






carried up to the mean proportion, this must be a loss to him who






had borrowed.






    From this we may perceive why, in the first article of the






preceding chapter, it was said, that there was less inconvenience






from the varying of the proportion of the metals, where the






standard is fixed to one of them, than when it is fixed to both.






In the first case, it is at least uncertain whether the standard






or the merchandize-species be to rise; consequently it is






uncertain whether the debtors or the creditors be to gain by a






variation. If the standard species should rise, the creditors






will gain; if the merchandize-species should rise, the debtors






will gain; but when the unit is attached to both species, then






the creditors never can gain, let the metals vary as they will:






if silver rise, then debtors will pay in gold; if gold rise,






debtors will pay in silver. But whether the unit be attached to






one or to both species, the infallible consequence of a variation






is, that one half of the difference is either gained or lost by






debtors and creditors. The invariable unit is constantly the mean






proportional between the two measures.






    I intended to have postponed the entering upon what concerns






the interests of debtors and creditors in all variations of the






coin, until I came to treat particularly of that matter; but as






it is a thing of the greatest consequence to be attended to, in






every proposal for altering or regulating the coin of a nation,






it will, perhaps, upon this account, bear a repetition in another






place.













    II. To render our ideas as distinct as possible, we must keep






them simple. Let us now suppose that the metals are perfectly






well proportioned in the coin, but that the coin is worn by use.






    If this be the case, we must either suppose it to be all






equally worn, or unequally worn.






    If all be equally worn, I think it needs no demonstration to






prove, that the money-unit which was attached to the coin, when






weighty, (drawing its value from the metals contained in it,)






must naturally diminish in its value in proportion as the metals






are rubbed away.






    If the coin be unequally worn, the money-unit will be






variously realised, or represented; that is to say, it will be of






different values, according to the weight of the pieces.






    The consequence of this is the same as in the disorder of the






proportion of the metals: debtors will choose to pay in the light






pieces, and the heavy will be melted down. In proportion,






therefore, to this disorder, will the value of the unit gradually






descend. This was the great disorder in England in 1695; while






the standard of the pound sterling was affixed to the silver






only, the gold being left to seek its own value.













    III. Since the invention of the money wheel, the inaccuracy






in the fabrication is greatly prevented. Formerly, when money was






coined with the hammer, the mint-masters weighed the coin






delivered by the workmen, in cumulo, by the pound troy weight,






without attending very exactly to the proportion of the pieces.






At present exactness is more necessary, and every piece must be






weighed by itself.






    It is of very great consequence that the weight and






denominations of coin be in exact proportion to that of their






current value, which is always relative to the money-unit of






account. When any inequality happens there, it is easy to






perceive how all the pieces which are above the proportion of






their just weight, will be immediately picked up, and melted






down, and none but the light ones will remain in circulation.






    This, from the principles already laid down, must






proportionally diminish the value of the money-unit.






    From what has been observed concerning the deviations in the






coin from the proportion in the market price of the metals, and






from the legal weight, we may lay down this undoubted principle,






That the value of the money-unit of account is not to be sought






for in the statutes and regulations of the mint, but in the






actual intrinsic value of that currency in which all obligations






are acquitted, and all accompts are kept.













    IV. As I have at present principally in view to lay down






certain principles with regard to money, which I intend






afterwards to apply to the state of the British coin; and as






these principles are here restrained to the effects which every






variation in the coin has upon the value of the unit of money in






account, I shall in this place observe only, as to the imposition






of coinage.






    That coin being necessary in every country where the






money-unit is attached to the metals, it must be procured by






those who are obliged to acquit their obligations in material






money.






    If, therefore, the state shall oblige every one who carries






the metals to the mint to pay the coinage, the coin they receive






must be valued, not only at the price the metals bear in the






market, when they are sold as bullion, (or mere metal, of no






farther value than as a physical substance,) but also at the






additional value these metals receive in being rendered useful






for purchasing commodities, and acquitting obligations. This






additional value is the price of coinage.






    If, therefore, in a country where coinage is free, as in






England, this coinage shall come to be imposed, the money-unit






continuing to be affixed as before to the same quantity of the






metals, ought to rise in its value; that is, ought to become






equal to a greater quantity of every sort of merchandize than






before; consequently, as the rough metals of which the coin is






made are merchandize, like every other thing, the same number of






money-units realized, or represented in the coin, ought to






purchase more of the rough metals than before: That is to say,






that every country where coinage is imposed, bullion must be






cheaper than coin.






    This proposition would be liable to no exception, were it






true that no debt could be exacted but in the nation's coin;






because in this case, the creditor would be constantly obliged to






receive it at its full value.






    But when nations owe to one another, the party debtor must






pay the party creditor in his coin: the debtor, therefore, is






obliged to sell his own coin for what he can get for it, and with






this he must buy of the coin of his creditor's country, in order






to pay him with it.






    Let us, to avoid abstract reasoning, take an example: and we






cannot choose a better than that of England and France. In






England, coinage is free, in France it costs 8 2/10 per cent as






shall be made out in its proper place.






    France owes England 1000 l. sterling. In paying in the market






of London, the bullion contained in this sum, either in gold or






silver, the debt is paid; because the coining of it costs






nothing. Here France acquits her debt cheaper than by sending her






own coin as bullion; because the bullion she sends is not worth






an equal weight of her coin.






    England owes France 20,000 livres. In paying the bullion






contained in this sum, England is not quit; she must also pay






France 8 2/10 per cent in order to put it into coin.













    V. The operation of raising, and debasing the coin is






performed in three ways.






    First, By augmenting or diminishing the weight of the coin.






    Secondly, By augmenting or diminishing the proportion of






alloy in the coin.






    Thirdly, By augmenting or diminishing the proportion between






the money (coin) and the money of account, as if every sixpence






were called a shilling, and every twenty six-pences a pound






sterling.






    The French call this increasing or diminishing the numerary






value: and as I think it is a better term than that of raising or






sinking the denomination, I shall take the liberty now and then






to employ it.






    These three operations may be reduced to one, and expressed






by one term: they all imply the augmenting or diminishing of the






weight of the pure metals in the money-unit of account.






    It would require a separate treatise, to investigate all the






artifices which have been contrived, to make mankind lose sight






of the principles of money, in order to palliate and make this






power in the sovereign to change the value of the coin, appear






reasonable. But these artifices seem to be at an end, and Princes






now perceive that the only scheme to get money, when occasion






requires, is to preserve their credit, and to allow the coin, by






which this credit is reckoned, to remain in a stable condition.






There are still, however, examples of such operations to be met






with; for which reason I shall subjoin, towards the end of this






book, a particular inquiry into the interest of Princes with






regard to altering the value of their coin, which is a synonimous






term with that of altering the value of the unit of money.













Chap. VI













How the variations in the intrinsic value of the unit of Money






must affect all the domestic Interest of a Nation













    We have briefly pointed out the effects of the imperfections






of the metals in producing a variation in the value of the unit






of account, we must now point out the consequences of this






variation.






    If the changing the content of the bushel by which grain is






measured, would affect the interest of those who are obliged to






pay, or who are entitled to receive, a certain number of bushels






of grain for the rent of lands; in the same manner must every






variation in the value of the unit of account affect all persons






who, in permanent contracts, are obliged to make payments, or who






are entitled to receive sums of money stipulated in multiples or






in fractions of this money-unit.






    Every variation, therefore, upon the intrinsic value of the






money-unit has the effect of benefiting the class of creditors,






at the expence of debtors, or vice versa.






    This consequence is deduced from an obvious principle. Money






is more or less valuable in proportion as it can purchase more or






less of every kind of merchandize. Now, without entering anew






into the causes of the rise and fall of prices, it is agreed upon






all hands, I suppose, that whether an augmentation of the general






mass of money in circulation has the effect of raising prices in






general, or not, any augmentation of the quantity of the metals






appointed to be put into the money-unit, must at least augment






the value of that money-unit, and make it purchase more of any






commodity than before; that is to say, if 113 grains of fine






gold, the present weight of a pound sterling in gold, can buy 113






pounds of flour; were the pound sterling raised to 114 grains of






the same metal, it would buy 114 pounds of flour; consequently,






were the pound sterling augmented by one grain of gold, every






miller who paid a rent of ten pounds a year would be obliged to






sell 1140 pounds of his flour, in order to procure 10 pounds to






pay his rent, instead of 1130 pounds of flour which he sold






formerly to procure the same sum; consequently by this






innovation, the miller must lose yearly ten pounds of flour,






which his landlord consequently must gain. From this example, I






think it is plain, that every augmentation of the metals put into






the pound sterling, either of silver or gold, must imply an






advantage to the whole class of creditors, who by contract are






paid in pounds sterling, and consequently must be a proportional






loss to all debtors in such contracts, who must pay by the same






denomination.






    I should not have been so particular in giving a proof of so






plain a proposition, had it not escaped the penetration of the






great Mr Locke.






    In 1695 a proposal was made to the government of England, to






diminish the value of the pound sterling by 20 per cent by making






a new coinage of all the silver, and by making every shilling 1/5






lighter than before. The author of this project (Mr Lowndes)






having given his scheme to the public, was answered by Mr Locke,






that this debasing of the value of the money-unit was effectually






defrauding all the landed interest of 20 per cent of their rents.






Lowndes replied, that silver was augmented 20 per cent in its






value, and that therefore the pound sterling, though reduced 20






per cent in its weight of pure silver, was still as valuable as






before. This proposition Mr Locke exploded with the most solid






reasoning, and indeed nothing could be more absurd, than to






affirm, that silver had risen in value with respect to itself.






But though Mr Locke felt that all the landed interest, and all






those who were creditors in permanent contracts, must lose 20 per






cent by Mr Lowndes's scheme, yet he did not perceive (which is






very wonderful) that the debtors in these contracts must gain.






This led him to advance a very extraordinary proposition, which






abundantly proves that the interests of debtors and creditors,






which are now become of the utmost consequence to be considered






attentively by modern statesmen, were then but little attended






to, and still less understood.






    We find in the 46th page of Mr Locke's Farther Considerations






concerning raising the value of Money, that Mr Lowndes had






affirmed in support of his scheme, that this new money would pay






as much debt, and buy as many commodities as the then money which






was one fifth heavier. Then, adds Mr Locke, 'What he says of






debts is true; but yet I would have it well considered by our






English gentlemen, that though creditors will lose 1/5 of their






principal and use, and landlords will lose 1/5 of their income,






yet the debtors and tenants will not get it. It may be asked, who






will get it? Those, I say, and those only, who have great sums of






weighty money (whereof one sees not a piece now in payments)






hoarded up by them, will get it. To these, by the proposed change






of our money, will be an increase of 1/5 added to their riches,






'paid out of the pockets of the rest of the nation.'






    If the authority of any man could prevail, where reason is






dark, it would be that of Mr Locke; and had any other than such a






person as Locke advanced such a doctrine, I should have taken no






notice of it.






    Here this great man, through inadvertency, at once gives up






the argument in favour of his antagonist, after having refuted






him in the most solid manner: for if a man, who at that time had






hoarded heavy 1/5 upon its being coined into pieces 1/5 lighter,






Mr money, were to gain Locke must agree with Mr Lowndes, that a






light piece was as much worth as a heavy one.






    Those who had heavy money at that time locked up in their






coffers, would gain no doubt, provided they were debtors; because






having, I shall suppose, borrowed 4000 l. sterling in heavy






money, and having a like sum borrowed from their coffers,






augmented to 5000 l. by Mr Lowndes's plan, they might pay their






debt of 4000 l. and retain one thousand clear profit for






themselves. But supposing them to have no debts, which way could






they possibly gain by having heavy money, since the 5000 l. after






the coinage, would have bought no more land, nor more of any






commodities, than 4000 l. would have done before the coinage.






    We may therefore safely conclude, that every diminution of






the metals contained in the money-unit, must imply a loss to all






creditors; and that in proportion to this loss, those who are






debtors must gain.






    That on the contrary, whatever augmentation is made of the






money-unit, such augmentation must be hurtful to debtors, and






proportionally advantageous to creditors.






    In the preceding chapters, I have laid down, with as much






distinctness as I am capable of, the most general principles






which influence the doctrine of money, and to these I think every






other may be applied.






    The combination, however, of these principles with one






another, occasions a surprising variety of problems, relating to






money, coin, and bullion, which are hard to solve, by the






difficulty, merely, of applying them to the rule.






    In order therefore to render this inquiry more useful, I






shall now apply the principles I have laid down, to the present






state of the British coin, and to the resolution of every






question which shall occur during the examination of the disorder






into which it has fallen.









An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy






by James Steuart













Book II













Of Trade and Industry













Introduction













    Before I enter upon this second book, I must premise a word






of connexion, in order to conduct the ideas of my reader by the






same way through which the chain of my own thoughts, and the






distribution of my plan have naturally led me.






    My principal view hitherto has been to prepare the way for an






examination of the principles of modern politics, by inquiring






into those which have, less or more, operated regular effects in






all the ages of the world.






    In doing this, I confess, it has been impossible for me not






to anticipate many things which, according to the plan I have






laid down, will in some measure involve me in repetitions.






    I propose to investigate principles which are all relative






and depending upon one another. It is impossible to treat of






these with distinctness, without applying them to the objects on






which they have an influence; and as the same principles extend






their influence to several branches of my subject, those of my






readers who keep them chiefly in their eye, will not find great






variety in the different applications of them.






    In all compositions of this kind, two things are principally






requisite. The first is, to represent such ideas as are abstract,






clearly, simply, and uncompounded. This part resembles the






forging out the links of a chain. The second is, to dispose those






ideas in a proper order; that is, according to their most






immediate relations. When such a composition is laid before a






good understanding, memory finishes the work, by cementing the






links together; and provided any one of them can be retained, the






rest will follow of course.






    Now the relations between the different principles of which I






treat, are indeed striking to such as are accustomed to abstract






reasoning, but not near so much as when the application of them






is made to different examples.






    The principle of self-interest will serve as a general key to






this inquiry; and it may, in one sense, be considered as the






ruling principle of my subject, and may therefore be traced






throughout the whole. This is the main spring, and only motive






which a statesman should make use of, to engage a free people to






concur in the plans which he lays down for their government.






    I beg I may not here be understood to mean, that






self-interest should conduct the statesman: by no means.






Self-interest, when considered with regard to him, is public






spirit; and it can only be called self-interest, when it is






applied to those who are to be governed by it.






    From this principle, men are engaged to act in a thousand






different ways, and every action draws after it certain necessary






consequences. The question therefore constantly under






consideration comes to be, what will mankind find it their






interest to do, under such and such circumstances?






    In order to exhaust the subject of political oeconomy, I have






proposed to treat the principles of it in relation to






circumstances; and as these are infinite, I have taken them by






the more general combinations, which modern policy has formed.






These, for the sake of order, I have represented as all hanging






in a chain of consequences, and depending on one another. See






Book I. Chap. ii.






    I found this the best method for distributing my plan, from






which it is natural to infer, that it will also prove the best






for enabling my readers to retain it.






    I shall do what I can to diversify, by various circumstances,






the repetitions which this disposition must lead me into. There






is no seeing a whole kingdom, without passing now and then






through a town which one has seen before. I shall therefore






imitate the traveller, who, upon such occasions, makes his stay






very short, unless some new curiosity should happen to engage his






attention.






    I have said, that self-interest is the ruling principle of my






subject, and I have so explained myself, as to prevent any one






from supposing, that I consider it as the universal spring of






human actions. Here is the light in which I want to represent






this matter.






    The best way to govern a society, and to engage every one to






conduct himself according to a plan, is for the statesman to form






a system of administration, the most consistent possible with the






interest of every individual, and never to flatter himself that






his people will be brought to act in general, and in matters






which purely regard the public, from any other principle than






private interest. This is the utmost length to which I pretend to






carry my position. As to what regards the merit and demerit of






actions in general, I think it fully as absurd to say, that no






action is truly virtuous, as to affirm, that none is really






vicious.






    It might perhaps be expected, that, in treating of politics,






I should have brought in public spirit also, as a principle of






action; whereas all I require with respect to this principle is






merely a restraint from it; and even this is, perhaps, too much






to be taken for granted. Were public spirit, instead of private






utility, to become the spring of action in the individuals of a






well-governed state, I apprehend, it would spoil all. Let me






explain myself.






    Public spirit, in my way of treating this subject, is as






superfluous in the governed, as it ought to be all-powerful in






the statesman; at least, if it is not altogether superfluous, it






is fully as much so, as miracles are in a religion once fully






established. Both are admirable at setting out, but would shake






every thing loose, were they to continue to be common and






familiar. Were miracles wrought every day, the laws of nature






would no longer be laws: and were every one to act for the






public, and neglect himself, the statesman would be bewildered,






and the supposition is ridiculous.






    I expect, therefore, that every man is to act for his own






interest in what regards the public; and, politically speaking,






every one ought to do so. It is the combination of every private






interest which forms the public good, and of this the public,






that is, the statesman only, can judge. You must love your






country. Why? Because it is yours. But you must not prefer your






own interest to that of your country. This, I agree, is perfectly






just and right: but this means no more, than that you are to






abstain from acting to its prejudice, even though your own






private interest should demand it; that is, you should abstain






from unlawful gain. Count Julian, for example, who, from private






resentment, it is said, brought the Moors into Spain, and ruined






his country, transgressed this maxim. A spy in an army, or in a






cabinet, who betrays the secrets of his country, and he who sells






his trust, are in the same case: defrauding the state is, among






many others, a notorious example of this. To suppose men, in






general, honest in such matters, would be absurd. The legislature






therefore ought to make good laws, and those who transgress them






ought to be speedily, severely, and most certainly punished. This






belongs to the coercive part of government, and, falling beyond






the limits of my subject, is ever taken for granted.






    Were the principle of public spirit carried farther; were a






people to become quite disinterested; there would be no






possibility of governing them. Every one might consider the






interest of his country in a different light, and many might join






in the ruin of it, by endeavouring to promote its advantages.






Were a rich merchant to begin and sell his goods without profit,






what would become of trade? Were another to defray the






extraordinary expence of some workmen in a hard year, in order to






enable them to carry on their industry, without raising their






price, what would become of others, who had not the like






advantages? Were a man of a large landed estate to sell his grain






at a low price in a year of scarcity, what would become of the






poor farmers? Were people to feed all who would ask charity, what






would become of industry? These operations of public spirit ought






to be left to the public, and all that is required of individuals






is, not to endeavour to defeat them.






    This is the regular distribution of things, and it is this






only which comes under my consideration.






    In ill-administered governments, I admire as much as any one






every act of public spirit, every sentiment of






disinterestediness, and nobody can have a higher esteem for every






person remarkable for them.






    The less attentive any government is to do their duty, the






more essential it is that every individual be animated by that






spirit, which then languishes in the very part where it ought to






flourish with the greatest strength and vigour; and on the other






hand, the more public spirit is shewn in the administration of






public affairs, the less occasion has the state for assistance






from individuals.






    Now as I suppose my statesman to do his duty in the most






minute particulars, so I allow every one of his subjects to






follow the dictates of his private interest. All I require is an






exact obedience to the laws. This also is the interest of every






one; for he who transgresses ought most undoubtedly to be






punished: and this is all the public spirit which any perfect






government has occasion for.













Chap. I













Of the reciprocal Connections between Trade and Industry













    I am now going to treat of trade and industry, two different






subjects, but which are as thoroughly blended together, as those






we have discussed in the first book. Similar to these in their






mutual operations, they are reciprocally aiding and assisting to






each other, and it is by the constant vibration of the balance






between them, that both are carried to their height of perfection






and refinement.






    TRADE is an operation, by which the wealth, or work, either






of individuals, or of societies, may, by a set of men called






merchants, be exchanged, for an equivalent, proper for supplying






every want, without any interruption to industry, or any check






upon consumption.






    INDUSTRY is the application to ingenious labour in a free






man, in order to procure, by the means of trade, an equivalent,






fit for the supplying every want.






    I must observe, that these definitions are only just,






relatively to my subject, and to one another: for trade may exist






without industry, because things produced partly by nature may be






exchanged between men; industry may be exercised without trade,






because a man may be very ingenious in working to supply his own






consumption, and where there is no exchange, there can be no






trade. Industry likewise implies something more than labour.






Industry, as I understand the term, must be voluntary; labour may






be forced: the one and the other may produce the same effect, but






the political consequences are vastly different.






    Industry, therefore, is applicable to free men only; labour






may be performed by slaves.






    Let me examine this last distinction a little more closely,






the better to try whether it be just, and to point out the






consequences which result from it.






    I have said, that without the assistance of one of the three






principles of multiplication, to wit, slavery, industry, or






charity, there was no possibility of making mankind subsist, so






as to be serviceable to one another, in greater numbers than






those proportioned to the spontaneous fruits of the earth.






Slavery and industry are quite compatible with the selfish nature






of man, and may therefore be generally established in any






society: charity, again, is a refinement upon humanity, and






therefore, I apprehend, it must ever be precarious.






    Now I take slavery and industry to be equally compatible with






great multiplication, but incompatible with one another, without






great restrictions laid upon the first. It is a very hard matter






to introduce industry into a country where slavery is






established; because of the unequal competition between the work






of slaves and that of free men, supposing both equally admitted






to market. Here is the reason:






    The slaves have all their particular masters, who can take






better care of them, than any statesman can take of the






industrious freemen; because their liberty is an obstacle to his






care. The slaves have all their wants supplied by the master, who






may keep them within the limits of sobriety. He may either






recruit their numbers from abroad, or take care of the children,






just as he finds it his advantage. If breeding from the slaves






should prove unprofitable, either their children will die for






want of care, or by promiscuous living few will be born, or by






keeping the sexes asunder, they will be prevented from breeding






at all. A troop of manufacturing slaves, considered in a






political light, will be found all employed, all provided for,






and their work, when brought to market by the master, may he






afforded much cheaper, than the like performed by freemen, who






must every one provide for himself, and who may perhaps have a






separate house, a wife, and children, to maintain, and all this






from an industry which produces no more, nay not so much, as that






of a single slave, who has no avocation from labour. Why do large






undertakings in the manufacturing way ruin private industry, but






by coming nearer to the simplicity of slaves? Could the






sugar-islands be cultivated to any advantage by hired labour?






Were not the expences of rearing children supposed to be great,






would slaves ever be imported? Certainly not: and yet it is still






a doubt with me, whether or not a proper regulation for bringing






up the children of slaves might not turn this expedient to a






better account, than the constant importation of them. But this






is foreign to the present purpose. All I intend here to observe






is the consequences of a competition between the work of slaves






and that of free men; from which competition I infer, that,






without judicious regulations, it must be impossible for industry






ever to get the better of the disadvantages to which it will






necessarily be exposed at first, in a state where slavery is






already introduced.






    These regulations ought to be made with a view to prevent the






competition between the industrious freemen and the masters of






slaves, by appropriating the occupation of each to different






objects: to confine slavery, for example, to the country, that






is, to set the slaves apart for agriculture, and to exclude them






from every other service of work. With such a regulation perhaps






industry might succeed. This was not the case of old; industry






did not succeed as at present: and to this I attribute the






simplicity of those times.






    It is not so difficult to introduce slavery into a state






where liberty is established; because such a revolution might be






brought about by force, and, for the reasons and violence, which






make every thing give way above-mentioned, I must conclude, that






the consequences of such a revolution would tend to extinguish,






or at least, without the greatest industry: but were such






precaution, greatly to check the progress of precautions properly






taken; were slavery reduced to a temporary and conditional






service, and put under proper regulations; it might prove, of all






others, the most excellent expedient for rendering the lower






classes of a people happy and flourishing; and for preventing






that abusive procreation, from which the great misery to which






they are exposed at present chiefly proceeds. But as every






modification of slavery is quite contrary to the spirit of modern






times, I shall carry such speculations no farther. Thus much I






have thought it necessary to observe, by the way, only for the






sake of some principles which I shall have occasion afterwards to






apply to our own oeconomy for where-ever any notable advantage is






found accompanying slavery, it is the duty of a modern statesman






to fall upon a method of profiting by it, without wounding the






spirit of European liberty. And this he may accomplish in a






thousand ways, by the aid of good laws, calculated for cutting






off from the lower classes of a people any interest they can have






in involving themselves in want and misery, opening to them at






the same time an easy progress towards ease and prosperity.






    Here follows an exposition of the principles, from which I






was led to say, in a former chapter, that the failure of the






slavish form of feudal government, and the extension thereby






given to civil and domestic liberty, were the source from which






the whole system of modern policy has sprung.






    Under the feudal form, the higher classes were perhaps more






free than at present, but the lower classes were either slaves,






or under a most servile dependence, which, as to the consequence






of interrupting the progress of private industry, is entirely the






same thing.






    I cannot pretend to advance, as a confirmation of this






doctrine, that the establishment of slavery in our colonies in






America was made with a view to promote agriculture, and to curb






manufactures in the new world, because I do not know much of the






sentiments of politicians at that time: but if it be true, that






slavery has the effect of advancing agriculture, and other






laborious operations which are of a simple nature, and at the






same time of discouraging invention and ingenuity; and if the






mother-country has occasion for the produce of the first, in






order to subsist or to employ those who are taken up at home in






the prosecution of the latter; then I must conclude, that slavery






has been very luckily, if not politically, established to compass






such an end: and therefore, if any colony, where slavery is not






common, shall ever begin to rival the industry of the






mother-country, a very good way of frustrating the attempt will






be, to encourage the introduction of slaves into such colonies






without any restrictions, and to allow it to work its natural






effect.






    Having given the definition of trade and industry, as






relative to my inquiry, I come now to examine their immediate






connections, the better to cement the subject of this book, with






the principles deduced in the former.






    In treating of the reciprocal wants of a society, and in






shewing how naturally their being supplied by labour and






ingenuity tends to increase population on one hand, and






agriculture on the other, the better to simplify our ideas, we






supposed the transition to be direct from the manufacturer to the






consumer, and both to be members of the same society. Matters now






become more complex, by the introduction of trade among different






nations, which is a method of collecting and distributing the






produce of industry, by the interposition of a third principle.






Trade receives from a thousand hands, and distributes to as many.






    To ask, whether trade owes its beginning to industry, or






industry to trade, is like asking, whether the motion of the






heart is owing to the blood, or the motion of the blood to the






heart. Both the one and the other, I suppose, are formed by such






insensible degrees, that it is impossible to determine where the






motion begins. But so soon as the body comes to be perfectly






formed, I have little doubt of the heart's being the principle of






circulation. Let me apply this to the present question.






    A man must first exist, before he can feel want; he must






want, that is, desire, before he will demand; and he must demand,






before he can receive. This is a natural chain, and from it we






have concluded in Book I, that population is the cause, and






agriculture the effect.






    By a parallel reason it may be alleged, that as wants excite






to industry, and are considered as the cause of it; and as the






produce of industry cannot be exchanged without trade; so trade






must be an effect of industry. To this I agree: but I must






observe, that this exchange does not convey my idea of trade,






although I admit, that it is the root from which the other






springs; it is the seed, but not the plant; and trade, as we have






defined it, conveys another idea. The workmen must not be






interrupted, in order to seek for an exchange, nor the consumer






put to the trouble of finding out the manufacturer. The object of






trade therefore is no more than a new want, which calls for a set






of men to supply it; and trade has a powerful effect in promoting






industry, by facilitating the consumption of its produce.






    While wants continue simple and few, a workman finds time






enough to distribute all his work: when wants become more






multiplied, men must work harder; time becomes precious; hence






trade is introduced. They who want to consume, send the merchant,






in a manner, to the workman for his labour, and do not go






themselves; the workman sells to this interposed person, and does






not look out for a consumer. Let me now take a familiar instance






of infant trade, in order to shew how it grows and refines: this






will illustrate what I have been saying.






    I walk out of the gates of a city in a morning, and meet with






five hundred persons, men and women, every one bringing to market






a small parcel of herbs, chickens, eggs, fruits, &c. It occurs to






me immediately that these people must have little to do at home,






since they come to market for so small a value. Some years






afterwards, I find nothing but horses, carts, and waggons,






carrying the same provisions. I must then conclude, that either






those I used to meet before are no more in the country, but






purged off, as being found useless, after a method has been found






of collecting all their burdens into a few carts; or that they






have found out a more profitable employment than carrying eggs






and greens to market. Whichever happens to be the case, this






change will point out the introduction of what I call trade; to






wit, this collecting of eggs, fruit, fowl, &c. from twenty hands,






in order to distribute it to as many more within the walls. The






consequence is, that a great deal of labour is saved; that is to






say, the cart gives time to twenty people to labour, if they are






disposed to it; and when wants increase, they will be ready to






supply them.






    We cannot therefore say, that trade will force industry, or






that industry will force trade; but we may say, that trade will






facilitate industry, and that industry will support trade. Both






the one and the other however depend upon a third principle; to






wit, a taste for superfluity, in those who have an equivalent to






give for it. This taste will produce demand, and this again will






become the main spring of the whole operation.













Chap. II













Of Demand













    This is no new subject; it is only going over what has been






treated of very extensively in the first book, under another






name, and relatively to other circumstances. These ideas were






there kept as simple as possible; here they take a more complex






form, and appear in a new dress.






    The wants of mankind were said to promote their






multiplication, by augmenting the demand for the food of the free






hands, who, by supplying these wants, are enabled to offer an






equivalent for their food, to the farmers who produced it; and as






this way of bartering is a representation of trade in its






infancy, it is no wonder that trade, when grown up, should still






preserve a resemblance to it.






    Demand, considered as a term appropriated to trade, will now






be used instead of wants; the term used in the first book






relatively to bartering; we must therefore expect, that the






operations of the same principle, under different appellations,






will constantly appear similar, in every application we can make






of it to different circumstances.






    Whether this term be applied to bartering or to trade, it






must constantly appear reciprocal. If I demand a pair of shoes,






the shoemaker either demands money, or something else for his own






use. To prevent therefore the ambiguity of a term, which, from






the sterility of language, is taken in different acceptations,






according to the circumstances which are supposed to accompany






it, I shall endeavour shortly to analyze it.






    First, Demand is ever understood to be relative to






merchandize. A demand for money, except in bills of exchange, is






never called demand. When those who have merchandize upon hand,






are desirous of converting them into money, they are said to






offer to sale; and if, in order to find a buyer, they lower their






price, then, instead of saying the demand for money is high, we






say the demand for goods is low.






    Secondly, Suppose a ship to arrive at a port loaded with






goods, with an intention to purchase others in return, the






operation becomes only double. The ship offers to sale, and the






demand of the port is said to be high or low, according to the






height of the price offered, not according to the quantity






demanded, or number of demanders. When all is sold, then the ship






becomes demander. and if his demand be proportionally higher than






the former, we say upon the whole, that the demand is for the






commodities of the port; that is, the port offers, and the ship






demands. This I call reciprocal demand.






    Thirdly, Demand is either simple or compound. Simple, when






the demander is but one, compound, when they are more. But this






is not so much relative to persons as to interests. Twenty people






demanding from the same determinate interest form but a simple






demand; it becomes compound or high, when different interests






produce a competition. It may therefore be said, that when there






is no competition among buyers, demand is simple, let the






quantity demanded be great or small, let the buyers be few or






many. When therefore in the contract of barter, the demand upon






one side is simple, upon the other compound, that which is






compound is constantly called the demand, the other not.






    Fourthly, Demand is either great or small: great, when the






quantity demanded is great; small, when the quantity demanded is






small.






    Fifthly, Demand is either high or low. high, when the






competition among the buyers is great; low, when the competition






among the sellers is great. From these definitions it follows,






that the consequence of a great demand, is a great sale; the






consequence of a high demand, is a great price. The consequence






of a small demand, is a small sale; the consequence of a low






demand, is a small price.






    Sixthly, The nature of demand is to encourage industry. and






when, it is regularly made, the effect of it is, that the supply






for the most part is found to be in proportion to it, and then






the demand is commonly simple. It becomes compound from other






circumstances. As when it is irregular, that is, unexpected, or






when the usual supply fails; the consequence of which is, that






the provision made for the demand, falling short of the just






proportion, occasions a competition among the buyers, and raises






the current, that is, the ordinary prices. From this it is, that






we commonly say, demand raises prices. Prices are high or low






according to demand. These expressions are just; because the






sterility of language obliges us there to attend to circumstances






which are only implied.






    Demand is understood to be high or low, relatively to the






common rate of it, or to the competition between buyers, to






obtain the provision made for it. When demand is understood to be






relative to the quantity demanded, it must be called great or






small, as has been said.






    Seventhly, Demand has not always the same effect in raising






prices. we must therefore carefully attend to the difference






between a demand for things of the first necessity for life, and






for things indifferent; also between a demand made by the






immediate consumers, and one made by merchants, who buy in order






to sell again. In both cases the competition will have different






effects. Things of absolute necessity must be procured, let the






price be ever so great: consumers who have no view to profit, but






to satisfy their desires, will enter into a stronger competition






than merchants, who are animated by no passion, and who are






regulated in what they offer by their prospect of gain alone.






Hence the great difference in the price of grain in different






years; hence the uniform standard of the price of merchandize, at






the India sales and in fairs of distribution, such as Franckfort,






Beaucaire, &c., hence, also, the advantage which consumers find






in making their provision at the same time that merchants make






theirs; hence the sudden rise and fall in the price of labouring






cattle in country markets, where every one provides for himself.






    Let what has been said suffice at setting out: this principle






will be much better explained by its application as we advance,






than by all the abstract distinctions I am capable to give of it.













Chap. III













Of the first Principles of bartering, and how this grows into






Trade













    I must now begin by tracing trade to its source, in order to






reduce it to its first principles.






    The most simple of all trade, is that which is carried on by






bartering the necessary articles of subsistence. If we suppose






the earth free to the first possessor, this person who cultivates






it will first draw from it his own food, and the surplus will be






the object of barter: he will give this in exchange to any one






who will supply his other wants. This (as has been said) supposes






naturally both a surplus quantity of food produced by labour, and






also free hands; for he who makes a trade of agriculture cannot






supply himself with all other necessaries, as well as food; and






he who makes a trade of supplying the farmers with such






necessaries in exchange for his surplus of food, cannot be






employed in producing that food. The more the necessities of man






increase, cateris paribus, the more free hands are required to






supply them; and the more free hands are required, the more






surplus food must be produced by additional labour, to supply






their demand.






    This is the least complex kind of trade, and may be carried






on to a greater or less extent, in different countries, according






to the different degrees of the wants to be supplied. In a






country where there is no money, nor any thing equivalent to it,






I imagine the wants of mankind will be confined to few objects;






to wit, the removing the inconveniences of hunger, thirst, cold,






heat, danger, and the like. A free man who by his industry can






procure all the comforts of a simple life, will enjoy his rest,






and work no more: And, in general, all increase of work will






cease, so soon as the demand for the purposes mentioned comes to






be satisfied. There is a plain reason for this. When the free






hands have procured, by their labour, wherewithal to supply their






wants, their ambition is satisfied; so soon as the husbandmen






have produced the necessary surplus for relieving theirs, they






work no more. Here then is a natural stop put to industry,






consequently to bartering. This, in the first book we have called






the moral impossibility of augmenting numbers.






    The next thing to be examined, is, how bartering grows into






trade, properly so called and understood, according to the






definition given of it above; how trade comes to be extended






among men; how manufactures, more ornamental than useful, come to






be established; and how men come to submit to labour, in order to






acquire what is not absolutely necessary for them.






    This, in a free society, I take to be chiefly owing to the






introduction of money, and a taste for superfluities in those who






possess it.






    In ancient times, money was not wanting; but the taste for






superfluities not being in proportion to it, the specie was






locked up. This was the case in Europe four hundred years ago. A






new taste for superfluity has drawn, perhaps, more money into






circulation, from our own treasures, than from the mines of the






new world. The poor opinion we entertain of the riches of our






forefathers, is founded upon the modern way of estimating wealth,






by the quantity of coin in circulation, from which we conclude,






that the greatest part of the specie now in our hands must have






come from America.






    It is more, therefore, through the taste for superfluity,






than in consequence of the quantity of coin, that trade comes to






be established; and it is in consequence of trade only that we






see industry carry things in our days to so high a pitch of






refinement and delicacy. Let me illustrate this by comparing






together the different operations of barter, sale, and commerce.






    When reciprocal wants are supplied by barter, there is not






the smallest occasion for money: this is the most simple of all






combinations.






    When wants are multiplied, bartering becomes (for obvious






reasons) more difficult; upon this money is introduced. This is






the common price of all things: it is a proper equivalent in the






hands of those who feel a want, perfectly calculated to supply






the occasions of those who, by industry, can relieve it. This






operation of buying and selling is a little more complex than the






former, but still we have here no idea of trade, because we have






not introduced the merchant, by whose industry it is carried on.






    Let this third person be brought into play, and the whole






operation becomes clear. What before we called wants, is here






represented by the consumer; what we called industry, by the






manufacturer; what we called money, by the merchant. The merchant






here represents the money, by substituting credit in its place;






and as the money was invented to facilitate barter, so the






merchant with his credit, is a new refinement upon the use of






money. The merchant, I say, renders money still more effectual in






performing the operations of buying and selling. This operation






is trade: it relieves both parties of the whole trouble of






transportation, and adjusting wants to wants, or wants to money.






the merchant represents by turns both the consumer, the






manufacturer, and the money. To the consumer he appears as the






whole body of manufacturers; to the manufacturers, as the whole






body of consumers; and to the one and the other class his credit






supplies the use of money. This is sufficient at present for an






illustration. I must now return to the simple operations of money






in the hands of the two contracting parties, the buyer and the






seller, in order to show how men come to submit to labour in






order to acquire superfluities.






    So soon as money is introduced into a country it becomes, as






we have said above, an universal object of want to all the






inhabitants. The consequence is, that the free hands of the






state, who before stopped working, because all their wants were






provided for, having this new object of ambition before their






eyes, endeavour, by refinements upon their labour, to remove the






smaller inconveniences which result from a simplicity of manners.






People, I shall suppose, who formerly knew but one sort of






clothing for all seasons, willingly part with a little money to






procure for themselves different sorts of apparel properly






adapted to summer and inter, which the ingenuity of






manufacturers, and their desire of getting money, may have






suggested to their invention.






    I shall not here pursue the gradual progress of industry, in






bringing manufactures to perfection; nor interrupt my subject






with any farther observations upon the advantages resulting to






industry, from the establishment of civil and domestic liberty;






but shall only suggest, that these refinements seem more






generally owing to the industry and invention of the






manufacturers (who by their ingenuity daily contrive means of






softening or relieving inconveniences, which mankind seldom






perceive to be such, till the way of removing them be contrived)






than to the taste for luxury in the rich, who, to indulge their






ease, engage the poor to become industrious.






    Let any man make an experiment of this nature upon himself,






by entering into the first shop. He will nowhere so quickly






discover his wants as there. Every thing he sees appears either






necessary, or at least highly convenient; and he begins to wonder






(especially if he be rich) how he could have been so long without






that which the ingenuity of the workman alone had invented, in






order that from the novelty it might excite his desire; for when






it is bought, he ill never once think more of it perhaps, nor






ever apply it to the use for which it at first appeared so






necessary.






    Here then is a reason why mankind labour though not in want.






They become desirous of possessing the very instruments of






luxury, which their avarice or ambition prompted them to invent






for the use of others.






    What has been said represents trade in its infancy, or rather






the materials with which this great fabric is built.






    We have formed an idea of the wants of mankind multiplied






even to luxury, and abundantly supplied by the employment of all






the free hands set apart for that purpose. But if we suppose the






workman himself disposing of his work, and purchasing with it






food from the farmer, cloths from the clothier, and in general






seeking for the supply of every want from the hands of the person






directly employed for the purpose of relieving it; this will not






convey an idea of trade, according to our definition.






    Trade and commerce are an abbreviation of this long process;






a scheme invented and set on foot by merchants, from a principle






of gain, supported and extended among men, from a principle of






general utility to every individual, rich or poor, to every






society, great or small.






    Instead of a pin-maker exchanging his pins with fifty






different persons, for whose labour he has occasion, he sells all






to the merchant for money or for credit; and, as occasion offers,






he purchases all his wants, either directly from those who supply






them, or from other merchants who deal with manufacturers in the






same way his merchant dealt with him.






    Another advantage of trade is, that industrious people in one






part of the country, may supply customers in another, though






distant. They may establish themselves in the most commodious






places for their respective business, and help one another






reciprocally, without making the distant parts of the country






suffer for want of their labour. They are likewise exposed to no






avocation from their work, by seeking for customers.






    Trade produces many excellent advantages; it marks out to the






manufacturers when their branch is under or overstocked with






hands. If it be understocked, they will find more demand than






they can answer: if it be overstocked, the sale will be slow.






    Intelligent men, in every profession, will easily discover






when these appearances are accidental, and when they proceed from






the real principles of trade. which are here the object of our






inquiry.






    Posts, and correspondence by letters, are a consequence of






trade, by the means of which merchants are regularly informed of






every augmentation or diminution of industry in every branch, in






every part of the country. From this knowledge they regulate the






prices they offer; and as they are many, they, from the






principles of competition which we shall hereafter examine, serve






as a check upon one another.






    From the current prices, the manufacturers are as well






informed as if they kept the correspondence themselves: the






statesman feels perfectly where hands are wanting, and young






people destined to industry, obey, in a manner, the call of the






public, and fall naturally in to supply the demand.






    Two great assistances to merchants, especially in the infancy






of trade, are public markets for collecting the work of small






dealers, and large undertakings in the manufacturing way by






private hands. By these means the merchants come at the knowledge






of the quantity of work in the market, as on the other hand the






manufacturers learn, by the sale of the goods, the extent of the






demand for them. These two things being justly known, the price






of goods is easily fixed, as we shall presently see.






    Public sales serve to correct the small inconveniences which






proceed from the operations of trade. A set of manufacturers got






all together into one town, and entirely taken up with their






industry, are thereby as well informed of the rate of the market,






as if every one of them carried thither his work; and upon the






arrival of the merchant, who readily takes it off their hands, he






has not the least advantage over them from his knowledge of the






state of demand. This man both buys and sells in what is called






wholesale (that is by large parcels) and from him retailers






purchase, who distribute the goods to every consumer throughout






the country. These last buy from wholesale merchants in every






branch, that proportion of every kind of merchandize which is






suitable to the demand of their borough, city, or province.






    Thus, all inconveniences are prevented, at some additional






cost to the consumer, who, for reasons we shall afterwards point






out, must naturally reimburse the whole expence. The distance of






the manufacturer, the obscurity of his dwelling, the caprice in






selling his work, are quite removed; the retailer has all in his






shop, and the public buys at a current price.













Chap. IV













How the Prices of Goods are determined by Trade













    In the price of goods, I consider two things as really






existing, and quite different from one another; to wit; the real






value of the commodity, and the profit upon alienation. The






intention of this chapter is to establish this distinction, and






to shew how the operation of trade severally influences the






standard of the one and the other; that is to say, how trade has






the effect of rendering fixed and determinate, two things which






would otherwise be quite vague and uncertain.






    I. The first thing to be known of any manufacture when it






comes to be sold, is, how much of it a person can perform in a






day, a week, a month, according to the nature of the work, which






may require more or less time to bring it to perfection. In






making such estimates, regard is to be had to what, upon an






average only, a workman of the country in general may perform,






without supposing him the best or the worst in his profession; or






having any peculiar advantage or disadvantage as to the place






where he works.






    Hence the reason why some people thrive by their industry,






and others not; why some manufactures flourish in one place and






not in another.






    II. The second thing to be known, is the value of the






workman's subsistence and necessary expence, both for supplying






his personal wants, and providing the instruments belonging to






his profession, which must be taken upon an average as above;






except when the nature of the work requires the presence of the






workman in the place of consumption; for although some trades,






and almost every manufacture, may be carried on in places at a






distance, and therefore may fall under one general regulation as






to prices, yet others there are which, by their nature, require






the presence of the workman in the place of consumption; and in






this case the prices must be regulated by circumstances relative






to every particular place.






    III. The third and last thing to be known, is the value of






the materials, that is the first matter employed by the workman;






and if the object of his industry be the manufacture of another,






the same process of inquiry must be gone through with regard to






the first, as with regard to the second: and thus the most






complex manufactures may be at last reduced to the greatest






simplicity. I have been more particular in this analysis of






manufactures than was absolutely necessary in this place, that I






might afterwards with the greater ease, point out the methods of






diminishing the prices of them.






    These three articles being known, the price of manufacture is






determined. It cannot be lower than the amount of all the three,






that is, than the real value; whatever it is higher, is the






manufacturer's profit. This will ever be in proportion to demand,






and therefore will fluctuate according to circumstances.






    Hence appears the necessity of a great demand, in order to






promote flourishiug manufactures.






    By the extensive dealings of merchants, and their constant






application to the study of the balance of work and demand, all






the above circumstances are known to them, and are made known to






the industrious, who regulate their living and expence according






to their certain profit. I call it certain, because under these






circumstances they seldom overvalue their work, and by not






overvaluing it, they are sure of a sale: a proof of this may be






had from daily experience.






    Employ a workman in a country where there is little trade or






industry, he proportions his price always to the urgency of your






want, or your capacity to pay; but seldom to his own labour.






Employ another in a country of trade, he will not impose upon






you, unless perhaps you be a stranger, which supposes your being






ignorant of the value; but employ the same workman in a work not






usual in the country, consequently not demanded, consequently not






regulated as to the value, he will proportion his price as in the






first supposition.






    We may therefore conclude from what has been said, that in a






country where trade is established, manufactures must flourish,






from the ready sale, the regulated price of work, and certain






profit resulting from industry. Let us next inquire into the






consequences of such a situation.













Chap. V













How foreign Trade opens to an industrious People, and the






Consequences of it to the Merchants who set it on foot













    The first consequence of the situation described in the






preceding chapter, is, that wants are easily supplied, for the






adequate value of the thing wanted.






    The next consequence is, the opening of foreign trade under






its two denominations of passive and active. Strangers and people






of distant countries finding the difficulty of having their wants






supplied at home, and the ease of having them supplied from this






country, immediately have recourse to it. This is passive trade.






The active is when merchants, who have executed this plan at home






with success, begin to transport the labour of their countrymen






into other regions, which either produce, or are capable of






producing such articles of consumption, proper to be






manufactured, as are most demanded at home; and consequently will






meet with the readiest sale, and fetch the largest profits. Here






then is the opening of foreign trade, under its two denominations






of active and passive: but as we are at present considering the






consequences of this new state of things with respect to the






merchants, we shall take no farther notice, in this place, of






that division: it will naturally come in afterwards.






    What then are the consequences of this new commerce to our






merchants, who have left their homes in quest of gain abroad?






    The first is, that arriving in any new country, they find






themselves in the same situation, with regard to the inhabitants,






as the workmen in the country of no trade, with regard to those






who employed him; that is, they proportion the price of their






goods to the eagerness of acquiring, or the capacity of paying,






in the inhabitants, but never to their real value.






    The first profits then, upon this trade, must be very






considerable; and the demand from such a country will be high or






low, great or small, according to the spirit, not the real wants






of the people: for these in all countries, as has been said, must






first be supplied by the inhabitants themselves, before they






cease to labour.






    If the people of this not-trading country (as we shall now






call it) be abundantly furnished with commodities useful to the






traders, they will easily part with them, at first, for the






instruments of luxury and ease; but the great profit of the






traders will insensibly increase the demand for the productions






of their new correspondents; this will have the effect of






producing a competition between themselves, and thereby of






throwing the demand on their side, from the principles I shall






afterwards explain. This is perpetually a disadvantage in






traffic: the most it; and unpolished nations in the world quickly






perceive the effects of are taught to profit of the discovery, in






spite of the address of those who are the most expert in






commerce.






    The traders will, therefore, be very fond of falling upon






every method and contrivance to inspire this people with a taste






of refinement and delicacy. Abundance of fine presents,






consisting of every instrument of luxury and superfluity, the






best adapted to the genius of the people, will be given to the






prince and leading men among them. Workmen will even be employed






at home to study the taste of the strangers, and to captivate






their desires by every possible means. The more eager they are of






presents, the more lavish the traders will be in bestowing and






diversifying them. It is an animal put up to fatten, the more he






eats the sooner he is fit for slaughter. When their taste for






superfluity is fully formed, when the relish for their former






simplicity is sophisticated, poisoned, and obliterated, then they






are surely in the fetters of the traders, and the deeper they go,






the less possibility there is of their getting out. The presents






then will die away, having served their purpose; and if,






afterwards, they are found to be continued, it will probably be






to support the competition against other nations, who will






incline to share of the profits.






    If, on the contrary, this not-trading nation does not abound






with commodities useful to the traders, these will make little






account of trading with them, whatever their turn may be; but if






we suppose this country inhabited by a laborious people, who,






having taken a taste for refinement from the traders, apply






themselves to agriculture, in order to produce articles of






subsistence, they will solicit the merchants to give them part of






their manufactures in exchange for these; and this trade will






undoubtedly have the effect of multiplying numbers in the trading






nation. But if food cannot be furnished, nor any other branch of






production found out to support the correspondence, the taste for






refinement will soon die away, and trade will stop in this






quarter.






    Had it not been for the furs in those countries adjacent to






Hudson's Bay, and in Canada, the Europeans never would have






thought of supplying instruments of luxury to those nations; and






if the inhabitants of those regions had not taken a taste for the






instruments of luxury furnished to them by the Europeans, they






never would have become so indefatigable nor so dexterous






hunters. At the same time we are not to suppose, that ever these






Americans would have come to Europe in quest of our manufactures.






It is therefore owing to our merchants, that those nations are






become in any degree fond of refinement; and this taste, in all






probability, will not soon exceed the proportion of the






productions of their country. From these beginnings of foreign






trade it is easy to trace its increase.






    One step towards this, is the establishing correspondences in






foreign countries; and these are more or less necessary in






proportion as the country where they are established is more or






less polished or acquainted with trade. They supply the want of






posts, and point out to the merchants what proportion the






productions of the country bear to the demand of the inhabitants






for manufactures. This communicates an idea of commerce to the






not-trading nation, and they insensibly begin to fix a






determinate value upon their own productions, which perhaps bore






no determinate value at all before.






    Let me trace a little the progress of this refinement in the






savages, in order to shew how it has the effect of throwing the






demand upon the traders, and of creating a competition among






them, for the productions of the new country.






    Experience shews, that in a new-discovered country, merchants






constantly find some article or other of its productions, which






turns out to a great account in commerce; and we see that the






longer such a trade subsists, and the more the inhabitants take a






taste for European manufactures, the more their own productions






rise in their value, and the less profit is made by trading with






them, even in cases where the trade is carried on by companies;






which is a very wise institution for one reason, that it cuts off






a competition between our merchants.






    This we shall shew, in its proper place, to be the best means






of keeping prices low in favour of the nation; however it may






work a contrary effect with respect to individuals who must buy






from these monopolies.






    When companies are not established, and when trade is open,






our merchants, by their eagerness to profit of the new trade,






betray the secrets of it, they enter into competition for the






purchase of the foreign produce, and this raises prices and






favours the commerce of the most ignorant savages.






    Some account for this in a different manner. They allege that






it is not this competition which raises prices; because there is






also a competition among the savages, which of them shall get the






merchandise; and this may be sufficient to counter-balance the






other, but in proportion as the quantity of goods demanded by the






savages, as an exchange for the produce of their country, becomes






greater, a less quantity of this produce must be given for every






parcel of the goods.






    To this I answer, That I cannot admit this apparent reason to






be consistent with the principles of trade, however ingenious the






conceit may be.






    The merchant constantly considers his own profit in parting






with his goods, and is not influenced by the reasons of






expediency which the savages may find, to offer him less than






formerly; for were this principle of proportion admitted






generally, the price of merchandise would always be at the






discretion of the buyers.






    The objection here stated is abundantly plain; but it must be






resolved in a very different manner. Here are two solutions:






    First, Prices, I have said, are made to rise, according as






demand is high, not according as it is great. Now, in the






objection, it is said, that, in proportion as the demand is






great, a less proportion of the equivalent must go to every






parcel of the merchandise; which I apprehend to be false; and






this shews the necessity of making a distinction between the high






and the great demand, things entirely different in trade, and






which communicate quite different ideas.






    Secondly, In all trade there is an exchange, and in all






exchange, we have said, there is a reciprocal demand implied: it






must therefore be exactly inquired into, on which hand the






competition between the demanders is found; that is to say, on






which hand it is strongest; according to the distinction in the






second chapter.






    If the inhabitants of the country be in competition for the






manufactures, goods will rise in their price most undoubtedly,






let the quantity of the produce they have to offer be large or






small; but so soon as these prices rise above the faculties, or






desire of buying, in certain individuals, their demand will stop,






and their equivalent will be prevented from coming into commerce.






This will disappoint the traders; and therefore, as their gains






are supposed to be great, either a competition will take place






among themselves, who shall carry off the quantity remaining,






supposing them to have separate interests; or, if they are






united, they may, from a view of expediency, voluntarily sink






their price, in order to bring it within the compass of the






faculties, or intention, to buy in those who are still possessed






of a portion of what they want.






    It is from the effects of competition among sellers that I






apprehend prices are brought down, not from any imaginary






proportion of quantity to quantity in the market. But of this






more afterwards, in its proper place.






    So soon as the price of manufactures is brought as low as






possible, in the new nation; if the surplus of their commodities






does not suffice to purchase a quantity of manufactures






proportioned to their wants, this people must begin to labour:






for labour is the necessary consequence of want, real or






imaginary; and by labour it will be supplied.






    When this comes to be the case, we immediately find two






trading nations instead of one; the balance of which trade will






always be in favour of the most industrious and frugal; as shall






be fully explained in another place.






    Let me now direct my inquiry more particularly towards the






consequences of this new state of things produced by commerce,






relative to the not-trading nation, in order to shew the effect






of a passive foreign trade. I shall spare no pains in






illustrating, upon every occasion, as I go along, the fundamental






principles of commerce, demand, and competition, even perhaps at






the expence of appearing tiresome to some of my readers.













Chap. VI













Consequences of the Introduction of a passive Foreign Trade among






a People who live in Simplicity and Idleness













    We now suppose the arrival of traders, all in one interest,






with instruments of luxury and refinement, at a port in a country






of great simplicity of manners, abundantly provided by nature






with great advantages for commerce, and peopled by a nation






capable of adopting a taste for superfluities.






    The first thing the merchants do, is to expose their goods,






and point out the advantages of many things, either agreeable or






useful to mankind in general, such as wines, spirits, instruments






of agriculture, arms, and ammunition for hunting, nets for






fishing, manufactures for clothing, and the like. The advantages






of these are presently perceived, and such commodities are






eagerly sought after. The natives on their side produce what they






most esteem, generally something superfluous or ornamental. The






traders, after examining all circumstances, determine the object






of their demand, giving the least quantity possible in return for






this superfluity, in order to impress the inhabitants with a high






notion of the value of their own commodities; but as this






parsimony may do more hurt than good to their interest, they are






very generous in making presents, from the principles mentioned






above.






    When the exchange is completed, and the traders depart,






regret is commonly mutual; the one and the other are sorry that






the superfluities of the country fall short. A return is promised






by the traders, and assurances are given by the natives of a






better provision another time.






    What are the first consequences of this revolution? Is it not






evident, that, in order to supply an equivalent for this new






want, more hands must be set to work than formerly? And it is






evident also, that this augmentation of industry will not






essentially increase numbers; as was supposed to be the effect of






it through the whole train of our reasoning in the first book.






Why? Because there the produce of the industry was supposed to be






consumed at home; and here it is intended to be exported. But if






we can find out any additional consumption at home even implied






by this new trade, I think it will have the effect of augmenting






numbers. An example will make this plain.






    Let me suppose the superfluity of this country to be the






skins of wild beasts, not proper for food; the manufacture sought






for, brandy. The brandy is sold for furs. He who has furs, or he






who can spare time to hunt for them, will drink brandy in






proportion: but I cannot find out any reason to conclude, from






this simple operation, that one man more in the country must






necessarily be fed, (for I have taken care to suppose, that the






flesh of the animals is not proper for food) or that any






augmentation of agriculture must of consequence ensue from this






new traffic.






    But let me throw in a circumstance which may imply an






additional consumption at home, and then examine the






consequences.






    A poor creature, who has no equivalent to offer for food, who






is miserable, and ready to perish for want of subsistence, goes a






hunting, and kills a wolf; he comes to a farmer with the skin,






and says; you are well fed, but you have no brandy; if you will






give me a loaf I will give you this skin, which the strangers are






so fond of, and they will give you brandy. But, says the farmer,






I have no more bread than what is sufficient for my own family.






As for that, replies the other, I will come and dig in your






ground, and you and I will settle our account as to the small






quantity I desire of you. The bargain is made; the poor fellow






gets his loaf, and lives at least; perhaps he marries, and the






farmer gets a dram. But had it not been for this dram, (that is,






this new want,) which was purchased by the industry of this poor






fellow, by what argument could he have induced the farmer to part






with a loaf?






    I here exclude the sentiment of charity. This alone, as I






have often observed, is a principle of multiplication, and if it






was admitted here it would ruin all my supposition; but as true






it is, on the other hand, that could the poor fellow have got






bread by begging, he would not probably have gone a-hunting.






    Here then it appears, that the very dawning of trade, in the






most unpolished countries, implies a multiplication. This is






enough to point out the first step, and to connect the subject of






our present inquiries with what has been already discussed in






relation to other circumstances. I proceed.






    So soon as all the furs are disposed of, and a taste for






superfluity introduced, both the traders and the natives will be






equally interested in the advancement of industry in this






country. Many new objects of profit for the first will be






discovered, which the proper employment of the inhabitants, in






reaping the natural advantages of their soil and climate, will






make effectual. The traders will therefore endeavour to set on






foot many branches of industry among the savages, and the






allurements of brandy, arms, and clothing, will animate these in






the pursuit of them. Let me here digress for a few lines.






    If we suppose slavery to be established in this country, then






all the slaves will be set to work, in order to provide furs and






other things demanded by the traders, that the masters may






thereby be enabled to indulge themselves in the superfluities






brought to them by the merchants. When liberty is the system,






every one, according to his disposition, becomes industrious, in






order to procure such enjoyments for himself.






    In the first supposition, it is the head of the master which






conducts the labour of the slave, and turns it towards ingenuity:






in the second, every head is at work, and every hand is improving






in dexterity. Where hands therefore are principally necessary,






the slaves have the advantage; where heads are principally






necessary, the advantage lies in favour of the free. Set a man to






labour at so much a day, he will go on at a regular rate, and






never seek to improve his method: let him be hired by the piece,






he will find a thousand expedients to extend his industry. This






is exactly the difference between the slave and the free man.






From this I account for the difference between the progress of






industry in ancient and modern times. Why was a peculium given to






slaves, but to engage them to become dextrous? Had there been no






peculium and no libertini, or free men, who had been trained to






labour, there would have been little more industry any where,






than there was in the republic of Lycurgus, where, I apprehend,






neither the one or the other was to be found. I return.






    When once this revolution is brought about; when those who






formerly lived in simplicity become industrious. Matters put on a






new face. Is not this operation quite similar to that represented






in the fifth chapter of the first book? There I found the






greatest difficulty, in shewing how the mutual operations of






supplying food and other wants could have the effect of promoting






population and agriculture, among a people who were supposed to






have no idea of the system proposed to be put in execution. Here






the plan appears familiar and easy. The difference between them






seems to resemble that of a child's learning a language by






grammar, or learning it by the ear in the country where it is






spoken. In the first case, many throw the book aside, but in the






other none ever fail of success.






    I have said, that matters put on a new face; that is to say,






we now find two trading nations instead of one, with this






difference, however, that as hitherto we have supposed the






merchants all in one interest, the compound demand, that is, the






competition of the buyers, has been, and must still continue on






the side of the natives. This is a great prejudice to their






interest, but as it is not supposed sufficient to check their






industry, nor to restrain their consumption of the manufactures,






let me here examine a little more particularly the consequences






of the principle of demand in such a situation; for although I






allow, that it can never change sides, yet it may admit of






different modifications, and produce different effects, as we






shall presently perceive.






    The merchants we suppose all in one interest, consequently






there can he no competition among them; consequently no check can






be put upon their raising their prices, as long as the prices






they demand are complied with. So soon as they are raised to the






full extent of the abilities of the natives, or of their






inclination to buy, the merchants have the choice of three






things, which are all perfectly in their option, and the






preference to be given to the one or the other depends entirely






upon themselves, and upon the circumstances I am going to point






out.






    First, they may support the high demand; that is, not lower






their price; which will preserve a high estimation of the






manufactures in the opinion of the inhabitants, and render the






profits upon their trade the greatest possible. This part they






may possibly take, if they perceive the natives doubling their






diligence, in order to become able, in time, to purchase






considerable cargoes at a high value; from which supposition is






implied a strong disposition in the people to become luxurious,






since nothing but want of ability prevents them from complying






with the highest demand: but still another circumstance must






concur, to engage the merchants not to lower their price. The






great proportion of the goods they seek for, in return, must be






found in the hands of a few. This will be the case if slavery be






established; for then there must be many poor, and few rich: and






they are commonly the rich consumers who proportion the price






they offer, rather to their desires, than to the value of the






thing.






    The second thing which may be done is, to open the door to a






great demand; that is, to lower their prices. This will sink the






value of the manufactures in the opinion of the inhabitants, and






render profits less in proportion, although indeed, upon the






voyage, the profits may be greater.






    This part they will take, if they perceive the inhabitants do






not incline to consume great quantities of the merchandize at a






high value, either from want of abilities or inclination; and






also, if the profits upon the trade depend upon a large






consumption, as is the case in merchandize of a low value, and






suited chiefly to the occasions of the lower sort. Such motives






of expediency will be sufficient to make them neglect a high






demand, and prefer a great one; and the more, when there is a






likelihood that the consumption of low-priced goods in the






beginning may beget a taste for others of a higher value, and






thus extend in general the taste of superfluity.






    A third part to be taken, is the least politic, and perhaps






the most familiar. It is to profit by the competition between the






buyers, and encourage the rising of demand as long as possible;






when this comes to a stop, to make a kind of auction, by first






bringing down the prices to the level of the highest bidders, and






so to descend by degrees, in proportion as demand sinks. Thus we






may say with propriety, according to our definitions of demand,






that it commonly becomes great, in proportion as prices sink. By






this operation, the traders will profit as much as possible, and






sell off as much of their goods as the profits will permit.






    I say, this plan, in a new discovered country, is not






politic, as it both discovers a covetousness and a want of faith






in the merchants, and also throws open the secrets of their trade






to those who ought to be kept ignorant of them.






    Let me next suppose, that the large profits of our merchants






shall be discovered by others, who arrive at the same ports in a






separate interest, and who enter into no combination with the






first, which might prevent the natural effects of competition.






    Let the state of demand among the natives be supposed the






same as formerly, both as to height and greatness, in consequence






of the operation of the different principles, which might have






induced our merchants to follow one or other of the plans we have






been describing; we must however still suppose, that they have






been careful to preserve considerable profits upon every branch.






    If we suppose the inhabitants to have increased in numbers,






wealth, and taste for superfluity, since the last voyage, demand






will be found rather on the rising hand. Upon the arrival of the






merchants in competition with the former, both will offer to






sale; but if both stand to the same prices, it is very natural to






suppose, that the former dealers will obtain a preference; as,






cateris paribus, it is always an advantage to know and to be






known. The last comers, therefore, have no other way left to






counterbalance this advantage, but to lower their prices.






    This is a new phaenomenon: here the fall of prices is not






voluntary as formerly; not consented to from expediency; not






owing to a failure of demand, but to the influence of a new






principle of commerce, to wit, a double competition. This I shall






now examine with all the care I am capable of.




















Chap. VII













Of double Competition













    When competition is much stronger on one side of the contract






than on the other, I call it simple, and then it is a term






synonimous with what I have called compound demand. This is the






species of competition which is implied in the term high demand,






or when it is said, that demand raises prices.






    Double competition is, when, in a certain degree, it takes






place on both sides of the contract at once, or vibrates






alternately from one to the other. This is what restrains prices






to the adequate value of the merchandize.






    I frankly confess I feel a great want of language to express






my ideas, and it is for this reason I employ so many examples,






the better to communicate certain combinations of them, which






otherwise would be inexplicable.






    The great difficulty is to distinguish clearly between the






principles of demand, and those of competition; here then follows






the principal differences between the two, relatively to the






effects they severely produce in the mercantile contract of






buying and selling, which I here express shortly by the word






contract.






    Simple demand is what brings the quantity of a commodity to






market. Many demand, who do not buy; many offer, who do not sell.






This demand is called great or small; it is said to increase, to






augment to swell; and is expressed by these and other synonimous






terms, which mark an augmentation or diminution of quantity. In






this species, two people never demand the same thing, but a part






of the same thing, or things quite alike.






    Compound demand is the principle which raises prices, and






never can make them sink; because in this case more than one






demands the very same thing. It is solely applicable to the






buyers, in relation to the price they offer. This demand is






called high or low, and is said to rise, to fall, to mount, to






sink, and is expressed by these and other synonimous terms.






    Simple competition, when between buyers, is the same as






compound or high demand, but differs from it so far, as this may






equally take place among sellers, which compound demand cannot,






and then it works a contrary effect: it makes prices sink, and is






synonimous with low demand: it is this competition which






overturns the balance of work and demand; of which afterwards.






    Double competition is what is understood to take place in






almost every operation of trade; it is this which prevents the






excessive rise of prices; it is this which prevents their






excessive fall. While double competition prevails, the balance is






perfect, trade and industry flourish.






    The capital distinction, therefore, between the terms demand






and competition is, that demand is constantly relative to the






buyers, and when money is not the price, as in barter, then it is






relative to that side upon which the greatest competition is






found.






    We therefore say, with regard to prices, demand is high or






low. With regard to the quantity of merchandize, demand is great






or small. With regard to competition, it is always called great






or small, strong or weak.






    Competition, I have said, is, with equal propriety,






applicable to both parties in the contract. A competition among






buyers is a proper expression: a competition among sellers, who






have the merchandize, is full as easily understood, though it be






not quite so striking, for reasons which an example will make






plain.






    You come to a fair where you find a great variety of every






kind of merchandize, in the possession of different merchants.






These, by offering their goods to sale, constitute a tacit






competition; every one of them wishes to sell in preference to






another, and at the same time with the best advantage to himself.






    The buyers begin, by cheapning at every shop. The first price






asked marks the covetousness of the seller; the first price






offered, that of the buyer. From this operation, I say,






competition begins to work its effects on both sides, and so






becomes double. The principles which influence this operation are






now to be deduced.






    It is impossible to suppose the same degree of eagerness,






either to buy or to sell, among several merchants; because the






degree of eagerness I take to be exactly in proportion to their






view of profit; and as this must necessarily be influenced and






regulated by different circumstances, that buyer, who has the






best prospect of selling again with profit, obliges him, whose






prospect is not so good, to content himself with less; and that






seller, who has bought to the best advantage, obliges him, who






has paid dearer for the merchandize, to moderate his desire of






gain.






    It is from these principles, that competition among buyers






and sellers must take place. This is what confines the






fluctuation of prices within limits which are compatible with the






reasonable profits of both buyers and sellers; for, as has been






said, in treating of trade, we must constantly suppose the whole






operation of buying and selling to be performed by merchants; the






buyer cannot be supposed to give so high a price as that which he






expects to receive, when he distributes to the consumers, nor can






the seller be supposed to accept of one so low as that which he






paid to the manufacturer. This competition is properly called






double, because of the difficulty to determine upon which side it






stands; the same merchant may have it in his favour upon certain






articles, and against him upon others; it is continually in






vibration, and the arrival of every post may less or more pull






down the heavy scale.






    In every transaction between merchants, the profit resulting






from the sale must be exactly distinguished from the value of the






merchandize. The first may vary, the last never can. It is this






profit alone which can be influenced by competition; and it is






for this reason we find such uniformity every where in the prices






of goods of the same quality.






    The competition between sellers does not appear so striking,






as that between buyers; because he who offers to sale, appears






passive only in the first operation; whereas the buyers present






themselves one after another; they make a demand, and when the






merchandize is refused to one at a certain price, a second either






offers more, or does not offer at all: but so soon as another






seller finds his account in accepting the price the first had






refused, then the first enters into competition, provided his






profits will admit his lowering the first price; and thus






competition takes place among the sellers, until the profits upon






their trade prevent prices from falling lower.






    In all markets, I have said, this competition is varying,






though insensibly, on many occasions; but in others, the






vibrations are very perceptible. Sometimes it is found strongest






on the side of the buyers, and in proportion as this grows, the






competition between the sellers diminishes. When the competition






between the former has raised prices to a certain standard, it






comes to a stop; then the competition changes sides, and takes






place among the sellers, eager to profit of the highest price.






This makes prices fall, and according as they fall, the






competition among the buyers diminishes. They still wait for the






lowest period. At last it comes; and then perhaps some new






circumstance, by giving the balance a kick, disappoints their






hopes. If therefore it ever happens, that there is but one






interest upon one side of the contract, as in the example in the






former chapter, where we supposed the sellers united, you






perceive, that the rise of the price, occasioned by the






competition of the buyers, and even its coming to a stop, could






not possibly have the effect of producing any competition on the






other side; and therefore, if prices come afterwards to sink, the






fall must have proceeded from the prudential considerations of






adapting the price to the faculties of those, who, from the






height of it, had withdrawn their demand.






    From these principles of competition, the forestalling of






markets is made a crime, because it diminishes the competition






which ought to take place between different people, who have the






same merchandize to offer to sale. The forestaller buys all up,






with an intention to sell with more profit, as he has by that






means taken other competitors out of the way, and appears with a






single interest on one side of the contract, in the face of many






competitors on the other. This person is punished by the state,






because he has prevented the price of the merchandize from






becoming justly proportioned to the real value; he has robbed the






public, and enriched himself; and in the punishment, he makes






restitution. Here occur two questions to be resolved, for the






sake of illustration.






    Can competition among buyers possibly take place, when the






provision made is more than sufficient to supply the quantity






demanded? On the other hand, can competition take place among the






sellers, when the quantity demanded exceeds the total provision






made for it?






    I think it may in both cases; because in the one and the






other, there is a competition implied on one side of the






contract, and the very nature of this competition implies a






possibility of its coming on the other, provided separate






interests be found upon both sides. But, to be more particular:






    First, Experience shews, that however justly the proportion






between the demand and the supply may be determined in fact, it






is still next to impossible to discover it exactly, and therefore






buyers can only regulate the prices they offer, by what they may






reasonably expect to sell for again. The sellers, on the other






hand, can only regulate the prices they expect, by what the






merchandize has cost them when brought to market. We have already






shewn, how, under such circumstances, the several interests of






individuals affect each other, and make the balance vibrate.






    Secondly, The proportion between the supply and the demand is






seldom other than relative among merchants, who are supposed to






buy and sell, not from necessity, but from a view to profit. What






I mean by relative is, that their demand is great or small,






according to prices: there may be a great demand for grain at 35






shillings per quarter, and no demand at all for it at 40






shillings, I say, among merchants.






    Here I must observe, how essential it is, to attend to the






smallest circumstance in matters of this kind. The circumstance I






here have in my eye, is the difference I find in the effect of






competition, when it takes place purely among merchants on both






sides of the contract, and when it happens, that either the






consumers mingle themselves with the merchant-buyers, or the






manufacturers, that is, the furnishers mingle themselves with the






merchant-sellers. This combination I shall illustrate, by the






solution of another question, and then conclude my chapter with a






few reflections upon the whole.






    Can there be no case formed, where the competition upon one






side may subsist, without a possibility of its taking place on






the other, although there should be separate interests upon both?






    I answer. The case is hardly supposable among merchants who






buy and sell with a view to profit; but it is absolutely






supposable, and that is all, when the direct consumers are the






buyers; when the circumstances of one of the parties is perfectly






known; and when the competition is so strong upon one side, as to






prevent a possibility of its becoming double, before the whole






provision is sold off, or the demand satisfied. Let me have






recourse to examples.






    Grain arriving in a small quantity, at a port where the






inhabitants are starving, produces so great a competition among






the consumers, who are the buyers, that their necessity becomes






evident; all the grain is generally bought up before prices can






rise so high as to come to a stop; because nothing but want of






money, that is, an impossibility of complying with the prices






demanded by the merchants, can restrain them: but if you suppose,






even here, that prices come naturally to a stop; or that, after






some time, they fall lower, from prudential considerations, then






there is a possibility of a competition taking place among the






sellers, from the principles above deduced. If, on the contrary,






the stop is not natural, but occasioned by the interposition of






the magistrate, from humanity, or the like, there will be no






competition, because then the principles of commerce are






suspended; the sellers are restrained on one side, and they






restrain the buyers on the other. Or rather, indeed, it is the






magistrate, or compassion, who in a manner fixes the price, and






performs the office of both buyer and seller.






    A better example still may be found, in a competition among






sellers; where it may be so strong, as to render a commodity in a






manner of no value at all, as in the case of an uncommon and






unexpected draught of fish, in a place of small consumption, when






no preparations have been made for salting them. There can then






be no competition among the buyers; because the market cannot






last, and they find themselves entirely masters, to give what






price they please, being sure the sellers must accept of it, or






lose their merchandize. In the first example, humanity commonly






stops the activity of the principle of competition; in the other






it is stopt by a certain degree of fair-dealing, which forbids






the accepting of a merchandize for nothing.






    In proportion therefore as the rising of prices can stop






demand, or the sinking of prices can increase it, in the same






proportion will competition prevent either the rise or the fall






from being carried beyond a certain length: and if such a case






can be put, where the rising of prices cannot stop demand, nor






the lowering of prices augment it, in such cases double






competition does not subsist; because these circumstances unite






the most separate interests of buyers and sellers in the






mercantile contract, and when upon one side there is no separate






interest, there can then be no competition.






    From what has been said, we may form a judgment of the






various degrees of competition. A book not worth a shilling, a






fish of a few pounds weight, are often sold for considerable






sums. The buyers here are not merchants. When an ambassador






leaves a court in a hurry, his effects are sold for less than the






half of their value: he is no merchant, and his situation is






known. When, at a public market, there are found consumers, who






buy their provision, or manufacturers, who dispose of their goods






for present subsistence; the merchants, who are respectively upon






the opposite side of the contract to these, profit of their






competition; and those who are respectively upon the same side






with them, stand by with patience, until they have finished their






business. Then matters come to be carried on between merchant and






merchant, and then, I allow, that profits may rise and fall, in






the proportion of quantity to demand; that is to say, if the






provision is less than the demand, the competition among the






demanders, or the rise of the price, will be in the compound






proportion of the falling short of the commodity, and of the






prospect of selling again with profit. It is this proportion






which regulates the competition, and keeps it within bounds. It






can affect the profits only upon the transaction; the intrinsic






value of the commodity stands immoveable: nothing is ever sold






below the real value; nothing is ever bought for more than it may






probably bring. I mean in general. Whereas so soon as consumers






and needy manufacturers mingle in the operation, all proportion






is lost. The competition between them is too strong for the






merchants; the balance vibrates by jerks. In such markets






merchants seldom appear: the principal objects there, are the






fruits and productions of the earth, and articles of the first






necessity for life, not manufactures strictly so called. A poor






fellow often sells, to purchase bread to eat; not to pay what he






did eat, while he was employed in the work he disposes of. The






consumer often measures the value of what he is about to






purchase, by the weight of his purse, and his desire to consume.






    As these distinctions cannot be conveyed in the terms by






which we are obliged to express them, and as they must frequently






be implied, in treating of matters relating to trade and






industry, I thought the best way was, to clear up my own ideas






concerning them, and to lay them in order before my reader,






before I entered farther into my subject.






    All difference of opinion upon matters of this nature






proceeds, as I believe, from our language being inadequate to






express our ideas; from our inattention in using terms, which






appear synonimous, and are not so; and from our natural






propensity to include, under general rules, things which upon






some occasions, common reason requires to be set asunder.




















Chap. VIII













Of what is called Expence, Profit, and Loss













    As we have been employed in explaining of terms, it will not






be amiss to say a word concerning those which stand in the title






of this chapter.






    The term expence, when simply expressed, without any






particular relation, is always understood to be relative to






money. This kind I distinguish under the three heads, of private,






public, and national.






    1. Private expence is, what a private person, or private






society, lays out, either to provide articles of consumption, or






something more permanent, which may be conducive to their ease,






convenience, or advantage. Thus we say, a large domestic expence,






relatively to one who spends a great income. We say, a merchant






has been at great expence for magazines, for living, for clerks,






&c. but never that he has been at any in buying goods. In the






same way a manufacturer may expend for building, machines,






horses, and carriages, but never for the matter he manufactures.






When a thing is bought, in order to be sold again, the sum






employed is called money advanced; when it is bought not to be






sold, it may be said to be expended.






    2. Public expence is, the employment of that money, which has






been contributed by individuals, for the current service of the






state. The contribution, or gathering it together, represents the






effects of many articles of private expence; the laying it out






when collected, is public expence.






    3. National expence, is what is expended out of the country:






this is what diminishes national wealth. The principal






distinction to be here attended to, is between public expence, or






the laying out of public money, and national expence, which is






the alienating the nation's wealth in favour of strangers. Thus






the greatest public expence imaginable, may be no national






expence; because the money may remain at home. On the other hand,






the smallest public, or even private expence, may be a national






expence, because the money may go abroad.






    Profit, and loss, I divide into positive, relative, and






compound. Positive profit, implies no loss to any body; it






results from an augmentation of labour, industry, or ingenuity,






and has the effect of swelling or augmenting the public good.






    Positive loss, implies no profit to any body; it is what






results from the cessation of the former, or of the effects






resulting from it, and may be said to diminish the public good.






    Relative profit, is what implies a loss to somebody, it marks






a vibration of the balance of wealth between parties, but implies






no addition to the general stock.






    Relative loss, is what, on the contrary, implies a profit to






somebody; it also marks a vibration of the balance, but takes






nothing from the general stock.






    The compound is easily understood; it is that species of






profit and loss which is partly relative, and partly positive. I






call it compound, because both kinds may subsist inseparably in






the same transaction.













Chap. IX













The general Consequences resulting to a trading Nation, upon the






opening of an active foreign Commerce













    Did I not intend to give myself to very general topics in






this chapter I might in a manner exhaust the whole subject of






modern oeconomy under this title; for I apprehend that the whole






system of modern politics is founded upon the basis of an active






foreign trade.






    A nation which remains passive in her commerce, is at the






mercy of those who are active, and must be greatly favoured,






indeed, by natural advantages, or by a constant flux of gold and






silver from her mines, to be able to support a correspondence,






not entirely hurtful to the augmentation of her wealth.






    These things shall be more enlarged upon as we go along: the






point in hand, is to consider the consequences of this trade,






relatively to those who are actors in the operation.






    When I look upon the wide field which here opens to my view,






I am perplexed with too great a variety of objects. In one part,






I see a decent and comely beginning of industry, wealth flowing






gently in, to recompence ingenuity; numbers augmenting, and every






one becoming daily more useful to another; agriculture






proportionally extending itself; no violent revolutions; no






exorbitant profits; no insolence among the rich; no excessive






misery among the poor; multitudes employed in producing; great






oeconomy upon consumption; and all the instruments of luxury,






daily produced by the hands of the diligent, going out of the






country for the service of strangers; not remaining at home for






the gratification of sensuality. At last augmentations come






insensibly to a stop. Then these rivers of wealth, which were in






brisk circulation through the whole world, and which returned to






this trading nation as blood returns to the heart, to be thrown






out again only by new pulsations, begin to be obstructed in their






course; and flowing abroad more slowly than before, come to form






stagnations at home. These, impatient of restraint, soon burst






out into domestic circulation. Upon this cities swell in






magnificence of buildings; the face of the country is adorned






with palaces, and becomes covered with groves; luxury shines






triumphant in every part; inequality becomes more striking to the






eye; and want and misery appear more deformed, from the contrast;






even fortune grows more whimsical in her inconstancy. the beggar






of the other day, now rides in his coach; and he who was born in






a bed of state, is seen to die in an alms-house. Such are the






effects of great domestic circulation.






    The statesman looks about with amazement; he, who was wont to






consider himself as the first man in the society in every






respect, perceives himself eclipsed by the lustre of private






wealth, which avoids his grasp when he attempts to seize it. This






makes his government more complex and more difficult to be






carried on; he must now avail himself of art and address as well






as of power and authority. By the help of cajoling and intrigues,






he gets a little into debt; this lays a foundation for public






credit, which, growing by degrees, and in its progress assuming






many new forms, becomes, from the most tender beginnings, a most






formidable monster, striking terror into those who cherished it






in its infancy. Upon this, as upon a triumphant war-horse, the






statesman gets a-stride, he then appears formidable anew; his






head turns giddy; he is choaked with the dust he has raised; and






at the moment he is ready to fall, he finds, to his utter






astonishment and surprise, a strong monied interest, of his own






creating, which, instead of swallowing him up as he apprehended,






flies to his support. Through this he gets the better of all






opposition, he establishes taxes, multiplies them, mortgages his






fund of subsistence, either becomes a bankrupt, and rises again






from his ashes; or if he be less audacious, he stands trembling






and tottering for a while on the brink of the political






precipice. From one or the other of these perilous situations, he






begins to discover an endless path which, after a multitude of






windings, still returns into itself, and continues an equal






course through this vast labyrinth: but of this last part, more






in the fourth book.






    It is now full time to leave off rhapsody, and return to






reasoning and cool inquiry, concerning the more immediate and






more general effects and revolutions produced by the opening of a






foreign trade in a nation of industry.






    The first and most sensible alteration will be an increase of






demand for manufacturers, because by supplying the wants of






strangers, the number of consumers will now be considerably






augmented. What again will follow upon this, must depend upon






circumstances.






    If this revolution in the state of demand should prove too






violent, the consequence of it will be to raise demand; if it






should prove gradual, it will increase it. I hope this






distinction is well understood, and that the consequence appears






just: for, if the supply do not increase in proportion to the






demand, a competition will ensue among the demanders; which is






the common effect of such sudden revolutions. If, on the other






hand, a gentle increase of demand should be accompanied with a






proportional supply, the whole industrious society will grow in






vigour, and in wholesome stature, without being sensible of any






great advantage or inconvenience; the change of their






circumstances will even be imperceptible.






    The immediate effects of the violent revolution will, in this






example, be flattering to some, and disagreeable to others.






Wealth will be found daily to augment, from the rising of prices,






in many branches of industry. This will encourage the industrious






classes, and the idle consumers at home will complain. I have






already dwelt abundantly long upon the effects resulting from






this to the lower classes of the people, in providing them with a






certain means of subsistence. Let me now examine in what respect






the higher classes will be likewise made to feel the good effects






of this general change, although at first they may suffer a






temporary inconvenience from it.






    Farmers, as has been observed, will have a greater difficulty






in finding servants, who, instead of labouring the ground, will






choose to turn themselves to manufactures. This we have






considered in the light of purging the lands of superfluous






mouths; but every consequence in this great chain of politics






draws other consequences after it, and as they follow one






another, things put on different faces, which affect classes






differently. The purging of the land is but one of the first;






here follows another.






    The desertion of the hands employed in a trifling agriculture






will at first, no doubt, embarrass the farmers, and raise the






price of wages; but in a little time every thing becomes balanced






in a trading nation, because here every industrious man must






advance prosperity, in spite of all combinations of






circumstances.






    In the case before us, the relative profits upon farming must






soon become greater than formerly, because of the additional






expence of servants which must affect the whole class of farmers;






consequently, this additional expence, instead of turning out to






be a loss to either landlord or farmer, will, after some little






time, turn out to the advantage of both: because the produce of






the ground, being indispensably necessary to every body, must in






every article increase in its value, in proportion to the expence






of raising it. Thus in a short time accounts will be nearly






balanced on all hands; that is to say, the same proportion of






wealth will, cateris paribus, continue the same among the






industrious. I say among the industrious; for those who are






either idle, or negligent, will be great losers.






    A proprietor of land, inattentive to the causes of his






farmer's additional expence, may very imprudently suffer his






rents to fall, instead of assisting him on a proper occasion, in






order to make them afterwards rise the higher.






    Those who live upon a determinate income in money, and who






are nowise employed in traffic, nor in any scheme of industry,






will, by the augmentation of prices, be found in worse






circumstances than before.






    In a trading nation every man must turn his talents to






account, or he will undoubtedly be left behind in this universal






emulation, in which the most industrious, the most ingenious, and






the most frugal will constantly carry off the prize.






    This consideration ought to be a spur to every body. The






richest men in a trading nation have no security against poverty,






I mean proportional poverty; for though they diminish nothing of






their income, yet by not increasing it in proportion to others,






they lose their rank in wealth, and from the first class in which






they stood, they will slide insensibly down to a lower.






    This is one consequence of an additional beneficial trade,






that it raises demand and increases wealth; but if we suppose no






proportional augmentation of supply, it will prove at best but an






airy dream which lasts for a moment, and when the gilded scene is






passed away, numberless are the inconveniences which are seen to






follow.






    I shall now point out the natural consequences of this






augmentation of wealth drawn from foreign nations, when, in






proportion to the augmentation of mouths, and of the demand for






the produce of industry, the statesman remains inattentive to






increase the supply both of food and manufactures.






    In such a situation profits will daily swell, and every






scheme for reducing them within the bounds of moderation, will be






looked upon as a hurtful and unpopular measure: be it so; but let






us examine the consequences.






    We have said, that the rise of demand for manufactures






naturally increases the value of work: now I must add, that under






such circumstances, the augmentation of riches, in a country,






either not capable of improvement as to the soil, or where






precautions have not been taken for facilitating a multiplication






of inhabitants, by the importation of subsistence, will be






productive of the most calamitous consequences.






    On one side, this wealth will effectually diminish the mass






of the food before produced; and on the other, will increase the






number of useless consumers. The first of these circumstances






will raise the demand for food; and the second will diminish the






number of useful free hands, and consequently raise the price of






manufactures: here are shortly the outlines of this progress.






    The more rich and luxurious a people are, the more delicate






they become in their manner of living; if they fed on bread






formerly, they will now feed on meat; if they fed on meat, they






will now feed on fowl. The same ground which feeds a hundred with






bread, and a proportional quantity of animal food, will not






maintain an equal number of delicate livers. Food must then






become more scarce; demand for it rises; the rich are always the






strongest in the market; they consume the food, and the poor are






forced to starve. Here the wide door to modern distress opens, to






wit, a hurtful competition for subsistence. Farther, when a






people become rich, they think less of oeconomy; a number of






useless servants are hired, to become an additional dead weight






on consumption; and when their starving countrymen cannot supply






the extravagance of the rich so cheaply as other nations, they






either import instruments of foreign luxury, or seek to enjoy






them out of their own country, and thereby make restitution of






their gains.






    Is it not therefore evident, that if, before things come to






this pass, additional subsistence be not provided by one method






or other, the number of inhabitants must diminish; although






riches may daily increase by a balance of additional matter,






supposed to be brought into the country in consequence of the






hitherto beneficial foreign trade. This is not all. I say






farther, that the beneficial trade will last for a time only. For






the infallible consequence of the rise of prices at home will be,






that those nations which at first consumed your manufactures,






perceiving the gradual increase of their price, will begin to






work for themselves; or finding out your rivals who can supply






them cheaper, will open their doors to them. These again,






perceiving the great advantages gained by your traders, will






begin to supply the market; and since every thing must be cheaper






in countries where we do not suppose the concurrence of all the






circumstances mentioned above, these nations will supplant you,






and be enriched in their turn.






    Here comes a new revolution. Trade is come to a stop: what






then becomes of all the hands which were formerly employed in






supplying the foreign demands?






    Were revolutions as sudden as we are obliged to represent






them, all would go to wreck; in proportion as they happen by






quicker or slower degrees, the inconveniences are greater or






smaller.






    Prices, we have said, are made to rise by competition. If the






competition of the strangers was what raised them, the distress






upon the manufacturers will be in proportion to the suddenness of






their deserting the market. If the competition was divided






between the strangers and the home consumers, the inconveniences






which ensue will be less; because the desertion of the strangers






will be in some measure made up by an increase of home






consumption which will follow upon the fall of prices. And if, in






the third case, the natives have been so imprudent as not only to






support a competition with the strangers, and thereby disgust






them from coming any more to market, but even to continue the






competition between themselves, the whole loss sustained by the






revolution will be national. Wealth will cease to augment, but






the inconveniences, instead of being felt by the manufacturers,






will affect the state only; these manufacturers will continue in






affluence, extolling the generosity of their countrymen, and






despising the poverty of the strangers who had enriched them.






    Domestic luxury will here prove an expedient for preserving






from ruin the industrious part of a people, who, in subsisting






themselves, had enriched their country. No change will follow in






their condition; they will go on with a painful assiduity to






labour, and if the consequences of it become now hurtful to one






part of the state, they must, at least, be allowed to be






essentially necessary for the support of the other.






    But that luxury is no necessary concomitant of foreign trade,






in a nation where the true principles of it are understood, will






appear very plain, from a contrast I am now going to point out,






in the example of a modern state, renowned for its commerce and






frugality. The country I mean, is Holland.






    A set of industrious and frugal people were assembled in a






country, by nature subject to many inconveniences, the removing






of which necessarily employed abundance of hands. Their situation






upon the continent, the power of their former masters, and the






ambition of their neighbours, obliged them to keep great bodies






of troops. These troops added to the numbers of the community,






without either enriching the state by their labour exported, or






producing food for themselves or countrymen.






    The scheme of a commonwealth was calculated to draw together






the industrious; but it has been still more useful in subsisting






them: the republican form of government, being there greatly






subdivided, vests authority sufficient in every part of it, to






make suitable provision for their own subsistence; and the tye






which unites them, regards matters of public concern only. Had






the whole been governed by one sovereign, or by one council, this






important matter never could have been effectuated.






    I imagine it would be impossible for the most able minister






that ever lived, to provide nourishment for a country so extended






as France, or even as England, supposing these as fully peopled






as Holland is: even although it should be admitted that a






sufficient quantity of food might be found in other countries for






their subsistence. The enterprise would be too great, abuses






would multiply; the consequence would be, that the inhabitants






would die for want. But in Holland the case is different, every






little town takes care of its own inhabitants; and this care,






being the object of application and profit to so many persons, is






accomplished with success.






    When once it is laid down as a maxim in a country, that food






must of necessity be got from abroad, in order to feed the






inhabitants at home, the corn trade becomes considerable, and at






the same time certain, regular, and permanent. This was the case






in Holland: as the inhabitants were industrious, the necessary






consequence has been, a very extraordinary multiplication; and at






the same time such an abundance of grain, that instead of being






in want themselves, they often supply their neighbours. There are






many examples of England's being supplied with grain from thence,






and, which is still more extraordinary, from the re-exportation






of the very produce of its own fruitful soil.






    It is therefore evident, that the only way to support






industry, is to provide a supply of subsistence, constantly






proportional to the demand that may be made for it. This is a






precaution indispensably necessary for preventing hurtful






competition. This is the particular care of the Dutch: so long as






it can be effectual, their state can fear no decline; but






whenever they come to be distressed in the markets, upon which






they depend for subsistence, they will sink into ruin. It is by






mere dint of frugality, cheap and parsimonious living, that the






navigation of this industrious people is supported. Constant






employment, and an accumulation of almost imperceptible gains,






fills their coffers with wealth, in spite of the large outgoings






to which their own proper nourishment yearly forces them. The






large profits upon industry in other countries, which are no






proof of the generosity of the consumers, but a fatal effect of






the unsteady price of subsistence, is far from dazzling their






eyes. They seldom are found in the list of competitors at any






foreign port; if they have their cargo to make, they wait with






pleasure in their own vessels, consuming their own provisions,






and at last accept of what others have left. It may be said, that






many other circumstances concur in favour of the Dutch, besides






the article of subsistence. I shall not dispute this matter; but






only remind my reader of what was said in the first book; to wit,






that if a computation be made of the hands employed in providing






subsistence, and of those who are severally taken up in supplying






every other want, their numbers will be found nearly to balance






one another in the most luxurious countries. From this I






conclude, that the article of food, among the lower classes, must






bear a very high proportion to all the other articles of their






consumption; and therefore a diminution upon the price of






subsistence, it at all times, must be of and still more an






uniformity in the value of infinite consequence to manufacturers,






who are obliged to buy it. From this consideration, let us judge






of the consequence of such sudden augmentations upon the price of






grain, as are familiar to us; 30 or 40 per cent seems nothing.






Now this augmentation operates upon one-half of the whole expence






of a labouring man: let any one who lives in tolerable affluence






make the application of this to himself, and examine how he would






manage his affairs if, by accidents of rains or winds, one-half






of his expences were to rise 30 per cent without a possibility of






restraining them; for this is unfortunately the case with all the






lower classes. From whence I conclude, that the keeping food






cheap, and still more the preserving it at all times at an equal






standard, is the fountain of the wealth of Holland; and that any






hurtful competition in this article must beget a disorder which






will affect the whole of the manufacturers of a state.













Chap. X













Of the Balance of Work and Demand













    It is quite impossible to go methodically through the subject






of political oeconomy, without being led into anticipations. We






have frequently mentioned this balance of work and demand, and






shewed how important a matter it is for a statesman to attend to






it. The thing, therefore, in general is well understood; and all






that remains to be done, is to render our ideas more determinate






concerning it, and more adequate, if possible, to the principles






we have been laying down.






    We have treated fully of demand, and likewise of competition.






We have observed how different circumstances influence these






terms, so as to make them represent ideas entirely different; and






we have said that double competition supports the balance we are






now to speak of, and that single competition overturns it.






    The word demand in this chapter is taken in the most simple






acceptation; and when we say that the balance between work and






demand is to be sustained in equilibrio, as far as possible, we






mean that the quantity supplied should be in proportion to the






quantity demanded, that is, wanted. While the balance stands






justly poised, prices are found in the adequate proportion of the






real expence of making the goods, with a small addition for






profit to the manufacturer and merchant.






    I have, in the fourth chapter, observed how necessary a thing






it is to distinguish the two constituent parts of every price;






the value, and the profit. Let the number of persons be ever so






great, who, upon the sale of a piece of goods, share in the






profits; it is still essential, in such enquiries as these, to






suppose them distinctly separate from the real value of the






commodity. and the best way possible to discover exactly the






proportion between the one and the other, is by a scrupulous






watchfulness over the balance we are now treating of, as we shall






presently see.






    The value and profits, combined in the price of a manufacture






produced by one man, are easily distinguished by means of the






analysis we have laid down in the fourth chapter. As long as any






market is fully supplied with this sort of work, and no more;






those who are employed in it live by their trade, and gain no






unreasonable profit: because there is then no violent competition






upon one side only, neither between the workmen, nor between






those who buy from them, and the balance gently vibrates under






the influence of a double competition. This is the representation






of a perfect balance.






    This balance is overturned in four different ways.






    Either the demand diminishes, and the work remains the same:






    Or the work diminishes, and the demand remains:






    Or the demand increases, and the work remains:






    Or the work increases, and the demand remains.






    Now each of these four relations between demand and work may,






or may not, produce a competition upon one side of the contract






only.






    This must be explained.






    If demand diminishes, and work remains the same, which is the






first case, either those who furnish the work will enter into






competition, in which case they will hurt each other, and prices






will fall below the reasonable standard of the even balance; or






they will not enter into competition, and then prices continuing






as formerly, the whole demand will be supplied, and the remainder






of the work will lie upon hand.






    This is a symptom of decaying trade.






    Let us now, on the other hand, suppose demand to increase,






and work to remain as before.






    This example points out no diminution on either side, as was






the case before, but an augmentation upon one; and is either a






symptom of growing luxury at home, or of an increase in foreign






trade.






    Here the same alternation of circumstances occurs. The






demanders will either enter into competition and raise the price






of work, or they will enter into no competition; but being






determined not to exceed the ordinary standard of the perfect






balance, will defer making their provision till another time, or






supply themselves in another market; that is to say, the new






demand will cease as soon as it is made, for want of a supply.






    Whenever, therefore, this perfect balance of work and demand






is overturned by the force of a simple competition, or by one of






the scale preponderating, one of two things must happen; either a






part of the demand is not answered, or a part of the goods is not






sold.






    These are the immediate effects of the overturning of the






balance.






    Let me next point out the object of the statesman's care,






relatively to such effects, and shew the consequences of their






being neglected.






    We may now simplify our ideas, and instead of the former,






make use of other expressions which may convey them.






    Let us therefore say, that the fall or rise upon either side






of the balance, is positive, or relative. Positive, when the side






we talk of really augments beyond, or diminishes below the usual






standard. Relative, when there is no alteration upon the side we






speak of, and that the subversion of the balance is owing to an






alteration on the other side.






    As for example:






    Instead of saying demand diminishes, and work remains the






same, let us say, demand diminishes positively, or work increases






relatively; according as the subject may lead us to speak either






of the one or of the other. This being premised.






    If the scale of work shall preponderate positively, it should






be inquired, whether the quantity furnished has really swelled,






in all respects, beyond the proportion of the consumption, (in






which case the statesman should diminish the number of hands, by






throwing a part of them into a new channel) or whether the






imprudence only of the workmen has made them produce their work






unseasonably; in which case proper information and even






assistance should be given them, to prevent merchants from taking






advantage of their want of experience: but these last precautions






are necessary in the infancy of industry only.






    If a statesman should be negligent on this occasion; if he






should allow natural consequences to follow upon one another,






just as circumstances shall determine; then it may happen, that






workmen will keep upon hand that part of their goods which






exceeds the demand, until necessity forces them to enter into






competition with one another, and sell for what they can get. Now






this competition is hurtful, because it is all on one side, and






because we have supposed the prepondering of the scale of work to






be an overturning of a perfect balance, which can by no means be






set right, consistently with a scheme of thriving, but by the






scale of demand becoming heavier, and re-establishing a double






competition. Were this to happen before the workmen come to sell






in competition, then the balance would again be even, after what






I call a short vibration, which is no subversion; but when the






scale of work remains too long in the same position, and






occasions a strong, hurtful, and lasting competition, upon one






side only, then, I say, the balance is overturned; because this






diminishes the reasonable profits, or perhaps, indeed, obliges






the workmen to sell below prime cost. The effect of this is, that






the workmen fall into distress, and that industry suffers a






discouragement; and this effect is certain.






    But it may be asked, Whether, by this fall of prices, demand






will not be increased? That is to say, will not the whole of the






goods be sold off?






    I answer, That this may, or may not, be the effect of the






fall, according to circumstances: it is a contingent consequence






of the simple, but not the certain effect of the double






competition: but the distress of the workmen is a certain and






unavoidable consequence of the simple competition.






    But supposing this contingent consequence to happen, will it






not set the balance even, by increasing the demand? I answer, the






balance is then made even by a violent shock given to industry,






but it is not set even from any principle which can support it,






or make it flourish. Here is the criterion of a perfect balance:






A positive moderate profit must balance a positive moderate






profit; the balance must vibrate, and no loss must befound on






either side. In the example before us, the balance stands even,






it is true; the work and the demand are equally poised as to






quantity; but it is a relative profit, which hangs in the scale,






opposite to a relative loss. I wish this may be well understood;






farther illustrations will make it clear.






    Next, let me suppose the scale of demand to preponderate






positively. In this case, the statesman should be still more upon






his guard, to provide a proportional supply; because the danger






here may at first put on a shew of profit, and deceive him.






    The consequences of this subversion of the balance are






either,






    First, That a competition will take place among the demanders






only, which will raise profits. Now if, after a short vibration,






the supply comes to be increased by the statesman's care, no harm






will ensue; competition will change sides, and profits will come






down again to the perfect standard. But if the scale of demand






remains preponderating, and so keeps profits high, the






consequence will be, that, in a little time, not only the






immediate seller of the goods, but also every one who has






contributed to the manufacture, will insist upon sharing these






new profits. Now the evil is not, that every one should share, or






that the profits should swell, as long as they are supported by






demand, and as long as they can truly be considered as






precarious; but the mischief is, that, in consequence of this






wide repartition, and by such profits subsisting for a long time,






they insensibly become consolidated, or, as it were, transformed






into the intrinsic value of the goods. This, I say, is brought






about by time; because the habitual extraordinary gains of every






one employed induce the more luxurious among them to change their






way of life insensibly, and fall into the habit of making greater






consumptions, and engage the more slothful to remain idle, till






they are exhausted. When therefore it happens, that large profits






have been made for a considerable time, and that they have had






the effect of forming a taste for a more expensive way of living






among the industrious, it will not be the cessation of the






demand, nor the swelling of the supply, which will engage them to






part with their gains. Nothing will produce this effect but sharp






necessity; and the bringing down of their profits, and the






throwing the workmen into distress, are then simultaneous; which






proves the truth of what I have said, that these profits become,






by long habit, virtually consolidated with the real value of the






merchandize. These are the consequences of a neglected simple






competition, which raises the profits upon industry, and keeps






the balance overturned for a considerable time.






    Secondly, Let me examine the consequences of this overturn in






the actual preponderancy of demand, when it does not occasion a






competition among the demanders, and consequently, when it does






not increase the profits upon industry.






    This case can only happen, when the commodity is not a matter






of great necessity, or even of great use; since the desire of






procuring it is not sufficient to engage the buyers to raise






their price; unless, indeed, this difference should proceed from






the ease of providing the same, in other markets, as cheap as






formerly. This last is a dangerous circumstance, and loudly calls






for the attention of the statesman. He must prevent the desertion






of the market, by a speedy supply for all the demand, and must






even perhaps give encouragement to manufacturers, to enable them






to diminish the prices fixed by the regular standard. This is the






situation of a nation which is in the way of losing branches of






her foreign trade; of which afterwards.






    Whatever therefore be the consequences of the actual






preponderancy of the scale of demand; that is, whether it tend to






raise profits, or to discredit the market; the statesman's care






should be directed immediately towards making the balance come






even of itself, without any shock, and that as soon as possible,






by increasing the supply. For if it be allowed to stand long in






this overturned state, natural consequences will operate a forced






restitution; that is, the rise in the price, or the call of a






foreign market, will effectually cut off a proportional part of






the demand, and leave the balance in an equilibrium,






disadvantageous to trade and industry.






    In the former case, the manufacturers were forced to starve,






by an natural restitution, when the relative profits and loss of






individuals balanced one another. Here the manufacturers are






enriched for a little time, by a rise of profits, relative to the






loss the nation sustains, by not supplying the whole demand. This






results from the competition of their customers; but so soon as






these profits become consolidated with the intrinsic value, they






will cease to have the advantage of profits, and, becoming in a






manner necessary to the existence of the goods, will cease to be






considered as advantageous. These forced restitutions then,






brought about, as we have said, by selling goods below their






value, by cutting off a part of the demand, or by sending it to






another market, resembles the operation of a carrier, who sets






his ass's burden even, by laying a stone upon the lightest end of






it. He however loses none of his merchandise; but the absurdity






of the statesman is still greater, for he appears willingly to






open the heavy end of the load, and to throw part of his






merchandise into the highway.






    I hope, by this time, I have sufficiently shewn the






difference in effect between the simple and the double






competition; between the vibrations of this balance of work and






demand, and the overturning of it. When it vibrates in






moderation, and by short alternate risings and sinkings, then






industry and trade go on prosperously, and are in harmony with






each other; because both parties gain. The industrious man is






recompenced in proportion to his ingenuity; the intrinsic value






of goods does not vary, nor deceive the merchant; profits on both






sides fluctuate according to demand, but never get time to






consolidate with, and swell the real value, and never altogether






disappear, and starve the workman.






    This happy state cannot be supported but by the care of the






statesman; and when he is found negligent in the discharge of






this part of his duty, the consequence is, that either the spirit






of industry, which, it is supposed, has cost him much pains to






cultivate, is extinguished, or the produce of it rises to so high






a value, as to be out of the reach of a multitude of purchasers.






    The progress towards the one or the other of these extremes






is easily perceived, by attending to the successive overturnings






of the balance. When these are often repeated on the same side,






and the balance set right, by a succession of forced restitutions






only, the same scale preponderating a-new, then is the last






period soon accomplished. When, on the contrary, the overturnings






are alternate, sometimes the scale of demand overturning the






balance, sometimes the scale of work, the last period is more






distant. Trade and industry subsist longer, but they remain in a






state of perpetual convulsion. On the other hand, when the






balance gently vibrates, then work and demand, that is, trade and






industry, like agriculture and population, prove mutually






assisting to each other, in promoting their reciprocal






augmentation.






    In order therefore to preserve a trading state from decline,






the greatest care must be taken, to support a perfect balance






between the hands employed in work and the demand for their






labour. That is to say, according to former definitions, to






prevent demand from ever standing long at an immoderate height,






by providing at all times a supply, sufficient to answer the






greatest that ever can be made: or, in other words, still, in






order to accustom my readers to certain expressions, to encourage






the great, and to discourage the high demand. In this case,






competition will never be found too strong on either side of the






contract, and profits will be moderate, but sure, on both.






    If, on the contrary, there be found too many hands for the






demand, work will fall too low for workmen to be able to live;






or, if there be too few, work will rise, and manufactures will






not be exported.






    For want of this just balance, no trading state has ever been






of long duration, after arriving at a certain height of






prosperity. We perceive in history the rise, progress, grandeur,






and decline of Sydon, Tyre, Carthage, Alexandria, and Venice, not






to come nearer home. While these states were on the growing hand,






they were powerful; when once they came to their height, they






immediately found themselves labouring under their own greatness.






The reason of this appears from what has been said.






    While there is a demand for the trade of any country,






inhabitants are always on the increasing hand. This is evident






from what has been so often repeated in the first book, and






confirmed by thousands of examples. There never was any branch of






trade established in any kingdom, province, city, or even






village; but such kingdoms, province, &c. increased in






inhabitants. While this gradual increase of people is in






proportion to the growing demand for hands, the balance between






work and demand is exactly kept up: but as all augmentations must






at last come to a stop, when this happens, inconveniences must






ensue, greater or less, according to the negligence or attention






of the statesman, and the violence or suddenness of the






revolution.













Chap. XI













Why in Time this Balance is destroyed













    Let us now examine what may be the reason why, in a trading






and industrious nation, time necessarily destroys the perfect






balance between work and demand.






    We have already pointed out one general cause, to wit, the






natural stop which must at last be put to augmentations of every






kind.






    Let us now apply this to circumstances, in order to discover






in what manner natural causes operate this stop, either by






preventing the increase of work, on one side of the balance, or






the increase of demand, on the other. When once we discover how






the stop is put to augmentations, we may safely conclude, that






the continuation of the same, or similar causes, will soon






produce a diminution, and operate a decline.






    We have traced the progress of industry, and shewn how it






goes hand in hand with the augmentation of subsistence, which is






the principal allurement to labour. Now the augmentation of food






is relative to the soil, and as long as this can be brought to






produce, at an expence proportioned to the value of the returns,






agriculture, without any doubt, will go forward in every country






of industry. But so soon as the progress of agriculture demands






an additional expence, which the natural return, at the stated






prices of subsistence, will not defray, agriculture comes to a






stop, and so would numbers, did not the consequences of industry






push them forward, in spite of small difficulties. The






industrious then, I say, continue to multiply, and the






consequence is, that food becomes scarce, and that the






inhabitants enter into competition for it.






    This is no contingent consequence, it is an infallible one;






because food is an article of the first necessity, and here the






provision is supposed to fall short of demand. This raises the






profits of those who have food ready to sell; and as the balance






upon this article must remain overturned for some time, without






the interposition of the statesman, these profits will be






consolidated with the price, and give encouragement to a more






expensive improvement of the soil. I shall here interrupt the






examination of the consequences of this revolution as to






agriculture, until I have examined the effects which the rise of






the price of food produces on industry, and on the demand for it.






    This augmentation on the value of subsistence must






necessarily raise the price of all work, because we are here






speaking of an industrious people fully employed, and because






subsistence is one of the three articles which compose the






intrinsic value of their work, as has been said.






    The rise therefore, upon the price of work, not being any






augmentation of that part of the price which we call profits, as






happens to be the case when a rise in demand has produced a






competition among the buyers, cannot be brought down but by






increasing the supply of subsistence; and were a statesman to






mistake the real cause of the rise, and apply the remedy of






increasing the quantity of work, in order to bring down the






market, instead of augmenting the subsistence, he would occasion






a great disorder; he would introduce the hurtful simple






competition between people who labour for moderate profits,






mentioned in the last chapter, and would throw such a






discouragement upon their industry, as would quickly extinguish






it altogether. On the other hand, did he imprudently augment the






subsistence, by large importations, he would put an end to the






expensive improvements of the soil, and this whole enterprise






would fall to nothing. Here then is a dilemma, out of which he






can extricate himself by a right application of public money,






only.






    Such a necessary rise in the price of labour may either






affect foreign exportation, or it may not, according to






circumstances. If it does, the price of subsistence, at any rate,






must be brought down at least to those who supply the foreign






demand; if it does not affect foreign exportation, matters may be






allowed to go on; but still the remedy must be ready at hand, to






be applied the moment it becomes expedient.






    There is one necessary augmentation upon the prices of






industry, brought about by a very natural cause, viz. the






increase of population, which may imply a more expensive






improvement of the soil; that is, an extension of agriculture.






This augmentation may very probably put a stop to the






augmentation of demand for many branches of manufactures,






consequently may stop the progress of industry; and if the same






causes continue to operate in a greater degree, it may also cut






off a part of the former demand, may discredit the market, open a






door to foreign consumption, and produce the inconveniences of






poverty and distress, in proportion to the degree of negligence






in the statesman.






    I shall now give another example, of a very natural






augmentation upon the intrinsic value of work, which does not






proceed from the increase of population, but from the progress of






industry itself; which implies no internal vice in a state, but






which is the necessary consequence of the reformation of a very






great one. This augmentation must be felt less or more in every






country, in proportion as industry becomes extended.






    We have said, that the introduction of manufactures naturally






tends. to purge the lands of superfluous mouths: now this is a






very slow and gradual operation. A consequence of it was said to






be (Book I. Chap. xx.) an augmentation of the price of labour,






because those who have been purged off, must begin to gain their






whole subsistence at the expence of those who employ them.






    If therefore, in the infancy of industry, any branch of it






shall find itself assisted in a particular province, by the cheap






labour of those mouths superfluously fed by the land, examples of






which are very frequent, this advantage must diminish, in






proportion as the cause of it ceases; that is, in proportion as






industry is extended, and as the superfluous mouths are of






consequence purged off.






    This circumstance is of the last importance to be attended to






by a statesman. Perhaps it was entirely owing to it, that






industry was enabled to set up its head in this corner. How many






examples could I give, of this assistance given to manufactures






in different provinces, where I have found the value of a day's






work, of spinning, for example, not equal to half the nourishment






of the person. This is a great encouragement to the making of






cloths; and accordingly we see some infant manufactures dispute






the market with the produce of the greatest dexterity; the






distaff dispute prices with the wheel. But when these provinces






come to be purged of their superfluous mouths, spinning becomes a






trade, and the spinners must live by it. Must not then prices






naturally rise? And if these are not supported by the statesman,






or if assistance is not given to these poor manufacturers, to






enable them to increase their dexterity, in order to compensate






what they are losing in cheapness, will not their industry fail?






Will not the poor spinners be extinguished? For it is not to be






expected, that the landlord will receive them back again from a






principle of charity, after he has discovered their former






uselessness.






    A third cause of a necessary augmentation upon the intrinsic






value of goods proceeds from taxes. A statesman must be very






negligent indeed, if he does not attend to the immediate






consequences of his own proper operations. I shall not enlarge on






this at present, as it would be an necessary anticipation; but I






shall return, to resume the part of my reasoning which I broke






off abruptly.






    I have observed, how the same cause which stops the progress






of industry, gives an encouragement to agriculture: how the rise






in the price of subsistence necessarily increases the price of






work to an industrious and well-employed people: how this cuts






off a part of the demand for work, or sends it to a foreign






market.






    Now all these consequences are entirely just, and yet they






seem Contradictory to another part of my reasoning, (Book I,






Chap. xvi.) where I set forth the advantages of a prodigal






consumption of the earth's produce as advantageous to






agriculture, by increasing the price of subsistence, without






taking notice, on the other hand, of the hurt thereby done to






industry, which supports the consumption of that produce.






    The one and the other chain of consequences is equally just,






and they appear contradictory upon the supposition only, that






there is no statesman at the helm. These contradictions represent






the alternate overturn of the balance. The duty of the statesman






is, to support the double competition every where, and to permit






the gentle alternate vibrations only of the two scales.






    When the progress of industry has augmented numbers, and made






subsistence scarce, he must estimate to what height it is






expedient that the price of subsistence should rise. If he finds,






that, in order to encourage the breaking up of new lands, the






price of it must rise too high and stand high too long, to






preserve the intrinsic value of goods at the same standard as






formerly; then he must assist agriculture with his purse, in






order that exportation may not be discouraged. This will have the






effect of increasing subsistence, according to the true






proportion of the augmentation required, without raising the






price of it too high. And if this operation be the work of time,






and the demand for the augmentation be pressing, he must continue






to assist his agriculture and have subsistence imported, or






brought from abroad, during that interval. This supply he may cut






off whenever he pleases, that is, whenever it ceases to be






necessary.






    If the supply comes from a sister country, it must be so






taken, as to occasion no violent revolution when it comes to be






interrupted a-new. As for example: One province demands a supply






of grain from another, for a few years only, until their own soil






can be improved, so as to provide them sufficiently. The






statesman should encourage agriculture, no doubt, in the province






furnishing, and let the farmers know the extent of the demand,






and the time it may probably last, as near as possible; but he






must discourage the plucking up of vineyards, and even perhaps






the breaking up of great quantities of old pasture; because, upon






the ceasing of the demand, such changes upon the agriculture of






the province furnishing, may occasion a hurtful revolution.






    While this foreign supply is allowed to come in, the






statesman should be closely employed in giving such encouragement






to agriculture at home, according to the principles hereafter to






be deduced, as may nearly balance the discouragement given to it






by this newly permitted importation. If this step be neglected,






the consequence may be, that the foreign supply will go on






increasing every year, and will extinguish the agriculture






already established in the country, instead of supplying a






temporary exigency, which is within the power of the country






itself to furnish. These, I suppose, were the principles attended






to by the government of England, upon opening their ports for the






importation of provisions from Ireland.






    The principle, therefore, being to support a gentle increase






of food, inhabitants, work, and demand, the statesman must suffer






small vibrations in the balance, which, by alternate competition,






may favour both sides of the contract; but whenever the






competition stands too long upon either side, and threatens a






subversion of the balance, then, with an artful hand, he must






endeavour to load the lighter scale, and never, but in cases of






the greatest necessity, have recourse to the expedient of taking






any thing from the heavier.






    In treating of the present state of France, we observed, in






the chapter above-cited, how the vibration of the balance of






agriculture and population may carry food and numbers to their






height; but as foreign trade was not there the direct object of






inquiry, I did not care to introduce this second balance of work






and demand, for fear of perplexing my subject. I hope I have now






abundantly shewn the force of the different principles, and it






must depend upon the judgment of the statesman to combine them






together, and adapt them to his plan: a thing impossible to be






even chalked out by any person who is not immediately at the head






of the affairs of a nation. My work resembles the formation of






the pure colours for painting, it is the artist's business to mix






them: all I can pretend to, is to reason consequentially from






suppositions. If at any time I go farther, I exceed my plan, and






I confess the fault.






    I shall now conclude my chapter by introducing a new subject.






I have been at pains to shew how the continued neglect of a






statesman, in watching over the vibrations of the balance of work






and demand, naturally produces a total subversion of it; but this






is not, of itself, sufficient to undo an industrious people.






Other nations must be taught to profit of the disorder; and this






is what I call the competition between nations.













Chap. XII













Of the Competition between Nations













    Mankind daily profit by experience, and acquire knowledge at






their own cost.






    We have said that what lays the foundation of foreign trade,






is the ease and convenience which strangers find in having their






wants supplied by those who have set industry on foot. The






natural consequence of this foreign demand is to bring in wealth,






and to promote augmentations of every kind. As long as these go






on, it will be impossible for other nations to rival the traders,






because their situation is every day growing better: dexterity






increasing diminishes the price of work; every circumstance, in






short, becomes more favourable; the balance never vibrates, but






by one of the scales growing positively heavier, and it is






constantly coming even by an increase of weight on the other






side. We have seen how these revolutions never can raise the






intrinsic value of goods, and have observed that this is the road






to greatness.






    The slower any man travels, the longer he is in coming to his






journey's end; and when his health requires travelling, and that






he cannot go far from home, he rides out in a morning and comes






home to dinner.






    This represents another kind of vibration of the balance, and






when things are come to such a height as to render a train of






augmentations impossible, the next best expedient is, to permit






alternate vibrations of diminution and augmentation.






    Work augments, I shall suppose, and no more demand can be






procured; it may then be a good expedient to diminish hands, by






making soldiers of them; by employing them in public works; or by






sending them out of the country to become useful in its colonies.






These operations give a relative weight to the scale of demand,






and revive a competition on that side. Then the industrious hands






must be gently increased a-new, and the balance kept in vibration






as long as possible. By these alternate augmentations and






diminutions, hurtful revolutions, and the subversion of the






balance, may be prevented. This is an expedient for standing






still without harm, when one cannot go forward to advantage.






    If such a plan be followed, an industrious nation will






continue in a situation to profit of the smallest advantage from






revolutions in other countries, occasioned by the subversion of






their balance; which may present an opportunity of new vibrations






by alternate augmentations.






    On such occasions, the abilities of a statesman are






discovered, in directing and conducting what I call the delicacy






of national competition. We shall then observe him imitating the






mariners, who do not take in their sails when the wind falls






calm, but keep them trimmed and ready to profit of the least






breath of a favourable gale. Let me follow my comparison: The






trading nations of Europe represent a fleet of ships, every one






striving who shall get first to a certain port. The statesman of






each is the master. The same wind blows upon all; and this wind






is the principle of self-interest, which engages every consumer






to seek the cheapest and the best market. No trade wind can be






more general, or more constant than this; the natural advantages






of each country represent the degree of goodness of each vessel;






but the master who sails his ship with the greatest dexterity,






and he who can lay his rivals under the lee of his sails, will,






caeteris paribus, undoubtedly get before them, and maintain his






advantage.






    While a trading nation, which has got an established






advantage over her rivals, can be kept from declining, it will be






very difficult, if not impossible, for any other to enter into






competition with her: but when the balance begins to vibrate by






alternate diminutions; when a decrease of demand operates a






failure of supply; when this again is kept low, in order to raise






the competition of consumers; and when, instead of restoring the






balance by a gentle augmentation, a people are engaged, from the






allurements of high profits, to discourage every attempt to bring






down the market; then the scissors of foreign rivalship will






fairly trim off the superfluity of demand; prices will fall, and






a return of the same circumstances will prepare the way for






another vibration downwards.






    Such operations as these, are just what is requisite for






facilitating the competition of rival nations; and are the only






means possible to engage those who did not formerly work, to






begin and supply themselves.






    Did matters stand so, the evil would be supportable;






strangers would supply the superfluities only of demand, and the






balance would still be found in a kind of equilibrium at home.






But, alas ! even this happy state can be of short duration only.






The beginnings of trade with the strangers will prove just as






favourable to the vibration of their balance, by augmentations,






as it was formerly to the home-traders; and now every






augmentation to those, must imply a diminution to the others.






What will then become of such hands, in the trading nation, as






subsist by supplying the foreign market only? Will not this






revolution work the same effect, as to these, as if an additional






number of hands had been employed to supply the same consumption?






And will not this utterly destroy the balance among the traders,






by throwing an unsurmountable competition on the side of the






supply? It will however have a different effect from what might






have happened, if the same number of hands had been thrown into






the trading nation; for, in this case, they might destroy the






consolidated profits only upon labour, and perhaps restore the






balance: the inconvenience would be equally felt by every






workman, but profit would result to the public. But in the other






case, the old traders will find no foreign sale for their work;






these branches of industry will fall below the price of






subsistence, and the new beginners will have reasonable profits






in supplying their own wants, I say reasonable, because this






transition of trade from one nation to another, never can be






sudden or easy; and can take place in proportion only to the rise






in the intrinsic value of goods in that which is upon the






decline, not in proportion to the rise in their profits upon the






sale of them: for as long as the most extravagant profits do not






become consolidated, as we have said, with the value of the work,






a diminution of competition among the consumers, which may be






occasioned by a beginning of foreign industry, will quickly make






them disappear; and this will prove a fatal blow to the first






undertakings of the rival nations. But when once they are fairly






so consolidated, that prices can no more come down of themselves,






and that the statesman will not lend his helping hand, then the






new beginners pluck up courage, and set out by making small






profits: because in all new undertakings there is mismanagement






and considerable loss; and nothing discourages mankind from new






undertakings more than difficult beginnings.






    As long, therefore, as a trading state is upon the rising






hand, or even not upon the decline, and while the balance is kept






right without the expedient of alternate diminutions, work will






always be supplied from this quarter, cheaper than it possibly






can be furnished from any other, where the same dexterity does






not prevail. But when a nation begins to lose ground, then the






very columns which supported her grandeur, begin, by their






weight, to precipitate her decline. The wealth of her citizens






will support and augment the home demand, and encourage that






blind fondness for high profits, which it is impossible to






preserve. The moment these consolidate to a certain degree, they






have the effect of banishing from the market the demand of






strangers, who only can enrich her. It is in vain to look for






their return after the nation has discovered her mistake,






although she should be able to correct it; because, before this






can happen, her rivals will have profited of the golden






opportunity, and during the infatuation of the traders, will,






even by their assistance, have got fairly over the painful






struggle against their superior dexterity.






    Thus it happens, that so soon as matters begin to go backward






in a trading nation, and that by the increase of their riches,






luxury and extravagance take place of oeconomy and frugality






among the industrious; when the inhabitants themselves foolishly






enter into competition with strangers for their own commodities;






and when a statesman looks coolly on, with his arms across, or






takes it into his head, that it is not his business to interpose,






the prices of the dextrous workman will rise above the amount of






the mismanagement, loss, and reasonable profits, of the new






beginners; and when this comes to be the case, trade will decay






where it flourished most, and take root in a new soil. This I






call a competition between nations.













Chap. XIII













How far the Form of Government of a particular Country may be






favourable or unfavourable to a Competition with other Nations,






in matters of Commerce













    The question before us, though relative to another science,






is not altogether foreign to this. I introduce it in this place,






not so much for the sake of connexion, as by way of an






illustration, which at the same time that it may serve as an






exercise upon general principles, may also prove a relaxation to






the mind, after so long a chain of close reasoning.






    In setting out, I informed my readers that I intended to






treat of the political oeconomy of free nations only; and upon






every occasion where I have mentioned slavery, I have pointed out






how far the nature of it is contrary to the advancement of






private industry, the inseparable concomitant of foreign and






domestic trade.






    No term is less understood than that of liberty, and it is






not my intention, at present, to enter into a particular inquiry






into all the different acceptations of it.






    By a people's being free, I understand no more than their






being governed by general laws, well known, not depending upon






the ambulatory will of any man, or any set of men, and






established so as not to be changed, but in a regular and uniform






way; for reasons which regard the body of the society, and not






through favour or prejudice to particular persons, or particular






classes. So far as a power of dispensing with, restraining or






extending general laws, is left in the hands of any governor, so






far I consider public liberty as precarious. I do not say it is






hereby hurt; this will depend upon the use made of such






prerogatives. According to this definition of liberty, a people






may be found to enjoy freedom under the most despotic forms of






government; and perpetual service itself, where the master's






power is limited according to natural equity, is not altogether






incompatible with liberty in the servant.






    Here new ideas present themselves concerning the general






principles of subordination and dependence among mankind; which I






shall lay before my reader before I proceed, submitting the






justness of them to his decision.






    As these terms are both relative, it is proper to observe,






that by subordination is implied an authority which superiors






have over inferiors; and by dependence, is implied certain






advantages which the inferiors draw from their subordination: a






servant is under subordination to his master, and depends upon






him for his subsistence.






    Dependence is the only bond of society and I have observed,






in the fourth chapter of the first book, that the dependence of






one man upon another for food, is a very natural introduction to






slavery. This was the first contrivance mankind fell upon, in






order to become useful to one another.






    Upon the abolishing of slavery, from a principle of






christianity, the next step taken was the establishment of an






extraordinary subordination between the different classes of the






people; this was the principle of the feudal government.






    The last refinement, and that which has brought liberty to be






generally extended to the lowest denominations of a people,






without destroying that dependence necessary to serve as a band






of society, was the introduction of industry.. by this is






implied, the circulation of an adequate equivalent for every






service, which procures to the rich every advantage they could






expect to reap, either from the servitude or dependence of the






poor'; and to these again, every comfort they could wish to enjoy






under the mildest slavery, or most gentle subordination.






    From this exposition, I divide dependence into three kinds.






The first natural, between parents and children; the second






political between masters and servants, lords and vassals,






Princes and subjects; the third commercial, between the rich and






the industrious.






    May I be allowed to transgress the limits of my subject for a






few lines, and to dip so far into the principles of the law of






nature, as to enquire, how far subordination among men is thereby






authorized? I think I may decide, that so far as the






subordination is in proportion to the dependence, sofar it is






reasonable and just. This represents an even balance. If the






scale of subordination is found too weighty, tyranny ensues; and






licentiousness is implied, in proportion as it rises above the






level. From this let me draw some conclusions.






    First, He who depended upon another, for the preservation of






a life justly forfeited, and at all times in the power of him who






spared it, was, by the civil law, called a slave. This surely is






the highest degree of dependence.






    Secondly, He who depends upon another for every thing






necessary for his subsistence, seems to be in the second degree;






this is the dependence of children upon their parents.






    Thirdly, He who depends upon another for the means of






procuring subsistence to himself by his own labour, stands in the






third degree: this I take to have been the case between the






feudal lords, and the lowest classes of their vassals, the






labourers of the ground.






    Fourthly, He who depends totally upon the sale of his own






industry, stands in the fourth degree: this is the case of






tradesmen and manufacturers, with respect to those who employ






them.






    These I take to be the different degrees of subordination






between man and man, considered as members of the same society.






    In proportion, therefore, as certain classes, or certain






individuals become more dependent than formerly, in the same






proportion ought their just subordination to increase: and in






proportion as they become less dependent than formerly, in the






same proportion ought this just subordination to diminish. This






seems to be a rational principle: next for the application.






    I deduce the origin of the great subordination under the






feudal government, from the necessary dependence of the lower






classes for their subsistence. They consumed the produce of the






land, as the price of their subordination, not as the reward of






their industry in making it produce.






    I deduce modern liberty from the independence of the same






classes, by the introduction of industry, and circulation of an






adequate equivalent for every service.






    If this doctrine be applied in order to resolve the famous






question so much debated, concerning the origin of supreme






authority, so far as it is a question of the law of nature, I do






not find the decision so very difficult: All authority is in






proportion to dependence, and must vary according to






circumstances.






    I think it is as rational to say, that the fatherly power






proceeded originally from the act of the children, as to say,






that the great body of the people who were fed, and protected by






a few great lords, was the fountain of power, and creator of






subordination. Those who have no other equivalent to give for






their food and protection, must pay in personal service, respect,






and submission; and so soon as they come to be a situation to pay






a proper equivalent for these dependences, so far they acquire a






title to liberty and independence. The feudal lords, therefore,






who, with reason, had an entire authority over many of their






vassals, being subdued by their King; the usurpation was upon






their rights, not upon the rights of the lower classes: but when






a King came to extend the power he had over the vassals of the






lords, to the inhabitants of cities, who had been independent of






this subordination, his usurpation became evident.






    The rights of Kings, therefore, are to be sought for in






history; and not founded upon the supposition of tacit contracts






between them and their people, inferred from the principles of an






imaginary law of nature, which makes all mankind equal: nature






can never be in opposition to common reason.






    The general principle I have laid down, appears, in my humble






opinion, more rational than this imaginary contract; and as






consonant to the full with the spirit of free government. If the






original tacit contract of government between Prince and people






is admitted universally, then all governments ought to be






similar; and every subordination, which appears contrary to the






entire liberty and independence of the lowest classes, ought to






be construed as tyrannical: whereas, according to my principle,






the subordination of classes may, in different countries, be






vastly different; the prerogative of one sovereign may, from






different circumstances, be far more extended than that of






another.






    May not one have attained the sovereignty (by the free






election of the people, I suppose) because of the great extent of






his possessions, number of his vassals and dependents, quantity






of wealth, alliances and connexions with neighbouring sovereigns?






Had not, for example, such a person as Hugh Capet, the greatest






feudal lord of his time, a right to a much more extensive






jurisdiction over his subjects, than could reasonably be aspired






to by a King of Poland, sent from France, or from Germany, and






set at the head of a republic, where he has not one person






depending upon him for any thing?






    The power of Princes, as Princes, must then be distinguished






from the power they derive from other circumstances, which do not






necessarily follow in consequence of their elevation to the






throne. It would, I think, be the greatest absurdity to advance,






that the title of King abolishes, of itself, the subordination






due to the person who exercises the office of that high






magistracy.






    Matter of fact, which is stronger than all reasoning,






demonstrates the force of the principle here laid down. Do we not






see how subordination rises and falls under different reigns,






under a rich Elizabeth, and a necessitous Charles, under a






powerful Austrian, and a distressed Bavarian Emperor? I proceed






no farther in the examination of this matter: perhaps my reader






has decided that I have gone too far already.






    From these principles may be deduced the boundaries of






subordination. A people who depend upon nothing but their own






industry for their subsistence, ought to be under no farther






subordination than what is necessary for their protection. And as






the protection of the whole body of such a people implies the






protection of every individual, so every political subordination






should there be general and equal: no person, no class should be






under a greater subordination than another. This is the






subordination of the laws; and whenever laws establish a






subordination more than what is proportionate to the dependence






of those who are subordinate, so far such laws may be considered






as contrary to natural equity, and arbitrary.






    These things premised, I come to the question proposed,






namely, How far particular forms of government are favourable or






unfavourable to a competition with other nations, in point of






commerce?






    If we reason from facts, and from experience, we shall find,






that trade and industry have been found to flourish best under






the republican form, and under those which have come the nearest






to it. May I be allowed to say, that, perhaps, one principal






reason for this has been, that under these forms the






administration of the laws has been the most uniform, and






consequently, that most liberty has actually been there enjoyed..






I say actually, because I have said above, that in my acceptation






of the term, liberty is equally compatible with monarchy as with






democracy; I do not say the enjoyment of it is equally secure






under both; because under the first it is much more liable to be






destroyed. The life of the democratical system is equality.






Monarchy conveys the idea of the greatest inequality possible.






Now, if, on one side, the equality of the democracy secures






liberty; on the other, the moderation in expence discourages






industry; and if, on one side, the inequality of the monarchy






endangers liberty, the progress of luxury encourages industry on






the other. From whence we may conclude, that the democratical






system is naturally the best for giving birth to foreign trade;






the monarchical, for the refinement of the luxurious arts, and






for promoting a rapid circulation of inland commerce.






    The danger which liberty is exposed to under monarchy, and






the discouragement to industry, from the frugality of the






democracy, are only the natural and immediate effects of the two






forms of government; and these inconveniences will take place






only, while statesmen neglect the interest of commerce, so far as






not to make it an object of administration.






    The disadvantage, therefore, of the monarchical form, in






point of trade and industry, does not proceed from the inequality






it establishes among the citizens, but from the consequence of






this inequality, which is very often accompanied with an






arbitrary and undeterminate subordination between the individuals






of the higher classes, and those of the lower; or between those






vested with the execution of the laws, and the body of the






people. The moment it is found that any subordination within the






monarchy, between subject and subject, is left without proper






bounds prescribed, liberty is so far at an end. Nay monarchy






itself is hereby hurt, as this undeterminate subordination






implies an arbitrary power in the state, not vested in the






monarch. Arbitrary power never can be delegated; for if it be






arbitrary, it may be turned against the monarch, as well as






against the subject.






    I might therefore say, that when such a power in individuals






is constitutional in the monarchy, such monarchy is not a






government, but a tyranny, and therefore falls without the limits






of our subject; and when such a power is anti-constitutional, and






yet is exercised, that it is an abuse, and should be overlooked.






But as the plan of this inquiry engages me to investigate the






operations of general principles, and the consequences they






produce, I cannot omit, in this place, to point out those which






flow from an indeterminate subordination, from whatever cause it






may proceed.






    Whether this indeterminate subordination between individuals,






be a vice in the constitution of the government, or an abuse, it






is the same thing as to the consequences which result from it. It






is this which checks and destroys industry, and which in a great






measure prevents its progress from being equal in all countries.






This difference in the form or administration of governments, is






the only one which it is essentially necessary to examine in this






inquiry. and, so essential it is, in my opinion, that I imagine






it would be less hurtful, in a plan for the establishment of






commerce, fairly, and at once to enslave the lower classes of the






inhabitants, and to make them vendible like other commodities,






than to leave them nominally free, burthened with their own






maintenance, charged with the education of their children, and at






the same time under an irregular subordination; that is, liable






at every moment to be loaded with new prestations or impositions,






either in work or otherwise, and to be fined or imprisoned at






will by their superiors.






    It produces no difference, whether these irregularities be






exercised by those of the superior classes, or by the statesman






and his substitutes. It is the irregularity of the exactions more






than the extent of them which ruins industry. It renders living






precarious, and the very idea of industry should carry along with






it, not only an assured livelihood, but a certain profit over and






above.






    Let impositions be ever so high, provided they be






proportional, general, gradually augmented, and permanent, they






may have indeed the effect of stopping foreign trade, and of






starving the idle, but they never will ruin the industrious; as






we shall have occasion to shew in treating of taxation. Whereas,






when they are arbitrary, falling unequally upon individuals of






the same condition, sudden, and frequently changing their object,






it is impossible for industry to stand its ground. Such a system






of oeconomy introduces an unequal competition among those of the






same class, it stops industrious people in the middle of their






career, discourages others from exposing to the eyes of the






public the ease of their circumstances, consequently encourages






hoarding; this again excites rapaciousness upon the side of the






statesman, who sees himself frustrated in his schemes of laying






hold of private wealth.






    From this a new set of inconveniences follow. He turns his






views upon solid property. This inspires the landlords with






indignation against him who can load them at will; and with envy






against the monied interest, who can baffle his attempts. This






class again is constantly upon the catch to profit of the public






distress for want of money. What is the consequence of all this?






It is that the lowest classes of the people, who ought by






industry to enrich the state, find on one hand the monied






interest constantly amassing, in order to lend to the state,






instead of distributing among them, by seasonable loans, their






superfluous income, with a view to share the reasonable profits






of their ingenuity; and on the other hand, they find the






emissaries of taxation robbing them of the seed before it is






sown, instead of waiting for a share in the harvest.






    Under the feudal form of government, liberty and independence






were confined to the nobility. Birth opened the door of






preferment to some, and birth as effectually shut it against






others. I have often observed how, by reason and from experience,






such a form of government must be unfavourable both to trade and






industry.






    From reason it is plain, that industry must give wealth, and






wealth will give power, if he who possesses it be left the master






to employ it as he pleases. A government could not therefore






encourage a system which tended to throw power into the hands of






those who were made to obey only. It was consequently very






natural for the nobility to be jealous of wealthy merchants, and






of every one who became easy and independent by means of his own






industry; experience proved how exactly this principle regulated






their administration.






    A statesman ought, therefore, to consider attentively every






circumstance of the constitution of his country, before he sets






on foot the modern system of trade and industry. I am far from






being of opinion that this is the only road to happiness,






security, and ease; though, from the general taste of the times I






live in, it be the system I am principally employed to examine. A






country may be abundantly happy, and sufficiently formidable to






those who come to attack it, without being extremely rich. Riches






indeed are forbid to all who have neither mines, or foreign






trade.






    If a country be found labouring under many natural






disadvantages from inland situation, barren soil, distant






carriage, it would be in vain to attempt a competition with other






nations in foreign markets. All that can be then undertaken is a






passive trade, and that so far only as it can bring in additional






wealth. When little money can be acquired, the statesman's






application must be, to make that already acquired to circulate






as much as possible, in order to give bread to every one in the






society.






    In countries where the government is vested in the hands of






the great lords, as is the case in all aristocracies, as was the






case under the feudal government, and as it still is the case in






many countries in Europe, where trade, however, and industry are






daily gaining ground; the statesman who sets the new system of






political oeconomy on foot, may depend upon it, that either his






attempt will fail, or the constitution of the government will






change. If he destroys all arbitrary dependence between






individuals, the wealth of the industrious will share, if not






totally root out the power of the grandees. If he allows such a






dependence to subsist, his project will fail.






    While Venice and Genoa flourished, they were obliged to open






the doors of their senate to the wealthy citizens, in order to






prevent their being broken down. What is venal nobility? The






child of commerce, the indispensible consequence of industry, and






a middle term, which our Gothic ancestors found themselves






obliged to adopt, in order not entirely to lose their own rank in






the state. Money, they found, must carry off the fasces, (sic),






so they chose rather to adopt the wealthy plebeians, and to






clothe ignoble shoulders with their purple mantle, than to allow






these to wrest all authority out of the hands of the higher






class. By this expedient, a sudden revolution has often been






prevented. Some kingdoms have been quit for a bloody rebellion or






a long civil war. Other countries have likewise demonstrated the






force of the principles here laid down: a wealthy populace has






broken their chains to pieces, and overturned the very






foundations of the feudal system.






    All these violent convulsions have been owing to the






short-sightedness of statesmen; who, inattentive to the






consequences of growing wealth and industry, foolishly imagined






that hereditary subordination was to subsist among classes, whose






situation, with respect to each other, was entirely changed.






    The pretorian cohorts were at first subordinate to the orders






of the Emperors, and were the guards of the city of Rome. The






Janissaries are understood to be under the command of the






principal officers of the Port. So soon as the leading men of






Rome and Constantinople, who naturally were entitled to govern






the state, applied to these tumultuous bodies for their






protection and assistance, they in their turn, made sensible of






their own importance, changed the constitution, and shared in the






government.






    A milder revolution, entirely similar, is taking place in






modern times; and an attentive spectator may find amusement in






viewing the progress of it in many states of Europe. Trade and






industry are in vogue; and their establishment is occasioning a






wonderful fermentation with the remaining fierceness of the






feudal constitution.






    Trade and industry owed their establishment to war and to






ambition; and perhaps mankind may hope to see the day when this






establishment will put an end to the first, by exposing the






expensive folly of the latter.






    Trade and industry, I say, owed their establishment to the






ambition of princes who supported and favoured the plan in the






beginning, principally with a view to enrich themselves, and






thereby to become formidable to their neighbours. But they did






not discover, until experience taught them, that the wealth they






drew from such fountains was but the overflowing of the spring;






and that an opulent, bold, and spirited people, having the fund






of the prince's wealth in their own hands, have it also in their






own power, when it becomes strongly their inclination, to shake






off his authority. The consequence of this change has been the






introduction of a more mild, and a more regular plan of






administration. The money gatherers are become more useful to






princes, than the great lords; and those who are fertile in






expedients for establishing public credit, and for drawing money






from the coffers of the rich, by the imposition of taxes, have






been preferred to the most wise and most learned counsellors.






    As this system is new, no wonder if it has produced phenomena






both new and surprising. Formerly, the power of Princes was






employed to destroy liberty, and to establish arbitrary






subordination; but in our days, we have seen those who have best






comprehended the true principles of the new plan of politics,






arbitrarily limiting the power of the higher classes, and thereby






applying their authority towards the extension of public liberty,






by extinguishing every subordination, but that due to the






established laws.






    The fundamental maxim of some of the greatest ministers, has






been to restrain the power of the great lords. The natural






inference that people drew from such a step, was, that the






minister thereby intended to make every thing depend on the






prince's will only. This I do not deny. But what use have we seen






made of this new acquisition of power? Those who look into events






with a political eye, may perceive several acts of the most






arbitrary authority exercised by some late European sovereigns,






with no other view than to establish public liberty upon a more






extensive bottom.






    And although the prerogative of some princes be increased






considerably beyond the bounds of the ancient constitution, even






to such a degree as perhaps justly to deserve the name of






usurpation; yet the consequences resulting from the revolution,






cannot every where be said, upon the whole, to have impaired what






I call public liberty. I should be at no loss to prove this






assertion from matters of fact, and by examples, did I think it






proper: it seems better to prove it from reason.






    When once a state begins to subsist by the consequences of






industry, there is less danger to be apprehended from the power






of the sovereign. The mechanism of his administration becomes






more complex, and, as was observed in the introduction to the






first book, he finds himself so bound up by the laws of his






political oeconomy, that every transgression of them runs him






into new difficulties.






    I speak of governments only which are conducted






systematically, constitutionally, and by general laws; and when I






mention princes, I mean their councils. The principles I am






enquiring into, regard the cool administration of their






government; it belongs to another branch of politics, to contrive






bulwarks against their passions, vices and weaknesses, as men.






    I say, therefore, that from the time states have begun to be






supported by the consequences of industry, the plan of






administration has become more moderate; has been changing and






refining by degrees; and every change, as has been often






observed, must be accompanied with inconveniences.






    It is of governments as of machines, the more they are






simple, the more they are solid and lasting; the more they are






artfully composed, the more they become useful; but the more apt






they are to be out of order.






    The Lacedemonian form may be compared to the wedge, the most






solid and compact of all the mechanical powers. Those of modern






states to watches, which are continually going wrong; sometimes






the spring is found too weak, at other times too strong for the






machine: and when the wheels are not made according to a






determinate proportion, by the able hands of a Graham, or a






Julien le Roy, they do not tally well with one another; then the






machine stops, and if it be forced, some part gives way; and the






workman's hand becomes necessary to set it right.













Chap. XIV













Security, Ease and Happiness, no inseparable Concomitants of






Trade and Industry













    The republic of Lycurgus represents the most perfect plan of






political oeconomy, in my humble opinion, anywhere to be met






with, either in ancient or modern times. That it existed cannot






be called in question, any more than that it proved the most






durable of all those established among the Greeks; and if at last






it came to fail, it was more from the abuses which gradually were






introduced into it, than from any vice in the form.






    The simplicity of the institution made the solidity of it;






and had the Lacedemonians at all times adhered to the principles






of their government, and spirit of their constitution, they might






have perhaps subsisted to this very day.






    My intention, in this chapter, is not to enter into a






critical disquisition concerning the mechanism of every part of






the Spartan republic; but to compare the general plan of






Lycurgus's political oeconomy with the principles we have been






laying down.






    Of this plan we have a description in the life of this






legislator written by Plutarch, one of the most judicious authors






to be met with in any age.






    This historian flourished at least 800 years after the






institution of the plan he describes. A plan never reduced into a






system of written laws, but stamped at first upon the minds of






the Spartans by the immediate authority of the gods, which made






them submit to the most violent revolution that perhaps ever took






place in any nation, and which they supported for so many ages by






the force of education alone.






    As the whole of Lycurgus's laws was transmitted by tradition






only, it is not to be supposed, that the description Plutarch, or






indeed any of the ancients, have given us of this republic, can






be depended on with certainty as a just representation of every






part of the system laid down by that great statesman. But on the






other hand, we may be very sure, that as to the outlines of the






institution, we have them transmitted to us in all their purity'.






and, in what relates to my subject, I have no occasion to touch






on any particulars which may admit of the smAllest controversy,






as to the matter of fact.






    Property among the Lacedemonians, at the time when Lycurgus






planned his institution, was very unequally divided: the






consequence of which, says our historian, was to draw many poor






people into the city, where the wealth was gathered into few






hands; that is according to our language, the luxury of the rich,






who lived in the city, had purged the lands of useless mouths,






and the instability of the government had rendered industry






precarious, which must have opened the door to general distress






among all the lower classes.






    The first step our legislator took, was to prepare the spirit






of the people, so as to engage them to submit to a total reform,






which could not fail of being attended with innumerable






inconveniences.






    For this purpose he went to Delphi, without having






communicated his design to any body. The Pythia declared him to






be the darling of the gods, and rather a god than a man; and






publicly gave out, that Apollo had delivered to him alone the






plan of a republic which far exceeded every other in perfection.






    What a powerful engine was this in the hands of a profound






politician, who had travelled over the world with a previous






intention to explore the mysteries of the science of government!






and what advantages did such an authentic recommendation, coming






directly (as was believed) from the voice of the Divinity, give






him over a superstitious people, in establishing whatever form of






government he thought most proper!






    The sagacious Lacedemonian did not, however, entirely depend






upon the blind submission of his countrymen to the dictates of






the oracle; but wisely judged that some preparatory steps might






still be necessary. He communicated, therefore, his plan, first






to his friends, and then by degrees to the principal people of






the state, who certainly never could have been brought to relish






an innovation so prejudicial to their interest, had it not been






from the deepest reverence and submission to the will of the






gods. Assured of their assistance, he appeared in the market






place, accompanied by his party, all in arms; and having imposed






respect, he laid the foundation of his government by the






nomination of a senate.






    Whatever regards any other object than his plan of political






oeconomy, shall be here passed over in silence. It is of no






consequence to my inquiry, where the supreme power was vested: it






is sufficient to know that there was an authority enough in the






state to support the execution of his plan.






    He destroyed all inequality at one stroke. The property of






all the lands of the state was thrown together, and became at the






disposal of the legislator. Every branch of industry was






proscribed to the citizens. And a monied interest was made to






disappear, by the introduction of iron coin. The lands he divided






into equal lots, according to the number of citizens.






    Thus all were rendered entirely equal in point of fortune, as






neither wealth, industry, or lands, could give a superiority to






any body. From this part of the plan I conclude, that Lycurgus






discovered the utter insufficiency of an agrarian law for






establishing equality among the individuals of a state, without






proscribing, at the same time, both wealth and industry. A






circumstance which seems to have escaped every other statesman in






ancient times, as well as the modern patrons of equality and






simplicity of manners. The lands were cultivated by the Helotes,






who were nourished from them, and who were obliged to deliver the






surplus, that is, a determinate quantity of fruits, to the






proprietor of the lot. Every necessary mechanic art was likewise






exercised by this body of slaves.






    By this distribution, the produce of the earth (that is every






article of nourishment) came free and without cost to every






individual of the state. The Spartan landlords were rather






overseers of the slaves, and collectors of the public






subsistence, than direct proprietors of the soil which produced






it. For although every man was fed from his own lands, and






provided his own portion, yet this portion was regulated, and was






to be consumed in public; and any one who pretended to eat alone,






or before he came to the public hall, was held in the utmost






contempt.






    Their clothing was the most simple possible, perfectly alike,






and could be purchased for a small value. This frugality produced






no bad effect; because no man lived by his industry. Arts, as has






been said, were exercised by the Helotes, the property of private






citizens; and if such masters as entertained manufacturing slaves






gained by the traffic (as some must do) every method of profiting






of their superior riches was cut off.






    The Spartans were continually together; they had nothing to






do but to divert themselves; and their amusements were mostly






martial exercises. The regulations of these numerous assemblies






(which were compared, with great elegance and justness, to swarms






of bees) cut off all outward marks of distinction. There was not






a possibility for luxury to introduce itself, either in eating,






drinking, cloathing, furniture, or any other expence.






    Here then was a whole nation fed and provided for






gratuitously; there was not the least occasion for industry. the






usefulness of which, we have shewn principally to consist in its






proving an expedient for procuring for the necessitous, what the






Spartans found provided for them without labour.






    Under such circumstances we may conclude, from the principles






we have laid down, that a people thus abundantly nourished, must






have multiplied exceedingly. And so no doubt they did. But the






regulation of the lots permitted no more than a fixed number of






citizens. Whenever, therefore, numbers were found to exceed this






standard, the supernumeraries were dismissed, and sent to form






colonies. And when the Helotes increased too much, and thereby






began to rise above the proportion of the labour required of






them, in order to prevent the consuming the food of their






masters, which they had in their hands, and thereby becoming






idle, licentious, and consequently dangerous to the state, it was






permitted to destroy them by way of a military exercise,






conducted by stratagem and address; arts which this people






constantly preferred in war, to labour, strength and intrepidity.






    This appears a very barbarous custom, and I shall not offer






any thing as an apology for it, but the ferocity of the manners






of those times. Abstracting from the cruelty, the restraining the






numbers of this class within certain limits, was absolutely






necessary. The Lacedemonian slaves were in many respects far






happier than those of other nations. They were in reality a body






of farmers, which paid a certain quantity of fruits out of every






lot; to wit, 70 medimni of barley: their numbers were not






recruited from abroad, as elsewhere, but supported by their own






propagation; consequently there was an absolute necessity either






to prevent the over multiplication of them, or to diminish an






income proportioned exactly to the necessities of the state: and






what expedient could be fallen upon? They were slaves, and






therefore, could not be inrolled in the number of citizens; they






could not be sold to strangers, for money which was forbid; and






they were of no use to industry. No wonder then if the fierceness






of the manners of those days permitted the inhuman treatment they






received; which, however, Plutarch is far from attributing to the






primitive institution of Lycurgus. Besides, when we see that the






freemen themselves were obliged to quit the country the moment






their numbers exceeded a certain standard, it was not to be






expected, that useless slaves should be permitted to multiply at






discretion.






    From this sketch of Lycurgus's political oeconomy, we find






the state abundantly provided with every necessary article; an






effectual stop put to abusive procreation among the citizens; and






a corrective for the over multiplication of the slaves. The next






care of a statesman is to regulate the employment of a people.






    Every freeman in the state was bred up from his infancy to






arms. No family care could prevent him from serving the state as






a soldier: his children were no load upon him; it was the






business of the Helotes to supply them with provisions: of the






servants in town to prepare these, and the public tables were






always ready furnished. The whole youth of Sparta was educated






not as the children of their parents, but of the state. They






imbibed the same sentiments of frugality, temperance, and love of






simplicity. They exercised the same employment, and were occupied






in the same way in every respect. The simplicity of Lycurgus's






plan, rendered this a practicable scheme. The multiplicity and






variety of employments among us, makes it absolutely necessary to






trust the parents with the education of their children; whereas






in Sparta, there were not two employments for a free man; there






was neither orator, lawyer, physician, or politician, by






profession to be found. The institutions of their lawgiver were






constantly inculcated by the old upon the minds of the young;






every thing they heard or saw, was relative to war. The very gods






were represented in armour, and every precept they were taught,






tended to banish superfluity, and to establish moderation and






hard living.






    The youth were continually striving together in all military






exercises; such as boxing and wrestling. To keep up, therefore, a






spirit of emulation, and to banish animosity at the same time,






sharp, satirical expressions were much encouraged; but these were






always to be seasoned with something gracious or polite. The






grave demeanour likewise, and downcast look which they were






ordered to observe in the streets, and the injunction of keeping






their hands within their robes, might very naturally be






calculated to prevent quarrels, and especially blows, at times






when the authority of a public assembly could not moderate the






vivacity of their passions. By these arts, the Spartans lived in






great harmony in the midst of a continual war.






    Under such regulations a people must enjoy security from






foreign attacks; and certainly the intention of the legislator






never was to extend the limits of Laconia by conquest. What






people could ever think of attacking the Lacedemonians, where






nothing but blows could be expected?






    They enjoyed ease in the most supreme degree; they were






abundantly provided with every necessary of life; although, I






confess, the enjoyment of these, in so austere a manner, would






not be relished by any modern society. But habit is all in things






of this kind. A coarse meal, to a good stomach, has more relish






than all the delicacies of the most exquisite preparation to a






depraved appetite; and if the pleasures of love be reckoned among






the pleasures of life, enough of it might have been met with in






the manners of this people. It does not belong to my subject to






enter into particular details on this head. But the most rational






pleasure among men, the delightful communication of society, was






here enjoyed to the utmost extent. The whole republic was






continually gathered together in bodies, and their studies, their






occupations and their amusements, were the same. One taste was






universal; and the young and the old being constantly together,






the first under the immediate inspection and authority of the






latter, the same sentiments were transmitted from generation to






generation. The Spartans were so pleased, and so satisfied with






their situation, that they despised the manners of every other






nation. If this does not transmit an idea of happiness, I am at a






loss to form one. Security, ease, and happiness, therefore, are






not inseparable concomitants of trade and industry.






    Lycurgus had penetration enough to perceive the weak side of






his institution. He was no stranger to the seducing influence of






luxury; and plainly foresaw, that the consequences of industry,






which procures to mankind a great variety of new objects of






desire, and a wonderful facility in satisfying them, would easily






root out the principles he had endeavoured to instil into his






countrymen, if the state of simplicity should ever come to be






corrupted by foreign communications. He affected, therefore, to






introduce several customs which could not fail of disgusting and






shocking the delicacy of neighbouring states. He permitted the






dead to be buried within the walls; the handling of dead bodies






was not reckoned pollution among the Lacedemonians. He forbade






bathing, so necessary for cleanliness in a hot country; and the






coarseness and dirtiness of their cloaths, and sweat from their






hard exercises, could not fail to disgust strangers from coming






among them. On the other hand, nothing was found at Sparta which






could engage a stranger to wish to become one of their number.






And to prevent the contagion of foreign customs from getting in,






by means of the citizens themselves, he forbade the Spartans to






travel; and excluded from any employment in the state, those who






had got a foreign education. Nothing indeed but a Spartan






breeding could have fitted a person to live among them.






    The theft encouraged among the Lacedemonians was calculated






to make them artful and dextrous; and contained not the smallest






tincture of vice. It was generally of something eatable, and the






frugality of their table prompted them to it; while on the other






hand, their being exposed to the like reprisals, made them






watchful and careful of what belonged to themselves; and the






pleasure of punishing an unsuccessful attempt, in part






indemnified them for the trouble of being constantly upon their






guard. A Lacedemonian had nothing of any value that could be






stolen; and it is the desire and intention of making unlawful






gain which renders theft either criminal or scandalous.






    The hidden intercourse between the Spartans and their young






wives was no doubt, calculated to impress upon the minds of the






fair sex, the wide difference there is between an act of






immodesty, and that of simply appearing naked in the public






exercises; two things which we are apt to confound, from the






impression of our own customs only. I am persuaded that many a






young person has felt her modesty as much hurt by taking off her






handkerchief, the first time she appeared at court, as any






Lacedemonian girl could have done by stripping before a thousand






people; yet both her reason and common sense, must make her






sensible of the difference between a compliance with a custom in






a matter of dress, and a palpable transgression against the laws






of her honour, and the modesty of her sex.






    I have called this Lacedemonian republic a perfect plan of






political oeconomy; because it was a system, uniform and






consistent in all its parts. There, no superfluity was necessary,






because there was no occasion for industry, to give bread to any






body. There, no superfluity was permitted, because the moment the






limits of the absolutely necessary are transgressed, the degrees






of excess are quite indeterminate, and become purely relative.






The same thing which appears superfluity to a peasant, appears






necessary to a citizen; and the utmost luxury of this class






frequently does not come up to what is thought the mere necessary






for one in a higher rank. Lycurgus stopt at the only determined






frontier, the pure physical necessary. All beyond this was






considered as abusive.






    The only things in commerce among the Spartans were,






    First, What might remain to them of the fruits of their lot,






over their own consumption; and secondly, The work of the slaves






employed in trades. The numbers of these could not be many, as






the timber of their houses was worked with the saw and axe only;






and every utensil was made with the greatest simplicity. A small






quantity, therefore, of iron coin, as I imagine, must have been






sufficient for carrying on the circulation at Sparta. The very






nature of their wants must, as I have said, terminate all their






commerce, in the exchange of the surplus-food of their portions






of land, with the work of the manufacturing slaves, who must have






been fed from it.






    As the Lacedemonians had no mercantile communications with






other nations, the iron coin was no more than a bank note of no






intrinsic value, as I suppose, but a middle term introduced for






keeping accounts, and for facilitating barter. An additional






argument for this opinion of the coin being of no intrinsic






value, is, that it is said to have been rendered unserviceable






for other uses, by being slaked in vinegar; in order consequently






to destroy, as they imagined, any intrinsic value which might






otherwise remain. If this coin, therefore, was made of an






extra-ordinary weight, it must have been entirely with a






political view of discouraging commerce and circulation, an






institution quite consistent with the general plan, and nowise a






consequence of the baseness of the metal of which it was made: a






small quantity of this, with the stamp of public authority for






its currency and value, would have answered every purpose equally






well.






    Let me now conclude this chapter by an illustration of the






subject, which will still more clearly point out the force of the






principles upon which this Lacedemonian republic was established.






    Were any Prince in Europe, whose subjects, I shall suppose,






may amount to six millions of inhabitants, one half employed in






agriculture, the other half employed in trade and industry, or






living upon a revenue already acquired; were such a Prince, I






say, supposed to have authority sufficient to engage his people






to adopt a new plan of oeconomy, calculated to secure them






against the designs of a powerful neighbour, who, I shall






suppose, has formed schemes of invading and subduing them.






    Let him engage the whole proprietors of land to renounce






their several possessions: or if that supposition should appear






too absurd, let him contract debts to the value of the whole






property of the nation; let the land-tax be imposed at twenty






shillings in the pound, and then let him become bankrupt to the






creditors. Let the income of all the lands be collected






throughout the country for the use of the state; let all the






luxurious arts be proscribed; and let those employed in them be






formed, under the command of the former land proprietors, into a






body of regular troops, officers and soldiers, provided with






every thing necessary for their maintenance, and that of their






wives and families at the public expence. Let me carry the






supposition farther. Let every superfluity be cut off; let the






peasants be enslaved, and obliged to labour the ground with no






view of profit to themselves, but for simple subsistence; let the






use of gold and silver be proscribed; and let all these metals be






shut up in a public treasure. Let no foreign trade, and very






little domestic be encouraged; but let every man, willing to






serve as a soldier, be received and taken care of; and those who






either incline to be idle, or who are found superfluous, be sent






out of the country. I ask, what confederacy among the modern






European Princes, would carry on a successful war against such a






people? What article would be wanting to their ease, that is, to






their ample subsistence? Their happiness would depend upon the






temper of their mind. And what country could defend itself






against the attack of such an enemy? Such a system of political






oeconomy, I readily grant, is not likely to take place: but if






ever it did, would it not effectually dash to pieces the whole






fabric of trade and industry which has been forming for so many






years? And would it not quickly oblige every other nation to






adopt, as far as possible, a similar conduct, from a principle of






self-preservation.













Chap. XV













A general View of the Principles to be attended to by a






Statesman, who resolves to establish Trade and Industry upon a






lasting Footing













    The two preceding chapters I have introduced purposely to






swerve as an illustration of general principles, and as a






relaxation to the mind, like a farce between the acts of a






serious opera. I now return to the place where I broke off my






subject, at the end of the twelfth chapter.






    It is a great assistance to memory, now and then to assemble






our ideas, after certain intervals, in going through an extensive






subject. Every branch of it must, in setting out, be treated with






simplicity, and all combinations not absolutely necessary, must






be banished from the theory. When this theory again comes to be






applied to examples, combinations will crowd in, and every one of






these must be attended to.






    For this reason nothing can appear more inconsistent than the






spirit which runs through some parts of this book, if compared






with that which prevailed in the first. There luxury was looked






on with a favourable eye, and every augmentation of superfluity






was considered as a method of advancing population. We were then






employed in drawing mankind, as, it were, out of a state of






idleness, in order to increase their numbers, and engage them to






cultivate the earth. We had no occasion to divide them into






societies having separate interests, because the principles we






treated of were common to all. We therefore considered the






industrious, who are the providers, and the luxurious, who are






the consumers, as children of the same family, and as being under






the care of the same father.






    We are now engaged in a more complex operation; we represent






different societies, animated with a different spirit; some given






to industry and frugality, others to dissipation and luxury. This






creates separate interests among nations, and every one must be






supposed to be under the government of a statesman, who is wholly






taken up in advancing the good of those he governs, though at the






expence of other societies which lie round him.






    This presents a new idea, and gives birth to new principles.






The general society of mankind treated of in the first book, is






here in a manner divided into two: the industrious providers are






supposed to live in one country, the luxurious consumers in






another. The principles of the first book remain here in full






vigour. Luxury still tends as much as ever to the advancement of






industry, the statesman's business only is, to remove the seat of






it from his own country. When this can be accomplished without






detriment to industry at home, he has an opportunity of joining






all the advantages of ancient simplicity to the wealth and power






which attend upon the luxury of modern states. He may preserve






his people in sobriety, and moderation as to every expence, as to






every consumption, and make them enjoy, at the same time, riches






and superiority over all their neighbours.






    Such would be the state of trading nations, were they






employed in supplying the wants or extravagant consumption of






strangers only, and did they not insensibly adopt the very






manners with which they strive to inspire others.






    As often, therefore, as we suppose a people applying






themselves to the advancement of foreign trade, we must simplify






our ideas, by dismissing all political combinations of other






circumstances; that is to say, we must suppose this spirit






universal, and then point out the principles which influence the






success of it.






    We must encourage oeconomy, frugality, and a simplicity of






manners, discourage the consumption of every thing that can be






exported, and excite a taste for superfluity in neighbouring






nations. When such a system can no more be supported to its full






extent, by the scale of foreign demand becoming positively






lighter; then in order to set the balance even again, without






taking any thing out of the heavier scale, and to preserve and to






give bread to those who have enriched the state; an additional






home consumption, proportioned to the deficiency of foreign






demand, must be encouraged. For were the same simplicity of






manners still kept up, the infallible consequence would be a






forced restitution of the balance, by the distress, misery, and






at last extinction of the supernumerary workmen.






    I must therefore, upon such occasions, consider the






introduction of luxury, or superfluous consumption, as a rational






and moral consequence of the deficiency of foreign trade.






    I am, however, far from thinking that the luxury of every






modern state, is in proportion only to such failure; and I






readily admit, that many examples may be produced where the






progress of luxury at home and the domestic competitions with






strangers who come to market, have been the cause both of the






decline and extinction of their foreign, trade but as my business






is chiefly to point out principles, and to shew their effects, it






is here sufficient to observe, that in proportion as foreign






trade declines, either a proportional augmentation upon home






consumption must take place, or a number of the industrious,






proportioned to the diminution of former consumption, must






decrease. By the first, what I call a natural restitution of the






balance is brought about, from the principles above deduced; by






the second, what I call a forced one.






    Here then is an example, where the introduction of luxury may






be a rational and prudent step of administration; and as long as






the progress of it is not accelerated from any other motive, but






that of preserving the industrious, by giving them employment;






the same spirit, under the direction of an able statesman, will






soon throw industry into a new channel, better calculated for






reviving foreign trade, and for promoting the public good, by






substituting the call of foreigners instead of that of domestic






luxury.






    I hope, from what I have said, that the political effects of






luxury, or the consumption of superfluity, are sufficiently






understood. These I have hitherto considered as advantageous to






those classes only who are made to subsist by them; I reserve for






another occasion the pointing out how they influence the






imposition of taxes, and how the abuse of consumption in the rich






may affect the prosperity of a state.






    So soon as all foreign trade has come to a stop, without a






scheme for recalling it, and domestic consumption has filled up






its place in consuming the work, and giving bread to the






industrious, we fund ourselves obliged to reason again upon the






principles of the first book. The statesman has once more both






the producers and the consumers under his care. The consumers can






live without employment, the producers cannot. The first seldom






have occasion for the statesman's protection; the last constantly






stand in need of it. There is a perpetual fluctuation in the






balance between these two classes, from which a multitude of new






principles arise; and these render the administration of






government infinitely more difficult, and require superior






talents in the person who is at the helm. I shall here point out






the most striking effects only of the fluctuation and overturn of






this new balance, which in the subsequent chapters shall be more






fully illustrated.






    First, In proportion as the consumers become extravagant, the






producers become wealthy; and when the former become bankrupts,






the latter fill their place.






    Secondly, As the former become frugal and oeconomical, the






latter languish; when those begin to hoard, and to adopt a simple






life, these are extinguished: all extremes are vicious.






    Thirdly, If the produce of industry consumed in a country






surpass the income of those who do not work, the balance due by






the consumers must be paid to the suppliers by a proportional






alienation of their funds. This vibration of the balance gives a






very correct idea of what is meant by relative profit and loss.






The nation here loses nothing by the change produced.






    Fourthly, When, on the other hand, the annual produce of






industry consumed in a country, does not amount to the value of






the income of those who do not work, the balance of income saved;






must either be locked up in chests, made into plate, lent to






foreigners, or fairly exported as the price of foreign






consumption.






    Fifthly, The scales stand even when there is no balance on






either side; that is, when the domestic consumption is just






equivalent to the annual income of the funds. I do not pretend to






decide at present whether this exact equilibrium marks the state






of perfection in a country where there is no foreign trade, (of






which we are now treating,) or whether it would be better to have






small vibrations between the two scales; but I think I may say,






that all subversions of the balance on either side must be






hurtful, and therefore should be prevented.






    Let this suffice at present, upon a subject which shall be






more fully treated of afterwards.






    Let us next fix our attention upon the interests of a people






entirely taken up in the prosecution of foreign trade. So long as






this spirit prevails, I say, that it is the duty of a statesman






to encourage frugality, sobriety, and an application to labour in






his own people, and to excite in foreign nations a taste for






superfluities as much as possible.






    While a people are occupied in the prosecution of foreign






trade, the mutual relations between the individuals of the state,






will not be so intimate as when the producers and consumers live






in the same society; such trade implies, and even necessarily






creates a chain of foreign dependences; which proportionally






diminish the mutual dependence which formerly subsisted among the






citizens. Now the use of dependences, I have said, is to form a






band of society, capable of making the necessitous subsist out of






the superfluities of the rich, and to keep mankind in peace and






harmony with one another.






    Trade, therefore, and foreign communications, form a new kind






of a society among nations; and consequently render the






occupation of statesman more complex. He must, as before, be






attentive to provide food, other necessaries and employment for






all his people; but as the foreign connections make these very






circumstances depend upon the entertaining a good correspondence






with neighbouring nations, he must acquire a proper knowledge of






their domestic situation, so as to reconcile, as much as may be,






the interests of both parties, by engaging the strangers to






furnish articles of the first necessity, when the precious metals






cannot be procured; and to accept, in return, the most consumable






superfluities which industry can invent. And, last of all, he






must inspire his own people with a spirit of emulation in the






exercise of frugality, temperance, oeconomy, and an application






to labour and ingenuity. If this spirit of emulation be not kept






up, another will take place; for emulation is inseparable from






the nature of man; and if the citizens cannot be made to vie with






one another, in the practice of moderation, the wealth they must






acquire, will soon make them vie with strangers, in luxury and






dissipation.






    While a spirit of moderation prevails in a trading nation, it






may rest assured, that as far as in this particular it excels the






nations with whom it corresponds, so far will it increase the






proportion of its wealth, power, and superiority, over them.






These are lawful pursuits among men, when purchased by success in






so laudable an emulation.






    If it be true, that superfluity, intemperance, prodigality,






and idleness, qualities diametrically opposite to the former,






corrupt the human mind, and lead to violence and injustice; is it






not very wisely calculated by the Author of all things, that a






sober people, living under a good government should, by industry






and moderation, necessarily acquire wealth, which is the best






means of warding off the violence of those, with whom they are






bound in the great society of mankind? And is it not also most






wisely ordained, that in proportion as a people contract vicious






habits, which may lead to excess and injustice, the very






consequence of their dissipation (poverty) should deprive them of






the power of doing harm? But such reflections seem rather to be






too great a refinement on my subject, and exceed the bounds of






political oeconomy.






    When we treat of a virtuous people applying to trade and






industry, let us consider their interest only, in preserving






these sentiments; and examine the political evil of their falling






off from them. When we treat of a luxurious nation, where the






not-working part is given to excesses in all kinds of






consumption, and the working-part to labour and ingenuity, in






order to supply them, let us examine the consequences of such a






spirit, with respect to foreign trade: and if we find, that a






luxurious turn in the rich is prejudicial to it, let us try if we






can discover the methods for engaging the inhabitants to correct






their manners from a motive of self-interest. These things






premised.






    I shall now give a short sketch of the general principles






upon which a system of foreign trade may be established, and






preserved as long as possible; and of the methods by which it may






be again recovered, when, from the natural advantages and






superior ability of administration in rival nations, (not from






vices at home,) a people may have lost for a time every advantage






they used to draw from their foreign commerce.






    The first general principle is to employ, as usefully as






possible, a certain number of the society, in producing objects






of the first necessity, always more than sufficient to supply the






inhabitants; and to contrive means of enabling every one of the






free hands to procure subsistence for himself, by the exercise of






some species of industry.






    These first objects compassed, I consider the people as






abundantly provided with what is purely necessary; and also with






a surplus prepared for an additional number of free hands, so






soon as a demand can be procured for their labour. In the mean






time, the surplus will be an article of exportation; but no






sooner will demand come from abroad, for a greater quantity of






manufactures than formerly, than such demand will have the effect






of gradually multiplying the inhabitants up to the proportion of






the surplus above mentioned, provided the statesman be all along






careful to employ these additional numbers, which an useful






multiplication must have produced, in supplying the additional






demand: then with the equivalent they receive from strangers,






they will at the same time enrich the country, and purchase for






themselves that part of the national productions, which had been






permitted to be exported, for want only of a demand for it at






home.






    He must, at the same time, continue to give a proper






encouragement to the advancement of agriculture, in order that






there may be constantly found a surplus of subsistence (for






without a surplus there can never be enough); this must be






allowed to be exported, and ought to be considered as the






provision of those industrious hands which are yet unborn.






    He must cut off all foreign competition, above a certain






standard price, for that quantity of subsistence which is






necessary for home consumption; and, by premiums upon






exportation, he must discharge the farmers of any superfluous






load, which may remain upon their hands when prices fall too low.






This important matter shall be explained at large in another






place, when we come to treat of the policy of grain.






    If natural causes should produce a rise in the price of






subsistence, which cannot be brought down by any encouragement he






can give to agriculture, he must then lay the whole community






under contribution, in order to indemnify those who work for






strangers, for the advance upon the price of their food; or he






must indemnify the strangers in another way, for the advance in






the price of manufactures.






    He must consider the manufactures of superfluity, as wrought






up for the use of strangers, and discourage all domestic






competition for them, by every possible means.






    He must do what he can, constantly to proportion the supply






to the demand made for them; and when the supply necessarily






comes to exceed the demand, in spite of all his care, he must






then consider what remains over the demand, as a superfluity of






the strangers; and for the support of the equal balance between






work and demand, he must promote the sale of this superfluity






even within the country (under certain restrictions however),






until the hands employed in such branches where a redundancy is






found, can be more usefully set to work in another way.






    He must consider the advancement of the common good as a






direct object of private interest to every individual, and by a






disinterested administration of the public money, he must plainly






make it appear that it is so.






    From this principle flows the authority, vested in all






governments, to load the community with taxes, in order to






advance the prosperity of the state. And this object can be






nowise better obtained than by applying the amount of them to the






keeping an even balance between work and demand. Upon this the






health of a trading state principally depends.






    If the failure of foreign demand be found to proceed from the






superior natural advantages of other countries, he must double






his diligence to promote luxury among his neighbours; he must






support simplicity at home; he must increase his bounties upon






exportation; and his expence in relieving manufactures, as oft as






the price of their industry falls below the expence of their






subsistence.






    While these operations are conducted with coolness and






perseverance, while the allurements of the wealth acquired do not






frustrate the execution, the statesman may depend upon seeing






foreigners return to his ports, so soon as their own dissipation,






and want of frugality, come to compensate the advantages which






nature had formerly given them over their frugal and industrious






neighbours.






    If this plan be pursued, foreign trade will increase in






proportion to the number of inhabitants; and domestic luxury will






serve as an instrument only in the hands of the statesman to






increase demand at home, when the supply becomes too great for






foreign consumption. In other words, the rich citizens will be






engaged to consume what is superfluous, in order to keep the






balance even in favour of the industrious, and in favour of the






nation.






    The whole purport of this plan is to point out the operation






of three very easy principles.






    The first, That in a country entirely taken up with the






object of foreign trade, no competition should be allowed to come






from abroad for articles of the first necessity, and principally






for food, so as to raise prices beyond a certain standard.






    The second, That no domestic competition should be encouraged






upon articles of superfluity, so as to raise prices beyond a






certain standard.






    The third, That when these standards cannot be preserved, and






that, from natural causes, prices get above them, public money






must be thrown into the scale to bring prices to the level of






those of exportation.






    The greater the extent of foreign trade in any nation is, the






lower these standards must be kept; the less the extent of it is,






the higher they may be allowed to rise. Consequently,






    Were nobody in a nation employed in producing the necessaries






of life, and all the industrious employed in supplying other






articles of consumption, the prices of necessaries might be






allowed to fall as low as possible. There would be no occasion






for a standard in favour of those who live by producing them.






    Were no man in the state employed in supplying strangers, the






prices of superfluities might be allowed to rise as high as






possible, and a standard would also become useless, as the sole






design of it is to favour exportation.






    But as neither of these suppositions can ever take place, and






as in every nation there is a part employed in producing, and a






part in consuming; and as it is the surplus only of industry






which can be exported; a standard is necessary for supporting the






reciprocal interests of both parties at home; and the public






money must be made to operate upon the price of the surplus of






industry only so as to make it exportable, even in cases where






the national prices upon home consumption have got up beyond the






proper standard. Let me set this matter in another light, the






better to communicate an idea which I think is still a little






obscure.






    Were food and other necessaries the pure gift of nature in






any country, I should have laid it down as a principle to






discourage all foreign competition for them, either below or






above any certain standard; because in this case the lower the






price of them be, it is so much the better, since no






inconvenience can result from thence to any industrious person.






But as the production of these is in itself a manufacture, or an






object of industry, a certain standard must be kept up in favour






of those who live by producing them.






    On the other hand, as to the manufactures of superfluity,






domestic competition should be discouraged, beyond a certain






standard, in order that prices may not rise above those offered






by foreigners; but it might be encouraged below the standard, in






order to promote consumption and give bread to manufacturers. But






were there no foreign demand at all, there would be no occasion






for any standard, and the nation's wealth would thereby circulate






only with greater or less rapidity in proportion as prices might






rise or fall. The study of the balance between work and demand,






would still continue a principal object of attention in the






statesman, not with a view to enrich the state, but in order to






preserve every member of it in health and vigour. On the other






hand, the object of a standard regards foreign trade, and the






acquisition of new wealth, at the expence of other nations. The






rich, therefore, of a trading state must not be allowed to






increase their consumption of superfluities to the full






proportion of the constant supply; because an ample surplus must






remain for exportation; and the only way to prevent foreigners






from supplying themselves, is to prevent prices from getting up






beyond the standard, at which these foreigners can produce them.






    Farther, were every one of the society in the same pursuit






after industry, there would be no occasion for the public to be






laid under contribution for advancing the general welfare; but as






there is constantly a part employed in enriching the state, by






the sale of their work to strangers, and a part employed in






making these riches circulate at home, by the consumption of






superfluities, I think it is a good expedient to throw a part of






domestic circulation into the public coffers by the name of






taxes; that when the consequences of private wealth come






necessarily to raise prices, a statesman may be enabled to defray






the expense of bounties upon that part which can be exported, and






thereby enable the nation to continue to supply foreigners at the






same price as formerly.






    The farther these principles can be carried into execution,






the longer a state will flourish; and the longer she will support






her superiority. When foreign demand begins to fail, so as not to






be recalled, either industry must decline, or domestic luxury






must begin. The consequences of both may be easily guessed at,






and the principles which influence them shall be particularly






examined in the following chapter.




















Chap. XVI













Illustration of some Principles laid down in the former Chapter,






relative to the Advancement and Support of foreign Trade













    I am now to give an illustration of some things relating to






that species of trade which is carried on with other nations,






laid down, I think, in too general terms in the former chapter.






    I have constantly in view to separate and distinguish the






principles of foreign trade, from those which influence the






advancement of an inland commerce, and a brisk circulation only;






operations which produce very different effects, equally meriting






the attention of a statesman.






    The very existence of foreign trade, implies a separate






interest between those nations who are found on the opposite






sides of the mercantile contract, namely the buyers and the






sellers, as both endeavour to make the hest bargain possible for






themselves. These transactions imply a mutual dependence upon one






another, which may either be necessary or contingent. It is






necessary, when one of the nations cannot subsist without the






assistance of the other, as is the case between the province of






Holland, and those countries which supply it with grain; or






contingent, when the wants of a particular nation cannot be






supplied by their own inhabitants, from a want of skill and






dexterity, only.






    Wherever, therefore, one nation finds another necessarily






depending upon her for particular branches of traffic, there is a






certain foundation for foreign trade; where the dependence is






contingent, there is occasion for management, and for the hand of






an able statesman.






    The best way to preserve every advantage is, to examine how






far they are necessary, and how far they are only contingent, to






consider in what respect the nation may be most easily rivalled






by her neighbours, and in what respect she has natural advantages






which cannot be taken from her.






    The natural advantages are chiefly to be depended on: France,






for example, never can be rivalled in her wines. Other countries






may enjoy great advantages from their situation, mines, rivers,






sea-ports, fishing, timber, and certain productions proper to the






soil. If you abstract from these natural advantages, all nations






are upon an equal footing as to trade. Industry and labour are no






properties attached to place, any more than oeconomy and






sobriety.






    This proposition may be called in question, upon the






principles of M. de Montesquieu, who deduces the origin of many






laws, customs, and even religions, from the influence of climate.






This great man reasoned from fact and from experience, and from






the power and tendency of natural causes, to produce certain






effects, when they are not checked by other circumstances; but in






my method of treating this subject, I do not suppose that these






causes are ever to be allowed to produce their natural and






immediate effects, when such effects would be followed by a






political inconvenience: but I constantly suppose a statesman at






the head of government, who makes every circumstance concur in






promoting the execution of the plan he has laid down.






    First, If a nation then has formed a scheme of being long






great and powerful by trade, she must first apply closely to the






manufacturing every natural produce of the country. For this






purpose a sufficient number of hands must be employed: for if






hands be found wanting, the natural produce will be exported






without receiving any additional value from labour; and the






consequences of this natural advantage will be lost.






    The price of food, and all necessaries for manufacturers,






must be found at an easy rate.






    And, in the last place, if oeconomy and sobriety in the






workmen, and good regulations on the part of the statesman, are






not kept up, the end will not be obtained: for if the






manufacture, when brought to market, do not retain the advantages






which the manufacturer had in the beginning, by employing the






natural produce of the country; it is the same thing as if the






advantage had not existed. I shall illustrate this by an example.






    I shall suppose wool to be better, more plentiful, and






cheaper, in one country than in another, and both to be rivals in






the woollen trade. It is natural that the last should desire to






buy wool of the first, and that the other should desire to keep






it at home, in order to manufacture it. Here then is a natural






advantage which the first country has over the latter, and which






cannot be taken from her. I shall suppose that subsistence is as






cheap in one country as in the other; that is to say, that bread






and every other necessary of life is at the same price. If the






workmen of the first country (by having been the founders of the






cloth manufacture, and by having had, for a long tract of years,






so great a superiority over other nations, as to make them, in a






manner, absolutely dependent upon them for cloths) shall have






raised their prices from time to time; and if, in consequence of






large profits, long enjoyed without rivalship, these profits






shall have been consolidated with the real value, in consequence






of an habitually greater expence in living, which implies an






augmentation of wages; this country may thereby lose all the






advantages it had from the low price and superior quality of its






wool. But if, on the other hand, the workmen in the last country






work less, be less dextrous, pay extravagant prices for wool at






prime cost, and be at great expence in carriage; if manufactures






cannot be carried on successfully, but by public authority, and






if private workmen be crushed with excessive taxes upon their






industry; all the accidental advantages which the last country






had over the first, may come to be more than balanced, and the






first may regain those which nature first had given her. But this






should by no means make the first country rest secure. These






accidental inconveniences found in the rival nation may come to






cease; and therefore her only real security for this branch, will






be the cheapness of the workmanship.






    Secondly, In speaking of a standard price, for goods in the






last chapter, I established a distinction between one regulated






by the height of foreign demand, and another kept as low as the






possibility of supplying the manufacture can admit. This requires






a little explanation.






    It must not here be supposed that a people, from a principle






of public spirit, will ever be engaged to relinquish the profit






of a rise in foreign demand; and as this rise may proceed from






circumstances and events which are entirely hid from the






manufacturers, such revolutions are unavoidable. We must






therefore restrain the generality of our former proposition, and






observe, that the indispensible vibrations of this foreign demand






do no harm; but that the statesman should be constantly on his






guard to prevent the subversion of the balance, or the smallest






consolidation of extraordinary profits with the real value. This






he may accomplish, as has been observed, by multiplying hands in






those branches of exportation, upon which profits have risen.






This will increase the home supply, and frustrate his own people






of extraordinary gains, which would otherwise terminate in a






prejudice to foreign trade.






    A statesman may sometimes, out of a principle of benevolence,






perhaps of natural equity towards the classes of the industrious,






as well as from sound policy, permit extraordinary profits, as an






encouragement to some of the more elegant arts, which serve as an






ornament to a country; which establish a reputation for taste and






refinement in favour of a people, and thereby make strangers






prefer articles of their production, which have no superior merit






but the name of the country they come from: but even these, he






never ought to allow to rise so high in the price as to prove an






encouragement to other nations to establish a successful






rivalship.






    Thirdly, The encouragement recommended to be given to the






domestic consumption of superfluities, as oft as the foreign






demand for them happens to fall so low as to be followed with the






distress of the workmen, requires a little farther explanation.






    If what I laid down in the last chapter with respect to this






encouragement be taken literally, I own it appears an absurd






supposition, because it both implies a degree of public spirit in






those who are in a capacity to purchase the superfluities, no






where to be met with, and at the same time a self-denial, in






discontinuing the demand, so soon as another branch of foreign






trade is opened for the employment of the industrious; one and






the other being equally contrary to the principles upon which we






have founded the whole scheme of our political oeconomy.






    I have elsewhere observed, that were revolutions to happen as






suddenly as I am obliged to represent them, all would go into






confusion.






    What, therefore, is recommended upon such an exigence comes






to this. That when a statesman finds, that the natural taste of






his people does not lead them to profit of the surplus of






commodities which lie upon hand, and which used to be exported,






he should interpose his authority and management in such a way as






to prevent the distress of the workmen, and when, by a sudden






fall in a foreign demand, this distress becomes unavoidable,






without a more powerful interposition, he should then himself






become the purchaser, if others will not; or, by premiums or






bounties on the exportation of the surplus which lies upon hand,






promote the sale of it at any rate, until the supernumerary hands






can be otherwise provided for. And although I allow that the rich






people of a state are not commonly led, from a principle either






of public spirit or self-denial, to concur in such political






operations; yet we cannot deny, that it is in the power of a good






governor, by exposing the political state of certain classes of






the people, to prevail with men of substance to join in schemes






for their relief; and this is all I intend to recommend in






practice. My point of view is to lay down the principles, and I






never recommend them farther than they may be rendered possible






in execution, by preparatory steps, and by properly working on






the spirit of the people.













Chap. XVII













Symptoms of Decay in foreign Trade













    If manufacturers be found without employment, we are not






immediately to accuse the statesman, nor conclude that it






proceeds from a decay of trade, until the cause of it be inquired






into. If upon examination it be found, that for some years past






food has been at a higher rate than in neighbouring countries,






the statesman may be to blame: for it is certain, that a trading






nation, by turning part of her commerce into a proper channel,






may always be able to establish a just balance in this






particular. And though it be not expedient in years of scarcity






to bring the price of grain very low, yet it is generally






possible to keep it at the rate it sells for in all rival






nations, which, with regard to the present point, is the same






thing.






    If this want of employment for manufacturers do not proceed






from the high prices of living, but for want of commissions from






the merchants, the causes of this diminution of demand must be






examined into. It may be accidental, and happen from causes which






may cease in a little time, and trade may return to flourish as






before. It may also happen upon the establishment of new






undertakings in different places of the country, from which, by






reason of some natural advantage, or a more frugal disposition in






the workmen, or from the proximity of place; certain markets may






be supplied, which formerly were furnished by those industrious






people who are now found to be without employment. In these last






suppositions, the distress of the manufacturers is no proof of






any decay of trade in general, but, on the contrary, it may






contribute to destroy the bad effects of consolidated profits, by






obliging those who formerly shared them, to abandon the ease of






their circumstances, and to submit a-new to a painful industry,






barely sufficient to procure subsistence. When such revolutions






are sudden, they prove hard to bear, and throw people into great






distress. It is partly to prevent such inconveniences, that we






have recommended the lowest standard possible in the price of






articles of exportation.






    Two causes there are, which very commonly mark a decline of






trade, to wit; 1. When foreign markets, usually supplied by the






trading nation, begin to be furnished, let it be in the most






trifling article, by others, not used to supply them. Or, 2. When






the country itself is furnished from abroad with such






manufactures as were formerly made at home.






    These circumstances prove one of two things, either that






there are workmen in other countries, who, from advantages which






they have acquired by nature, or by industry and frugality,






finding a demand for their work, take the bread out of the mouths






of those formerly employed, and deprive them of certain branches






of their foreign trade: or, that these foreign workmen, having






profited of the increased luxury and dissipation of the former






traders, have begun to supply the markets with certain articles






of consumption, the profits upon which being small, are, without






much rivalship, insensibly yielded up to them by the workmen of






the other trading nation, who find better bread in serving their






own wealthy countrymen.






    Against the first cause of decline, I see no better remedy






than patience, as I have said already, and a perseverance in






frugality and oeconomy, until the unwary beginners shall fall






into the inconveniences generally attending upon wealth and ease.






    The second cause of decline it is far more difficult to






remove. The root of it lies deep, and is ingrafted with the






spirit and manners of the whole people, high and low. The lower






classes have contracted a taste for superfluity and expence which






they are enabled to gratify, by working for their own countrymen;






while they despise the branches of foreign trade as low and






unprofitable. The higher classes again depend upon the lower






classes, for the gratification of a thousand little trifling






desires, formed by the taste for dissipation, and supported by






habit, fashion, and a love of expence.






    Here then is a system set on foot, whereby the poor are made






rich, and the rich are made happy, in the enjoyment of a






perpetual variety of every thing, which can remove the






inconveniences to which human nature is exposed. Thus both






parties become interested to support it, and vie with one another






in the ingenuity of contriving new wants; the one from the






immediate satisfaction of removing them; the other from the






profit of furnishing the means, and from the hopes of one day






sharing in them.






    But even for this great evil, the very nature of man points






out a remedy. It is the business of a statesman to lay hold of






it. The remedy flows from the instability of every taste not






founded upon rational desires.






    In every country of luxury, we constantly find certain






classes of workmen in distress, from the change of modes. Were a






statesman upon his guard to employ such as are forced to be idle,






before they betake themselves to new inventions, for the support






of the old plan, or before they contract an abandoned and vicious






habit, he would get them cheap, and might turn their labour both






to the advantage of the state and to the discouragement of






luxury.






    I confess, however, that while a luxurious taste in the rich






subsists, industrious people will always be ready to supply the






instruments of it to the utmost extent; and I also allow, that






such a taste has infinite allurements, especially while youth and






health enable a rich man to in it. Those, however, who are






systematically luxurious, that is, from a formed taste and






confirmed habit, are but few, in comparison of those who become






so from levity, vanity, and the imitation of others. The last are






those who principally support and extend the system; but they are






not the most incorrigible. Were it not for imitation, every age






would seek after, and be satisfied with the gratification of






natural desires. Twenty-five might think of dress, horses,






hunting, dogs, and generous wines: forty, of a plentiful table,






and the pleasures of society: sixty, of coaches, elbow-chairs,






soft carpets, and instruments of ease. But the taste for






imitation blends all ages together. The old fellow delights in






horses and fine clothes; the youth rides in his chariot on






springs, and lolls in an easy chair, large enough to serve him






for a bed. All this proceeds from the superfluity of riches and






taste for imitation, not from the real allurements of ease and






taste for luxury, as every one must feel, who has conversed at






all with the great and rich. Fashion, which I understand here to






be a synonimous term for imitation, leads most people into






superfluous expence, which is so far from being an article of






luxury, that it is frequently a load upon the person who complies






with it. All such branches of expence, it is in the power of a






statesman to cut off, by setting his own example, and that of his






favourites and servants, against the caprice of fashion.






    The levity and changeableness of mankind, as I have said,






will even assist him. A generation of oeconomists is sometimes






found to succeed a generation of spendthrifts; and we now see,






almost over all Europe, a system of sobriety succeeding an






habitual system of drunkenness. Drunkenness, and a multitude of






useless servants, were the luxury of former times.






    Every such revolution may be profited of by an able






statesman, who must set a good example on the one hand, while, on






the other, he must profit of every change of taste, in order to






re-establish the foreign trade of his subjects. An example of






frugality, in the head of a luxurious people, would do finite






harm, were it intended to reform the morals of the rich only,






without indemnifying the poor for the diminution upon






consumption.






    At the same time, therefore, that luxury comes to lose ground






at home, a door must be opened, to serve as an out-let for the






work of those hands which must be thereby made idle; and which,






consequently must fall into distress.






    This is no more than the principle before laid down, in the






fifteenth chapter, reversed: there we said, that when foreign






demand begins to decline, domestic luxury must be made to






increase, in order to soften the shock of the sudden revolution






in favour of the industrious. For the same reason here we say,






that foreign trade must be opened upon every diminution of






domestic luxury.






    How few Princes do we find either frugal or magnificent from






political considerations! And, this being the case, is it not






necessary to lay before them the natural consequences of the one






and the other? And it is still more necessary to point out the






methods to be taken in order to avoid the inconveniences which






may proceed from either.






    Under a prodigal administration, the number of people will






increase. The statesman therefore should keep a watchful eye upon






the supplying of subsistence. Under a frugal reign, numbers will






diminish, if the statesman do not open every channel which may






carry off the superfluous productions of industry. Here is the






reason: a diminution of expence at home, is a diminution of






employment; and this again implies a diminution of people;






because it interrupts the circulation of the subsistence which






made them live; but if foreign trade he made to fill up the void,






the nation will preserve its people, and the savings of the






Prince will be compensated by the balance coming in from






strangers.






    These topics are delivered as hints only; and the






amplification of them might not improperly have a place here; did






I not expect to bring them in to greater advantage, after






examining the principles of taxation, and pointing out those






which direct the application of public money.




















Chap. XVIII













Methods of lowering the Price of Manufactures, in order to make






them vendible in foreign Markets













    The multiplicity of relations between the several parts of






political oeconomy, forces me to a frequent repetition of






principles. I have no other rule to judge whether such






repetitions be superfluous, or necessary, but by the tendency






they have to give me a more distinct view of my subject. This is






commonly the case when the same principles are applied to






different combinations of circumstances.






    Almost every thing to be said on the head mentioned in the






title of this chapter, has been already taken notice of; and my






present intention is merely to lay together ideas which appear






scattered, because they have been occasionally brought in by






their relations to other matters.






    The methods of lowering the price of manufactures, so as to






render them exportable, are of two kinds.






    The first, such as proceed from a good administration, and






which bring down prices within the country, in consequence of






natural causes.






    The second, such as operate upon that part only which comes






to be exported in consequence of a proper application of public






money.






    As I have not yet inquired into the methods of providing a






public fund, it would, I think, be contrary to order to examine






in this place the doctrine of premiums for bringing down the






price of manufactures. This operation will come in more naturally






afterwards, and the general distinction here mentioned, is only






introduced by the by, that my readers may retain it and apply it






as we go along.






    The end proposed is to lower the price of manufactures, so






that they may be exported. The first thing therefore to be known,






is the cause from whence it happens, that certain manufactures






cannot be furnished at home so cheap as in other countries; the






second, how to apply the proper remedy for lowering the price of






them.






    The causes of high prices, that is, of prices relatively






higher than they are found to be in other nations, are reducible






to four heads; which I shall lay down in their order, and then






point out the methods of removing them likewise, in their order.






    First, The consolidation of high profits with the real value






of the manufacture. This cause operates in countries where luxury






has gained ground, and where domestic competition has called off






too many of the hands, which were formerly content to serve at a






lower price, and for smaller gains.






    Secondly, The rise in the price of articles of the first






necessity. This cause operates when the progress of industry has






been more rapid than that of agriculture. The progress of






industry, as we have shewn, necessarily implies an augmentation






of useful inhabitants; and as these have commonly wherewithal to






purchase subsistence, the moment their numbers swell above the






proportion of the food produced by agriculture, or above what is






found in the markets of the country, or brought from abroad, they






enter into competition and raise the price of it. Here then let






it be observed, by the by, that what raises the price of






subsistence is the augmentation of the number of useful






inhabitants, that is, of such as are easy in their circumstances.






Let the wretched be ever so many, let abusive procreation go on






ever so far, such inhabitants will have little effect in raising






the price of food, but a very great one in increasing the misery






of their own class. A proof of this is to be met with in many






provinces where the number of poor is very great, and where at






the same time the price of necessaries is very low; whereas no






instance can be found where a number of the industrious being got






together, does not occasion an immediate rise on most of the






articles of subsistence.






    Thirdly, The natural advantages of other countries. This






operates in spite of all the precautions of the most frugal and






laborious people. Let them deprive themselves of every






superfluity; let them be ever so diligent and ingenious; let






every circumstance be improved to the utmost by the statesman for






the establishment of foreign trade; the advantage of climate and






situation may give such a superiority to the people of another






country, as to render a direct competition with them impossible.






    Fourthly, The superior dexterity of other nations in working






up their manufactures, their knowledge in the science of trade,






the promptitude of their payments, the advantage they have in






turning their money to account in the intervals of their own






direct circulation, the superior abilities of their statesman,






the application of their public money, in one word, the






perfection of their political oeconomy.






    Before I enter upon the method of removing these several






inconveniences, I must observe, that as we are at present






treating of the relative height of the price of manufactures, a






competition between nations is constantly implied. It is this






which obliges a statesman to be principally attentive to the rise






of prices. The term competition is relative to, and conveys the






idea of emulation between two parties striving to compass the






same end. I must therefore distinguish between the endeavours






which one nation makes to retain a superiority already got, and






the endeavours which another nation makes in order to acquire it.






The first I shall call a competition to retain; the second, a






competition to acquire.






    The first three heads represent the inconveniences to which






the competitors to retain are liable; and the fourth comprehends






those to which the competitors to acquire are most commonly






exposed.






    Having digested our subject into order, I shall run through






the principles which severally influence the removing of every






inconvenience, whether incident to a nation whose foreign trade






is already well established, or to another naturally calculated






for entering into a competition for the acquisition of it.






    In proposing a remedy for the particular causes of the rise






of prices above mentioned, we must suppose every one entirely






simple, and uncompounded with the others; a thing which in fact






seldom happens. This I do for the sake of distinctness; and the






principal difficulty in practice is to combine the remedies in






proportion to the complication of the disease. I now come to the






first of the four causes of high prices, to wit, consolidated






profits.






    The whole doctrine of these has been abundantly set forth in






the 10th chapter. We there explained the nature of them, shewed






how the subversion of the balance, by a long preponderancy of the






scale of demand, had the effect of consolidating profits in a






country of luxury; and observed, that the reducing them to the






proper standard could never fail of bringing those who had long






enjoyed them, into distress.






    The question now before us is how to reduce them, when






foreign trade cannot otherwise be retained, let the consequences






be ever so hurtful to certain individuals. When the well being of






a nation comes in competition with a temporary inconvenience to






some of the inhabitants, the general good must be preferred to






particular considerations.






    I have observed above, that domestic luxury, by offering high






prices upon certain species of industry, calls off many hands






employed to supply the articles of exportation, upon which






profits are generally very moderate. The first natural and






immediate effect of this, is, to diminish the hands employed in






furnishing the foreign demand; consequently, to diminish the






supply; consequently, to occasion a simple competition on the






side of the strangers, who are the purchasers; consequently, to






augment profits to the furnishers until by the rise and






consolidation of such profits the market is deserted.






    The very progress here laid down, points out the remedy. The






number of hands employed in these particular branches must be






multiplied; and if the luxurious taste and wealth of the country






prevent any one who can do better, from betaking himself to a






species of industry lucrative to the nation, but ungrateful to






those who exercise it, the statesman must collect the children of






the wretched into workhouses, and breed them to this employment,






under the best regulations possible for saving every article of






necessary expence; here likewise may be employed occasionally






those above mentioned, whom the change of modes may have cast out






of employment, until they can be better provided for. This is






also an outlet for foundlings, since many of those who work for






foreign exportation, are justly to be ranked in the lowest






classes of the people; and in the first book we proposed, that






every one brought up at the expence of public charity, should be






thrown in for recruiting these classes, which can with greatest






difficulty support their own numbers by propagation.






    Here let me observe, that although it be true in general,






that the greatest part of exportable manufactures do yield but






very middling profits, from the extension of industry in






different countries, yet sundry exceptions may be found;






especially in nations renowned for their elegance of taste. But






how quickly do we see these lucrative branches of foreign trade






cut off, in consequence of the very inconvenience we here seek a






remedy for. The reason is plain. When strangers demand such






manufactures, they share only in the instruments of foreign






luxury, which bring every where considerable profits to the






manufacturer. These high profits easily establish a rivalship in






favour of the nation to whom they are supplied; because a hint is






sufficient to enable such as exercise a similar profession at






home, to supply their own inhabitants. This being the case, an






able statesman should be constantly attentive to every growing






taste among foreign nations for the inventions of his people; and






so soon as his luxurious workmen have set any one on foot, he may






throw this branch into the hands of the most frugal, in order to






support it, and then give them such encouragement as to prevent






the rivalship of those strangers at least, who are accustomed to






work for larger profits. This is one method of turning a branch






of luxury into an article of foreign trade. Let me illustrate






this by an example.






    What great advantages do not the French reap from the






exportation of their modes? But how quickly do we find their






varnishes, gauzes, ribbands, and colifichets, imitated by other






nations? For no other reason but because of the large, or






consolidated profits enjoyed by the French workmen themselves,






who, fertile in new inventions, and supported by their reputation






for the elegance of their taste in matters of dress, have got






into possession of the right of prescribing to all Europe the






standard of taste in articles of mere superfluity. This however






is no permanent prerogative; and that elegant people, by long






setting the example, and determining the standard of refinement






in some luxurious arts, will at last inspire a similar taste into






their scholars, who will thereby be enabled to supplant them.






Whereas were they careful to supply all their inventions at the






lowest prices possible, they would ever continue to be the only






furnishers.






    The method therefore of reducing consolidated profits,






whether upon articles of exportation, or home consumption, is to






increase the number of hands employed in supplying them; and the






more gradually this change is made to take place, the fewer






inconveniences will result to those who will thereby be forced to






renounce them.






    A country which has an extensive territory, and great






opportunities of extending her agriculture (such as in a former






chapter I supposed the present situation of France to be) may,






under a good administration, find the progress of luxury very






compatible with the prosperity of her foreign trade; because






inhabitants may be multiplied at discretion. But so soon as






subsistence becomes hard to be obtained, this expedient is cut






off. A statesman must then make the best of the inhabitants he






has, luxury must suffer a check; and those who are employed in






supplying home consumption at high prices, must be made to reduce






their consolidated profits, in order to bring the price of their






manufactures within such bounds as to make them vendible in






foreign markets.






    If manufacturers become luxurious in their way of living, it






must proceed from their extraordinary profits. These they may






still continue to have, as long as the produce of their work is






consumed at home. But no merchant will pretend to sell it out of






the country; because, in this case, he will find the labour of






other people who are less luxurious, and consequently work






cheaper, in competition with him.






    To re-establish then the foreign trade, these consolidated






profits must be put an end to, by attacking luxury when






circumstances render an augmentation of people inconvenient, and






prices will fall of course.






    This will occasion great complaints among all sorts of






tradesmen. The cry will be, that trade is ruined, manufacturers






are starving, and the state is undone: but the truth will be,






that manufacturers will, by their labour, begin to enrich their






own nation, at the expence of all those who trade with her,






instead of being enriched at the expence of their own countrymen;






and by a revolution only in the balance of wealth at home.






    It will prove very discouraging to any statesman to attempt a






sudden reform of this abuse of consolidated profits, and to






attack the luxury of his own people. The best way therefore is to






prevent matters from coming to such as pass, as to demand so






dangerous and difficult a remedy.






    There is hardly a possibility of changing the manners of a






people, but by a proper attention to the education of the youth.






All methods, therefore, should be fallen upon to supply






manufactures with new hands; and lest the contagion of example






should get the better of all precautions, the seat of






manufactures might be changed; especially when they are found in






great and populous cities, where living is dear: in this case,






others should be erected in the provinces where living is cheap.






The state must encourage these new undertakings; numbers of






children must be taken in, in order to be bred early to industry






and frugality; this again will encourage people to marry and






propagate, as it will contribute towards discharging them of the






load of a numerous family. If such a plan as this be followed,






how inconsiderable will the number of poor people become in a






little time; and as it will insensibly multiply the useful






inhabitants, out of that youth which recruited and supported the






numbers of the poor, so the taxes appropriated for the relief of






poverty may be then wholly applied, in order to prevent it.






    Laws of naturalization have been often proposed in a nation,






where consolidated profits have occasioned the inconveniences for






which we have here been proposing a remedy. By this expedient






many flatter themselves to draw industrious strangers into the






country, who being accustomed to live more frugally, and upon






less profits, may, by their example and competition, beat down






the price of work among the inhabitants.






    Several circumstances concur to defeat the success of this






scheme. The first is, that consolidated profits are not the only






inconvenience to be removed: there is also a complication of high






prices upon many necessaries. Secondly, as no real change has






been proposed as a concomitant of such naturalization-laws (such






as a regulation for augmenting the supply of subsistence, and






fixing the price of it within proper bounds) these strangers,






who, as such, must be exposed to extraordinary expence, are not






able to subsist, nor consequently to work so cheap as they did at






home. Besides, what can be supposed to be their motive of coming,






if it be not to have higher wages, and to live better?






    Here then is a nation sending for strangers, in order that






they may work cheaper; and strangers flocking into the country in






hopes of selling their work dearer. This is just the case with






two friends who are about making a bargain; the seller imagines






that his friend will not grudge a good price. The buyer, on the






other hand, flatters himself that his friend will sell to him






cheaper than to another. This seldom fails to produce discontent






on both sides.






    Besides, unless the quantity of food be increased, if






strangers are imported to eat part of it, natives must in some






degree starve and if you augment the quantity of food, and keep






it at a little lower price than in neighbouring nations, your own






inhabitants will multiply; the state may take great numbers of






them into their service when young; they soon come to be able to






do something in the manufacturing way; they may be bound for a






number of years, sufficient to indemnify the public for the first






expence; and the encouragement alone of having bread cheaper than






elsewhere, will bring you as many strangers as you incline to






receive, provided a continual supply of food can be procured in






proportion to the increase of the people.






    But I imagine that it is always better for a state to






multiply by means of its own inhabitants, than by that of






strangers; for many reasons which to me appear obvious.






    We come now to the second cause of high prices, to wit, a






rise in the value of the articles of the first necessity, which






we have said proceeds from the progress of industry having






outstripped the progress of agriculture. Let me set this idea in






a clearer light; for here it is expressed in too general terms to






be rightly viewed on all sides.






    The idea of inhabitants being multiplied beyond the






proportion of subsistence, seems to imply that there are too many






already; and the demand for their industry having been the cause






of their multiplication, proves that formerly there were too few.






Add to this, that if, notwithstanding the rise upon the price of






work proceeding from the scarcity of subsistence, the scale of






home demand be found to preponderate, at the expence of foreign






trade, this circumstance proves farther, that however the






inhabitants may be already multiplied above the proportion of






subsistence, their numbers are still too few for what is demanded






of them at home; and for what is required of them towards






promoting the prosperity of their country, in supporting their






trade abroad.






    From this exposition of the matter, the remedy appears






evident: both inhabitants and subsistence must be augmented. The






question comes to be, in what manner, and with what precautions,






must these operations be performed?






    Inhabitants are multiplied by reducing the price of






subsistence to the value, which demand has fixed upon the work of






those who are to consume it. This can in no other way be






accomplished than by augmenting the quantity, by importation from






foreign parts, when the country cannot be made to produce more of






itself.






    Here the interposition of a statesman is absolutely






necessary; since great loss may often be incurred by bringing






down the price of grain in a year of scarcity. Premiums,






therefore, must be given upon importation, until a plan can be






executed for the extending of agriculture; of which in another






place. This must be gone about with the greatest circumspection;






for if grain be thereby made to fall too low, you ruin the landed






interest, and although (as we have said above) all things soon






become balanced in a trading nation, yet sudden and violent






revolutions, such as this must be, are always to be apprehended.






They are ever dangerous; and the spirit of every class of






inhabitants must be kept up.






    By a discredit cast upon any branch of industry, the hands






employed in it may be made to abandon it, to the great detriment






of the whole. This will infallibly happen, when violent






transitions do not proceed from natural causes, as in the example






here before us, namely, when the price of grain is supposed to be






brought down, from the increase of its quantity by importation,






and not by plenty. Because upon the falling of the market by






importation, the poor farmer has nothing to make up for the low






price he gets for his grain; whereas when the fall proceeds from






plenty, he has an additional quantity.






    In years, therefore, of general scarcity, a statesman should






not, by premiums given, reduce the price of grain, but in a






reciprocal proportion to the quantity wanted: that is to say, the






more grain is wanted, the less the price should be diminished.






    It may appear a very extensive project for any government to






undertake to keep down the prices of grain, in years of general






scarcity. I allow it to be politically impossible to keep prices






low, because if all Europe be taken together, the produce of the






whole is one with another consumed by the inhabitants; and in a






year when there is a general scarcity, it would be very hard, if






not impossible, (without having previously established a plan for






this purpose) to make any nation live in plenty while others are






starving. All therefore that is proposed, is to keep the prices






of grain in as just a proportion as possible to the plenty of the






year.






    Now if a government do not interpose, this never can be the






case. I shall suppose the inhabitants of a country to consume, in






a year of moderate plenty, six millions of quarters of grain; if






in a year of scarcity it shall be found, that one million of






quarters, or indeed a far less quantity, be wanting, the five






millions of quarters produced, will rise in their price to






perhaps double the ordinary value, instead of being increased by






one fifth only. But if you examine the case in countries where






trade is not well established, as in some inland provinces on the






continent, it is no extraordinary thing to see grain bearing






three times the price it is worth in ordinary years of plenty,






and yet if in such a year there were wanting six months'






provisions for the inhabitants of a great kingdom, all the rest






of Europe would perhaps hardly be able to keep them from






starving.






    It is the fear of want and not real want, which makes grain






rise to immoderate prices. Now as this extraordinary revolution






in the rise of it, does not proceed from a natural cause, to wit,






the degree of scarcity, but from the avarice and evil designs of






men who hoard it up, it produces as bad consequences to that part






of the inhabitants of a country employed in manufactures, as the






fall of grain would produce to the farmers, in case the prices






should be, by importation, brought below the just proportion of






the quantity produced in the nation.






    Besides the importation of grain, there is another way of






increasing the quantity of subsistence very considerably, in some






countries of Europe. In a year of scarcity, could not the






quantity of food be considerably augmented by a prohibition to






make malt liquors, allowing the importation of wines and






brandies; or indeed without laying any restraint upon the liberty






of the inhabitants as to malt liquors, I am persuaded that the






liberty of importing wines duty free, would, in years of






scarcity, considerably augment the quantity of subsistence.






    This is not a proper place to examine the inconvenience which






might result to the revenue by such a scheme: because we are here






talking of those expedients only which might be fallen upon to






preserve a balance on foreign trade. An exchequer which is filled






at the expence of this, will not continue long in a flourishing






condition.






    These appear to be the most rational temporary expedients to






diminish the price of grain in years of scarcity; we shall






afterwards examine the principles upon which a plan may be laid






down to destroy all precariousness in the price of subsistence.






    Precautions of another kind must be taken in years of plenty;






for high prices occasioned by exportation are as hurtful to the






poor tradesman as if they were occasioned by scarcity. And low






prices occasioned by importation are as hurtful to the poor






husbandman as if his crop had failed him.






    A statesman therefore, should be very attentive to put the






inland trade in grain upon the best footing possible, to prevent






the frauds of merchants, and to promote an equal distribution of






food in all corners of the country. and by the means of






importation and exportation, according to plenty and scarcity, to






regulate a just proportion between the general plenty of the year






in Europe, and the price of subsistence; always observing to keep






it somewhat lower at home, than it can be found in any nation






rival in trade. If this method be well observed, inhabitants will






multiply; and this is a principal step towards reducing the






expence of manufactures; because you increase the number of






hands, and consequently diminish the price of labour.






    Another expedient found to operate most admirable effects in






reducing the price of manufactures (in those countries where






living is rendered dear, by a hurtful competition among the






inhabitants for the subsistence produced) is the invention and






introduction of machines. We have, in a former chapter, answered






the principal objections which have been made against them, in






countries where the numbers of the idle, or triflingly






industrious are so great, that every expedient which can abridge






labour is looked upon by some as a scheme for starving the poor.






There is no solidity in this objection; and if there were, we are






not at present in quest of plans for feeding the poor; but for






accumulating the wealth of a trading nation, by enabling the






industrious to feed themselves at the expence of foreigners. The






introduction of machines is found to reduce prices in a






surprising manner. And if they have the effect of taking bread






from hundreds, formerly employed in performing their simple






operations, they have that also of giving bread to thousands, by






extending numberless branches of ingenuity, which, without the






machines, would have remained circumscribed within very narrow






limits. What progress has not building made within these hundred






years? Who doubts that the convenience of great iron works, and






saw mills, prompts many to build? But this taste has greatly






contributed to increase, not to diminish, the number both of






smiths and carpenters, as well as to extend navigation. I shall






add only in favour of such expedients, that experience shews the






advantage gained by certain machines to be more than enough to






compensate every inconvenience arising from consolidated profits,






and expensive living; and that the first inventors gain thereby a






superiority which nothing but adopting the same invention can






counterbalance.






    The third cause of high prices we have said to be owing to






the natural advantage which neighbouring nations reap from their






climate, soil, or situation.






    Here no rise of prices is implied in the country in question,






they are only supposed to have become relatively high by the






opportunity other nations have had to furnish the same articles






at a lower rate, in consequence of their natural advantages.






    Two expedients may be used, in order to defeat the bad






effects of a competition which cannot be got the better of in the






ordinary way. The first is, to assist the branches in distress






with the public money. The other is patience, and perseverance in






frugality, as has been already observed. A short example of the






first will be sufficient in this place to make the thing fully






understood. I have already said, that I purposely postpone an






ample dissertation upon the principles which influences such






operations.






    Let me suppose a nation which is accustomed to export to the






value of a million sterling of fish every year, to be undersold






in this article by another which has found a fishery on its own






coasts, so abundant as to enable it to undersell the first by 20






per cent. In this case, let the statesman buy up all the fish of






his subjects, and undersell his competitors at every foreign






market, at the loss to himself of perhaps 250,000l. What is the






consequence? That the million he paid for the fish remains at






home, and that 750,000l. comes in from abroad for the prices of






them. How is the 250,000l. to be made up? By a general imposition






upon all the inhabitants. This returns into the public coffers,






and all stands as it was. If this expedient be not followed, what






will be the consequence? That those employed in the fishery will






starve; that the fish taken will either remain upon hand, or be






sold by the proprietors at a great loss; they will be undone, and






the nation for the future will lose the acquisition of 750,000l.






a year.






    To abridge this operation premiums are given upon






exportation, which comes to the same thing, and this is a






refinement on the application of this very principle: but






premiums are often abused. It belongs to the department of the






coercive power of government to put a stop to such abuse. All I






shall say upon the matter is, that if there be a crime called






high treason, which is punished with greater severity than






highway robbery, and assassination, I should be apt (were I a






statesman) to put at the head of this bloody list, every attempt






to defeat the application of public money, for the purposes here






mentioned. The multiplicity of frauds alone discourages a wise






government from proceeding upon this principle, and disappoints






the scheme. If severe punishment can in its turn put a stop to






frauds, I believe it will be thought very well applied.






    While a statesman is thus defending the foreign trade of his






country by an extraordinary operation performed upon the






circulation of its wealth, he must at the same time employ the






second expedient with equal address. He must be attentive to






support sobriety at home, and wait patiently until abuses among






his neighbours shall produce some of the inconveniences we have






already mentioned. So soon as this comes to be the case, he has






gained his point; the premiums then may cease; the public money






may be turned into another channel; or the tax may be suppressed






altogether, according as circumstances may require.






    I need not add, that the more management and discretion be






used in such operations, the less jealousy will be conceived by






other rival nations. And as we are proposing this plan for a






state already in possession of a branch of foreign trade, ready






to be disputed by others, having superior natural advantages, it






is to be presumed that the weight of money, at least is on her






side. This, if rightly employed, will prove an advantage, more






than equal to any thing which can be brought against it; and if






such an operation comes to raise the indignation of her rival, it






will on the other hand, reconcile the favour of every neutral






state, who will find a palpable benefit from the competition, and






will never fail to give their money to those who sell the






cheapest. In a word, no private trader can stand in competition






with a nation's wealth. Premiums are an engine in commerce, which






nothing can resist but a similar operation.






    Hitherto we have been proposing methods for removing the






inconveniences which accompany wealth and superiority, and for






preserving the advantages which result from foreign trade already






established: we must now change sides, and adopt the interest of






those nations who labour under the weight of a heavy competition






with their rich neighbours, versed in commerce, dextrous in every






art and manufacture, and conducted by a statesman of superior






abilities, who sets all engines to work, in order to make the






most of every favourable circumstance.






    It is no easy matter for a state unacquainted with trade and






industry, even to form a distant prospect of rivalship with such






a nation, as long as the abuses attending upon their wealth are






not supposed to have crept in among them. Consequently, it would






be the highest imprudence to attempt, at first setting out, any






thing that could excite their jealousy.






    The first thing to be inquired into is the state of natural






advantages. If any branch of natural produce, such as grain,






cattle, wines, fruits, timber, or the like, are here found of so






great importance to the rival nations, that they will purchase






them with money, not with an exchange of their manufactures, such






branches of trade may be kept open with them. If none such can be






found, the first step is to cut off all communication of trade by






exchange with such a people; and to apply closely to the supply






of every want at home, without having recourse to foreigners.






    So soon as these wants begin to be supplied, and that a






surplus is found, other nations must be sought for, who enjoy






less advantages and trade may be carried on with them in a lower






way. People here must glean before they can expect to reap. But






by gleaning every year they will add to their stock of wealth,






and the more it is made subservient to public uses, the faster it






will increase.






    The beginners will have certain advantages inseparable from






their infant state; to wit, a series of augmentation of all






kinds, of which we have so frequently made mention. If these can






be preserved in an equable progression; if the balance of work






and demand, and that of population and agriculture, can be kept






in a gentle vibration, by alternate augmentations; and if a plan






of oeconomy, equally good with that of the rivals, be set on foot






and pursued; time will bring every natural advantage of climate,






soil, situation, and extent, to work their full effects; and in






the end they will decide the superiority.






    I shall now conclude my chapter, with some observations on






the difference between theory and practice, so far as regards the






present subject.






    In theory, we have considered every one of the causes which






produce high prices, and prevent exportation, as simple and






uncompounded: in practice they are seldom ever so. This






circumstance makes the remedies difficult, and sometimes






dangerous. Difficult, from the complication of the disease;






dangerous, because the remedy against consolidated profits which






is to increase the number of manufacturers, will do infinite






harm, if applied to remove that which proceeds from dear






subsistence, which calls for a supply of food, not of mouths, as






has been said.






    Another great difference between theory and practice occurs






in the fourth case; where we suppose a nation unacquainted with






trade, to set out upon a competition with those who are in






possession of it. When I examine the situation of some countries






of Europe (Spain perhaps) to which the application of these






principles may be made, I find that it is precisely in such






nations, where the other disadvantages of consolidated profits,






and even the high prices of living, are carried to the greatest






height; and that the only thing which keeps one shilling of






specie among them, is the infinite advantage they draw from their






mines, and from the sale of their pure and unmanufactured natural






productions, added to their simplicity of life, occasioned by the






wretchedness of the lower classes, which alone prevents these






also from consuming foreign commodities. Were money in these






countries as equally distributed as in those of trade and






industry, it would quickly be exported. Every one would extend






his consumption of foreign commodities, and the wealth would






disappear. But this is not the case; the rich keep their money in






their coffers; because lending at interest, there, is very wisely






laid under numberless obstructions. The vice, therefore, is not






so much that the lending of money at interest is forbid, as that






the people are not put in a situation to have any pressing






occasion for borrowing it, as a mean of advancing their industry.






Were they taught to supply their own wants, the state might






encourage circulation by loan; but as they run to strangers for






this supply, their money is far better locked up.






    Upon a right use and application of these general principles,






according to the different combinations of circumstances, in a






nation whose principal object is an extensive and profitable






foreign trade, I imagine a statesman may both establish and






preserve, for a very long time, a great superiority in point of






commerce; provided peace can be preserved: for in time of war,






every populous nation, if great and extended, will find such






difficulties in procuring food, and such numbers of hands






gratuitously to maintain, that what formerly made its greatness






will hasten its ruin.













Chap. XIX













Of infant, foreign, and inland Trade, with respect to the several






Principles which influence them













    I have always found it easier to retain the geography of a






country, from the inspection of maps, after travelling over the






regions there represented, than before; as most prefaces are best






understood, after reading the book which they are calculated to






introduce. Let this serve as an apology for presenting to my






readers a chapter of distribution, in the middle of my subject.






    I intend at present to take a view of the whole region of






trade, divided into its different districts, in order to point






out a ruling principle in each, from which every other must






naturally flow, or may be deduced by an easy reasoning. These I






shall lay before my reader, that from them he may distribute his






ideas in the same order I have done. Hence the terms I shall be






obliged to use will be rendered more adequate, in expressing the






ideas I may have occasion to convey by them.






    I divide trade into infant, foreign, and inland.






    First. Infant trade, taken in a general acceptation, may be






understood to be that species, which has for its object the






supplying the necessities of the inhabitants of a country;






because it is commonly antecedent to the supplying the wants of






strangers. This species has been known in all ages, and in all






countries, in a less or a greater degree, in proportion to the






multiplication of the wants of mankind, and in proportion to the






number of those who depend on their ingenuity for procuring






subsistence.






    The general principles which direct a statesman in the proper






encouragement of this commerce, relate to two objects.






    First, To promote the ease and happiness of the higher






classes, in making their wealth subservient to their wants and






inclinations.






    Secondly, To promote the ease and happiness of the lower






classes, by turning their natural faculties to an infallible






means of relieving their necessities.






    This communicates the idea of a free society; because it






implies the circulation of a real equivalent for every thing






transferred, and for every service performed; to acquire which,






mankind submit with pleasure to the hardest labour.






    In the first book, I had little occasion to consider trade






under different denominations; or as influenced by any other






principle than that of promoting the multiplication of mankind,






and the extension of agriculture, by drawing the wealth of the






rich into the hands of the industrious. This operation, when






carried no farther, is a true representation of infant trade.






    But now I must set this matter in a new light: and consider






this infant trade as a basis for establishing a foreign commerce.






In itself it is a mean only of gratifying the desires of those






who have the equivalent to give; and of providing it for those






who have it not. We are next to examine how a statesman may, by






proper care, convert it into the means of procuring to his people






a great superiority over all the neighbouring nations; by






diminishing, on one hand, the quantity they have of this general






equivalent (wealth); and by increasing, on the other, the






absolute quantity of it at home; in such a manner as not only to






promote the circulation of that part of it which is necessary to






supply the wants of all the citizens, but by a surplus of it, to






render other nations dependent upon them, in most operations of






their political oeconomy.






    The statesman who resolves to improve this infant trade into






foreign commerce, must examine the wants of other nations, and






consider the productions of his own country. He must then






determine, what kinds of manufactures are best adapted for






supplying the first, and for consuming the latter. He must






introduce the use of such manufactures among his subjects; and






endeavour to extend his population and his agriculture, by






encouragements given to these new branches of consumption. He






must provide his people with the best masters; he must supply






them with every useful machine; and above all, he must relieve






them of their work, when home-demand is not sufficient for the






consumption of it.






    A considerable time must of necessity be required to bring a






people to a dexterity in manufactures. The branches of these are






many; and every one requires a particular slight of hand, which






cannot be acquired but under the eye of a skilful master, able to






point out the rudiments of the art. People do not perceive this






inconvenience, in countries where the arts are already






introduced; and many a projector has been ruined for want of






attention to it.






    In the more simple operations of manufacturing, where






apprenticeships are not in use, every one teaches another. The






new beginners are put among a number who are already perfect: all






the instructions they get is, do as you see others do before you.






This is an advantage which an established industry has over






another newly set on foot; and this I apprehend to be the reason






why we see certain manufactures, after remaining long in a state






of infancy, make in a few years a most astonishing progress. What






loss must be at first incurred! what numbers of aspiring geniuses






overpowered by unsuccessful beginnings, when a statesman does not






concern himself in the operation! If he assist his subjects, by






laying a prohibition upon foreign work, this expedient will






become the means of encouraging the most extravagant profits,






unless, at the same time, he extend the manufacture, by






multiplying the hands employed in it. I allow, indeed, that as






long as the gates of a kingdom are kept shut, and that no foreign






communication is permitted, large profits do little harm, and






tend to promote dexterity and refinement. This is a very good






method for laying a foundation for manufactures: but so soon as






dexterity has been thus sufficiently encouraged, and that






abundance of excellent masters have been provided; then the






statesman, in order to carry the plan into execution, ought to






multiply the number of scholars; and a new generation must be






brought up in frugality, and in the enjoyment of the most






moderate profits.






    The ruling principle, therefore, which ought to direct a






statesman in promoting and improving the infant trade of his






people, is to encourage the manufacturing of every branch of






natural productions, by extending the home-consumption of them;






by excluding all competition with strangers; by permitting the






rise of profits, so far as to promote dexterity and emulation in






invention and improvement; by relieving the industrious of their






work, as often as demand for it falls short; and, until it can be






exported to advantage, it may be exported with loss, at the






expence of the public. He must likewise spare no expence in






procuring the ablest masters in every branch of industry, nor any






cost in making the first establishments, in providing machines,






and every other thing necessary or useful to make the undertaking






succeed. He must keep constantly an eye upon the profits made in






every branch of industry, and so soon as he finds that the real






value of the manufacture comes so low as to render it exportable,






he must employ the hands, as above, and put an end to these






profits he had permitted as the means only of bringing the






manufacture to its perfection. In proportion as the prices of






every species of industry are brought down to the standard of






exportation, in such proportion will this species of trade lose






its original character, and adopt the second.






    Secondly, Foreign trade has been explained sufficiently: the






ruling principles of which are to banish luxury; to encourage






frugality; to fix the lowest standard of prices possible; and to






watch, with the greatest attention, over the vibrations of the






balance between work and demand. While this is preserved, no






internal vice can affect the prosperity of it. And when the






natural advantages of other nations constitute a rivalship, not






otherwise to be overcome, the statesman must counterbalance these






advantages by the weight and influence of public money; and when






this expedient becomes also ineffectual, foreign trade is at an






end; and out of its ashes arises the third species, which I call






inland commerce.






    Thirdly, The more general principles of in land commerce have






been occasionally considered in the first book, and more






particularly hinted at in the 15th chapter of this; but there are






still many new relations to be examined, from which new






principles will arise: these shall be illustrated in the






subsequent chapters of this book. I shall here point out the






general heads only, which will serve to particularize and






distinguish this third species of trade, from the two preceding.






    Inland commerce, in the present acceptation of the term, is






supposed to take place upon the total extinction of foreign






trade. The statesman must, in such a case, as in the other two






species, attend to supplying the wants of the rich, in relieving






the necessities of the poor, by the circulation of the equivalent






as above; but as formerly he had it in his eye to watch over the






balance of work and demand, so now he must principally attend to






the balance of wealth, as it vibrates between consumers and






manufacturers; that is, between the rich and the industrious. The






effects of this vibration have been shortly pointed out, Chap.






xv.






    In conducting a foreign trade, his business was to establish






the lowest standard possible as to prices; and to confine profits






within the narrowest bounds: but as now there is no question of






exportation, this object of his care in a great measure






disappears; and high profits made by the industrious will have






then no other effect than to draw the balance of wealth more






speedily to their side. The higher profits rise, the more quickly






will the industrious be enriched, the more quickly will the






consumers become poor, and the more necessary will it be to cut






off every foreign communication in the way of trade.






    From this political situation of any state, arises the






fundamental principle of taxation; which is, that, at the time of






the vibration of the balance between the consumer and the






manufacturer, the state should, by the imposition of a tax,






advance the dissipation of the first, and share in the profits of






the latter. This branch of our subject I shall not here






anticipate; but I shall, in the remaining chapters of this book,






make it sufficiently evident, that so soon as the wealth of a






state becomes considerable enough to introduce luxury, and put an






end to foreign trade; and when, from the excessive rise of






prices, all hopes of restoring it are lost, then taxes become






necessary, both for the support of government on the one hand,






and, on the other, to serve as an expedient for recalling foreign






trade in spite of all the pernicious effects of luxury to






extinguish it.






    I hope from this short recapitulation and exposition of






principles, I have sufficiently communicated to my reader the






distinctions I want to establish, between what I have called






infant, foreign, and inland trade. Such distinctions are very






necessary to be retained, because it is proper they should be






applied in many places of this treatise, in order to qualify






general propositions: these cannot be avoided, without a






perpetual repetition of such restrictions, which would tire the






reader, appear frivolous to him, and divert his attention.






    I shall only add, that we are not to suppose the commerce of






any nation confined to any one of the three species. I have






considered them separately, according to custom, in order to






point out their different principles. It is the business of






statesmen to compound them according to circumstances.













Chap. XX













Of Luxury













    My reader may perhaps be surprized to find this subject






formally introduced, after all I have said of it in the first






book, under a definition which renders the term sufficiently






clear, by distinguishing it from sensuality and excess; and by






confining it to the providing of superfluities, in favour of a






consumption, which necessarily must produce the good effects of






giving employment and bread to the industrious.






    This simple acceptation of the term, was the most proper for






explaining the political effects of extraordinary consumption. I






cannot however deny, that the word luxury commonly conveys a more






complex idea; and did I take no notice of this circumstance, it






might be thought that I had purposely confined the meaning of a






general term to a particular acceptation, in order to lead to






error, and with a view to conceal the vicious influence of modern






economy over the minds of mankind; which influence, if vicious,






cannot fail to affect even their political happiness.






    My intention therefore, in this chapter, is to relax the mind






of my reader, while I set before him my ideas concerning luxury,






taken in the most extensive acceptation of the word, in such an






order, as first to vindicate the definition I have given of it,






by shewing that it is a proper one; and secondly, to reconcile






the sentiments of those who appear to combat one another, on a






subject wherein all must agree, when terms are fully understood.






    For this purpose, I shall set out by distinguishing luxury,






as it affects our different interest, by producing hurtful






consequences; from luxury, as it regards the moderate






gratification of our natural or rational desires. I must separate






objects which are but too frequently confounded, and analyze this






complicated term, by specifying the ideas it contains, under






partial definitions.






    The interests affected by luxury, I take to be four: first,






the moral, as it hurts the mind; secondly, the physical, as it






hurts the body; the domestic, as it hurts the fortune; and the






political, as it hurts the state.






    The natural desires which proceed from our animal oeconomy,






and which are gratified by luxury, may be also reduced to four,






viz. hunger, thirst, love, and ease or indolence. The moderate






gratification of these desires, and physical happiness, is the






same thing. The immoderate gratification of them is excess; and






if this also be implied by luxury, no man, I believe, ever






seriously became its apologist.






    The first point to be explained is, what is to be understood






by excess. What appears an excess to one man, may appear






moderation to another. I therefore measure the excess by the bad






effects it produces on the mind, the body, the fortune, and the.






state. and when we speak of luxury as a vice, it is requisite to






point out the particular bad effects it produces to one, more, or






all the interests which may be affected by it: when this is






neglected, ambiguities ensue, which involve people in






inextricable disputes.






    In order to communicate my thoughts upon this subject with






the more precision, I shall give an example of the harm resulting






to the mind, the body, the fortune, and the state, from the






excessive gratification of the several natural desires above






mentioned.






    First, As to the mind, eating to exCess produces the






inconvenience of rendering the perceptions dull, and of making a






person unfit for study or application.






    Drinking confounds the understanding, and often prevents our






discovering the most palpable relations of things.






    Love fixes our ideas too much upon the same object, makes all






our pursuits and pleasures analogous to itself, and consequently






renders them trifling and superficial.






    Ease, that is, too great a fondness for it, destroys






activity, damps our resolution, and misleads the decisions of our






judgment on every occasion, where one side of the question






implies an obstacle to the enjoyment of a favourite indolence.






    These are examples of the moral evils proceeding from luxury






in the most general acceptation of the term. While the






gratification of these desires is accompanied by no such






inconveniences, I think it is a proof, that there has been no






moral excess, or that no moral evil has been directly implied in






the gratification. But I cannot equally determine that there has






been no luxury in the enjoyment of superfluity.






    Secondly, The physical inconveniences which follow from all






the four, terminate in the hurt they do the body, health or






constitution. If no such harm follows upon the gratification of






our desires, I find no physical evil: but still luxury, I think,






may be implied in every acceptation of the term.






    Thirdly, If the domestic inconveniences of the four species






be examined, they all centre in one, viz. the dissipation of






fortune, upon which depends the future ease of the proprietor,






and the well-being of his posterity. When luxury is examined with






respect to this object, the idea we conceive of it admits of a






new modification. An exCess here is compatible with a very






moderate gratification of our most natural desires. It is not






eating nor drinking, love nor indolence which are hurtful to the






fortune, but the expence attending such gratifications. All these






are frequently indulged even to excess, in a moral and physical






sense, by people who are daily becoming more wealthy by these






very means.






    Fourthly, Some political inconveniences of luxury have been






already pointed out. The extinction of foreign trade is the most






striking. But the loss of trade conveys no ideas of any moral,






physical, or domestic excess; and still it is vicious so far as






it affects the well-being of a state. Besides this particular






evil, I very willingly agree, that as far as the good government






of a state depends upon the application and capacity, as well as






the integrity of those who sit at the helm, or who are employed






in the administration or direction of public affairs, so far may






the moral inconveniences of luxury mentioned above, affect the






prosperity of a state. The consequences of excessive luxury,






moral and physical, as well as the dissipation of private






fortunes, may render both the statesman, and those whom he






employs, negligent in their duty, unfit to discharge it,






rapacious and corrupt. These may, indirectly, be reckoned among






the political evils attending luxury, so far as they take place.






But on the other hand, as they cannot be called the necessary






effects of the cause to which they are here ascribed, that is, of






moral, physical and domestic luxury, I do not think they can with






propriety be implied in the definition of the term. They are






rather to be attributed to the imperfection of the human mind,






than to any other second cause which may occasionally contribute






to their production. They may proceed from avarice, as well as






from prodigality.






    I hope this short exposition of a matter, not absolutely






falling within the limits of my subject, will suffice to prove






that my definition of luxury, describes at least the most






essential requisite towards determining it; namely, the providing






of superfluity with a view to consumption. This is inseparable






from our ideas of luxury, but vicious excess certainly is not. A






sober man may have a most delicate table, as well as a glutton;






and a virtuous man may enjoy the pleasures of love and ease with






as much sensuality as a Heliogabalus. But no man can become






luxurious, in our acceptation of the word, without giving bread






to the industrious, without encouraging emulation, industry, and






agriculture; and without producing the circulation of an adequate






equivalent for every service. This last is the palladium of






liberty, the fountain of gentle dependence, and the agreeable






band of union among free societies.






    Let me therefore conclude my chapter, with a metaphysical






observation. The use of words, is to express ideas; the more






simple any idea is, the more easy it is to convey it by a word.






Whenever therefore, language furnishes several words, which are






called synonimous, we may conclude, that the idea conveyed by






them is not simple. On every such occasion, it is doing a service






to language, to render such words as little synonimous as






possible, and to point out the particular differences between the






ideas they convey.






    Let us now apply this remark to the point under






consideration. I find the three terms, luxury, sensuality, and






excess, generally considered in a synonimous light,






notwithstanding the characteristic differences which distinguish






them. Luxury consists in providing the objects of sensuality, so






far as they are superfluous. Sensuality consists in the actual






enjoyment of them, and excess implies an abuse of enjoyment. A






person, therefore, according to these definitions, may be very






luxurious from vanity, pride, ostentation, or with a political






view of encouraging consumption, without having a turn for






sensuality, or a tendency to fall into excess. Sensuality, on the






other hand, might have been indulged in a Lacedemonian republic,






as well as at the court of Artaxerxes. Excess indeed, seems more






closely connected with sensuality, than with luxury; but the






difference is so great, that I apprehend sensuality must in a






great measure be extinguished before excess can begin.













Chap. XXI













Of Physical and Political Necessaries













    After having cleared up our ideas concerning luxury, it






follows naturally, to examine what is meant by






physical-necessary.






    I have observed in the third chapter of the first book, that






in most countries where food is limited to a determinate






quantity, inhabitants are fed in a regular progression down from






plenty and ample subsistence, to the last period of want, and






dying from hunger. It is ample subsistence where no degree of






superfluity is implied, which communicates an idea of the






physical-necessary. It is the top of this ladder; it is the first






rank among men who enjoy no superfluity whatsoever. A man enjoys






the physical-necessary as to food, when he is fully fed; if he is






likewise sufficiently clothed, and well defended against every






thing which may hurt him, he enjoys his full physical-necessary.






The moment he begins to add to this, he may be considered as






moving upwards into another class, to wit, that of the luxurious,






or consumers of superfluity; of which there are to be found, in






most countries, as many stages upward, as there are stages






downwards, from where he stood before. This is one general idea






of the question. Let me now look for another.






    If we examine the state of many animals which have no






appetites leading them to excess, we may form a very just idea of






a physical-necessary for man. When they are free from labour, and






have food at will, they enjoy their full physical-necessary. They






are then in the height of beauty, and enjoy the greatest degree






of happiness they are capable of. Animals which are forced to






labour, prove to us very plainly, that this physical-necessary is






not fixed to a point, but that it may vary like most other






things: every one perceives the difference between labouring






cattle which are well fed, and those which are indifferently, or






ill fed; all however, I suppose to live in health, and to work






according to their strength. This represents the nature of a






physical-necessary for man.






    In all the inferior classes in every nation, we find various






degrees of ease among the individuals; and yet upon the whole, it






would be hard to determine, which are those who enjoy






superfluity; which are those who possess the pure






physical-necessary; and which are those who fall below it. The






cause of this ambiguity must here be explained.






    The nature of man furnishes him with some desires relative to






his wants, which do not proceed from his animal oeconomy, but






which are entirely similar to them in their effects. These






proceed from the affections of his mind, are formed by habit and






education, and when once regularly established, create another






kind of necessary, which, for the sake of distinction, I shall






call political. The similitude between these two species of






necessary, is therefore the cause of ambiguity.






    This political-necessary has for its object, certain articles






of physical superfluity, which distinguishes what we call rank in






society.






    Rank is determined by birth, education, or habit. A man with






difficulty submits to descend from a higher way of living to a






lower and when an accidental circumstance has raised him for a






while, above the level of that rank where his birth or education






had placed him, his ambition prompts him to support himself in






his elevation. If his attempt be a rational scheme, he is






generally approved of; the common consent of his fellow-citizens






prescribes a certain political-necessary for him, proportioned to






his ambition; and when at any time this comes to fail, he is






considered to be in want.






    If on the other hand, a person either from vanity, or from no






rational prospect of success, form a scheme of rising above the






rank where birth or education had placed him, his fellow-citizens






do not consent to prescribe for him a political-necessary






suitable to his ambition; and when this fails him, he is






considered to fall back only into the class to which he properly






belonged. But if the political-necessary suitable to this rank






should come to fail, then he is supposed to be deprived of his






political-necessary.






    The measure of this last species of necessary, is determined






by general opinion only, and therefore can never be justly






ascertained; and as this opinion may have for its object even






those who are below the level of the physical-necessary, it often






happens, that we find great difficulties in determining its exact






limits.






    It may appear absurd, to suppose any one to enjoy superfluity






(which we have called the characteristic of political-necessary)






to whom any part of the physical-necessary is found wanting.






However absurd this may appear, yet nothing is more common among






men, and the reason arises from what has been observed above. The






desires which proceed from the affections of his mind, are often






so strong as to make him comply with them at the expence of






becoming incapable of satisfying those which his animal oeconomy






necessarily demands.






    From this it happens, that however easy it may be to conceive






an accurate idea of a physical-necessary for other animals,






nothing is more difficult, than to prescribe the proper limits






for it with regard to man.






    This being the case, let us suppose the condition of those






who enjoy but little superfluity, and who fill the lower classes






of the people, to be distinguished into three denominations; to






wit, the highest, middle, and lowest degree of






physical-necessary, and then let us ask, how we may form an






estimation of the respective value of the consumption implied in






each, in order to determine the minimum as to the profits upon






industry. This question is of great importance; because we have






shewn that the prosperity of foreign trade depends on the






cheapness of manufacturing; and this again never can fall below






the proportion or value of the physical-necessary for






manufacturers.






    One very good method of estimating the value of the total






consumption implied by this necessary quantity, is to compute the






expence of those who live in communities, such as in hospitals,






workhouses, armies, convents, according to the different degrees






of ease, severally enjoyed by those who compose them. In running






over the few articles of expence in such establishments, it will






be easy to discern between those, which relate to the supply of






the physical, and those which relate to the supply of the






political-necessary: ammunition bread is an example of the first;






a monk's hood and long sleeves, are a species of the latter.






    When once the real value of a man's subsistence is found, the






statesman may the better judge of the degree of ease, necessary






or expedient to allow for the several classes of the laborious






and ingenious inhabitants.






    As we have divided this physical-necessary into three






degrees; the highest, middle, and lowest; the next question is,






which of the three degrees is the most expedient to be






established, as the standard value of the industry of the very






lowest class of a people?






    I answer, that in a society, it is requisite that the






individual of the most puny constitution for labour and industry,






and of the most slender genius for works of ingenuity, having no






natural defect, and enjoying health, should be able by a labour






proportioned to his force, to gain the lowest degree of the






physical-necessary; for in this case, by far the greatest part of






the industrious will be found in the second class, and the strong






and healthy all in the first.






    The difference between the highest class and the lowest, I do






not apprehend to be very great. A small quantity added to what is






barely sufficient, makes enough: but this small quantity is the






most difficult to acquire, and a desire to surmount this






difficulty is the most powerful spur to industry. The moment a






person begins to live by his industry, let his livelihood be ever






so poor, he immediately forms little objects of ambition,






compares his situation with that of his fellows who are a degree






above him, and considers a shade more of ease, as I may call it,






as an advancement, not of his happiness only, but also of his






rank.






    There are still more varieties to be met with in the






condition of those who are confined to the sphere of the






physical-necessary. The labour of a strong man ought to be






otherwise recompensed than that of a puny creature. But in every






state there is found labour of different kinds, some requiring






more, and some less strength, and all must be paid for; but as a






weakly person does not commonly require so much nourishment as






the strong and robust, the difference of his gains may be






compensated by the smallness of his consumption.






    What we mean by the first class of the physical-necessary, is






when a person gains wherewithal to be well fed, well clothed, and






well defended against the injuries of heat and cold, without any






superfluity. This I say, a strong healthy person should be able






to gain by the exercise of the lowest denominations of






industrious labour, and without a possibility of being deprived






of it, by the competition of others of the same profession.






    Could a method be fallen upon to prevent competition among






industrious people of the same profession, the moment they come






to be reduced within the limits of the physical-necessary, it






would prove the best security against decline in a modern state,






and the most solid basis of a lasting prosperity.






    But as we have observed in the first book, the thing is






impossible, while marriage subsists on the present footing. From






this one circumstance, the condition of the industrious of the






same profession, is rendered totally-different. Some are loaded






with a family, others are not. The only expedient, therefore, for






a statesman, is to keep the general principles constantly in his






eye, to destroy this competition as much as he can, at least in






branches for exportation; to avoid, in his administration, every






measure which may tend to promote it, by constituting a






particular advantage in favour of some individuals of the same






class above others; and if the management of public affairs






necessarily implies such inconveniences, he must find out a






method of indemnifying those who suffer by the competition.






    We may therefore, in this place, lay down two principles:






First, that no competition should be encouraged among those who






labour for a physical-necessary: secondly, that in a state which






flourishes by her foreign trade, competition is to be encouraged






in every branch of manufactures for exportation, until the






competitors have reduced one another within the limits of this






necessary.






    Farther, I must observe, that this physical-necessary ought






to be the highest degree of ease, which any one should be able to






acquire with labour and industry, where no peculiar ingenuity is






required. This also is a point deserving the attention of a






statesman. For how frequently do we find, in great cities,






different employments, such as carrying of water, and other






burdens, sawing of wood, &c. erected into confraternities, which






prevent competition, and raise profits beyond the standard of the






physical-necessary? This, I apprehend, to be a discouragement to






ingenuity, and have the bad effect of rendering living dear,






without answering any one of the intentions of establishing






corporations, as shall be shewn in another place. The






physical-necessary, therefore, ought to be the reward of labour






and industry; whatever any workman gains above this standard,






ought to be in consequence of his superior ingenuity.






    It is not at all necessary to ascertain the limits between






these two classes; they will sufficiently distinguish themselves






by the simple operation of competition. Let a particular person






fall upon an ingenious invention, he will profit by it, and rise






above the lower classes which are confined to the






physical-necessary; but if the invention be such as may be easily






copied, he will quickly be rivalled to such a degree as to reduce






his profits within the bounds of the physical-necessary; so soon






as this comes to be the case, his ingenuity disappears, because






it ceases to be peculiar to him.






    Here arises a question: whence does it happen that certain






workmen avoid this competition, and make considerable gains by






their employment, while others are rivalled in their endeavours






to retain a bare physical-necessary?






    There is a combination of several causes to produce these






effects, which we shall examine separately; leaving to the reader






to judge, how far these causes may extend profits beyond the






physical-necessary.






    First, We have said (chap. 9.) that the value of a workman's






labour is determined from the quantity performed, in general, by






those of his profession, neither supposing them the best or the






worst, or as having any advantage or disadvantage, from the place






of their abode. A workman therefore, who, to an extraordinary






dexterity, joins the advantages of place, must gain more than






another.






    Secondly, We have often remarked, that competition between






workmen of the same profession, diminishes the profits upon their






labour. From this it follows, that in such arts where the least






competition is found, there must be the largest profits. Now






several circumstances prevent competition. First, An






extraordinary dexterity in any art, and especially in those where






the whole excellency depends upon great accuracy and a refined






taste, such as watch-making, painting of all kinds, making






mathematical instruments, and the like; all which set a






celebrated artist in a manner above a possibility of rivalship,






and make him the master of his price, as experience shews.






Secondly, The difficulty of acquiring the dexterity requisite,






resulting both from the time and expence of apprenticeships,






proves a plain obstacle to a numerous competition. Few there are,






who having the stock sufficient to defray the loss of several






years fruitless application, have also the turn necessary to lead






them to a particular branch of ingenuity. Thirdly, Many there






are, who have skill and capacity sufficient to enter into






competition, but are obliged to work for others, because of the






expensive apparatus of instruments, machines, lodging, and many






other things necessary for setting out as a master in the art.






These, and similar causes, prevent competition, and support large






profits. Fourthly, Masters increase their profits greatly by






sharing those of their journeymen: this share, the first have a






just title to, from the constant employment they provide for the






latter. and the certainty these again have of gaining their






physical-necessary, together with a profit proportional to their






dexterity, makes them willing to share with their master. The






fifth cause of considerable gains, and the last I shall mention,






is the most effectual of all, viz. great oeconomy, and






parsimonious living. In proportion to the combination of these






circumstances, the fortune of the artist will increase, which is






the answer to the first part of the question proposed.






    We are next to enquire how it happens that many industrious






people are rivalled in an industry which brings no more than a






bare physical-necessary. This must proceed from some disadvantage






either in their personal or political situation. In their






personal situation, when they are loaded with a numerous family,






interrupted by sickness, or other accidental avocations. In their






political situation, when they happen to be under a particular






subordination from which others are free, or to be loaded with






taxes which others do not pay.






    I shall only add, that in computing the value of the






physical-necessary of the lowest denomination, a just allowance






must be made for all interruptions of labour: no person can be






supposed to work every free day; and the labour of the year must






defray the expence of the year. This is evident. Farther, neither






humanity, or policy, that is the interest of a state, can






recommend a rigorous oeconomy upon this essential quantity. If






the great abuses upon the price of labour be corrected, those






which remain imperceptible to the public eye, will prove no






disadvantage to exportation; and as long as this goes on with






success, the state is in health and vigour. Exportation of work






is another pulse of the political body.













Chap. XXII













Preliminary Reflections upon inland Commerce













    I resume the subject, which, as a rest to the mind, I dropt






at the end of the 19th chapter.






    I am now to treat directly of inland commerce, which has been






sufficiently distinguished from infant, and foreign trade.






    We are to consider ourselves now as transported into a new






country, where foreign trade had been carried to the greatest






height possible; until the luxury of the inhabitants, the






carelessness, perhaps, of the statesman, and the natural






advantages of other nations, added to the progress of their






industry and refinement, had concurred to cut it off, and thereby






to dry up the source which had till then been constantly






augmenting the national opulence.






    We must examine the natural effects of this revolution; we






must point out how every inconvenience proceeding from it may be






avoided, and how a statesman may regulate his conduct, so as to






prevent the exportation of any part of that wealth which the






nation may have heaped up within herself, during the prosperity






of her foreign trade. How he may keep the whole of his people






constantly employed, and by what means he may promote an equable






circulation of domestic wealth, through the hands of the lower






classes, which will prove an adequate equivalent given by the






rich, for the services rendered them by the industrious poor.






How, by a judicious imposition of taxes, he may draw together an






equitable proportion of every man's annual income, without






reducing any one below the standard of a full physical-necessary.






How he may, with this public fund, preserve in vigour every






branch of industry, and be enabled also, by the means of it, to






profit of the smallest revolution in the situation of other






nations, so as to reestablish the foreign trade of his own






people. And lastly, how the society may be thereby sufficiently






defended against foreign enemies, by a body of men regularly






supported and maintained at the public charge, without






occasioning any sudden revolution hurtful to industry, either






when it becomes necessary to increase their numbers, in order to






carry on an unavoidable war, or to diminish them, upon the return






of peace and tranquility. This is, in few words, the object of a






statesman's attention when he finds himself at the head of a






people living upon their own wealth without any mercantile






connections with strangers.






    How hurtful soever the natural and immediate effects of






political revolutions may have been formerly, when the mechanism






of government was more simple than at present, they are now






brought under such restrictions, by the complicated system of






modern oeconomy, that the evil which might otherwise result from






them may be guarded against with ease.






    As often, therefore, as we find a notable prejudice resulting






to a state, from a change of their circumstances, gradually






taking place, we may safely conclude, that negligence, or want of






abilities, in those who have the direction of public affairs, has






more than any other cause been the occasion of it.






    It was observed, in the third chapter of the first book, that






before the introduction of modern oeconomy, which is made to






subsist by the means of taxes, a state was seldom found to be






interested in watching over the actions of the people. They






bought and sold, transferred, transported, modified, and






compounded productions and manufactures, for public use, and






private consumption, just as they thought fit. Now it is






precisely in these operations that a modern state is chiefly






interested; because proportional taxes are made to affect a






people on every such occasion.






    The interest the state has in levying these impositions,






gives a statesman an opportunity of laying such operations under






certain restrictions; by the means of which, upon every change of






circumstances, he can produce the effect he thinks fit. Do the






people buy from foreigners what they can find at home? he imposes






a duty upon importation. Do they sell what they ought to






manufacture? he shuts the gates of the country. Do they transfer






or transport at home? he accelerates or retards the operation, as






best suits the common interest. Do they modify or compound what






the public good requires to be consumed in its simple state? he






can either prevent it by a positive prohibition, or he may permit






such consumption to the more wealthy only, by subjecting it to a






duty.






    So powerful an influence over the operations of a whole






people, vests an authority in a modern statesman, which in former






ages, even under the most absolute governments, was utterly






unknown. The truth of this remark will appear upon reflecting on






the force of some states, at present in Europe, where the






sovereign power is extremely limited, in every arbitrary exercise






of it, and where, at the same time, it is found to operate over






the wealth of the inhabitants, in a manner far more efficacious






than the most despotic and arbitrary authority possibly can do.






    It is the order and regularity in the administration of the






complicated modern oeconomy, which alone can put a statesman in a






capacity to exert the whole force of his people. The more he has






their actions under his influence, the easier it is for him to






make them concur in advancing the general good.






    Here it is objected, that any free people who invest a






statesman with a power to control their most trivial actions,






must be out of their wits, and considered as submitting to a






voluntary slavery of the worst nature, as it must be the most






difficult to be shaken off. This I agree to; supposing the power






vested to be of an arbitrary nature, such as we have described in






the thirteenth chapter of this book. But while the legislative






power is exerted in acquiring an influence only over the actions






of individuals, in order to promote a scheme of political






oeconomy, uniform and consistent in all its parts, the






consequence will be so far from introducing slavery among the






people, that the execution of the plan will prove absolutely






inconsistent with every arbitrary or irregular measure.






    The power of a modern prince, let it be by the constitution






of his kingdom, ever so absolute, immediately becomes limited so






soon as he establishes the plan of oeconomy which we are






endeavouring to explain. If his authority formerly resembled the






solidity and force of the wedge (which may indifferently be made






use of, for splitting of timber, stones and other hard bodies,






and which may be thrown aside and taken up again at pleasure), it






will at length come to resemble the delicacy of the watch, which






is good for no other purpose than to mark the progression of






time, and which is immediately destroyed, if put to any other






use, or touched with any but the gentlest hand.






    As modern oeconomy, therefore, is the most effectual bridle






ever was invented against the folly of despotism; so the wisdom






of so great a power never shines with greater lustre, than when






we see it exerted in planning and establishing this oeconomy, as






a bridle against the wanton exercise of itself in succeeding






generations. I leave it to my reader to seek for examples in the






conduct of our modern Princes, which may confirm what, I think,






reason seems to point out: were they less striking, I might be






tempted to mention them.






    The part of our subject we are now to treat of, will present






us with a system of political oeconomy, still more complicated






than any thing we have hitherto met with.






    While foreign trade flourishes and is extended, the wealth of






a nation increases daily; but force is not so easily exerted, as






after this wealth begins to circulate more at home, as we shall






easily shew. But, on the other hand, the force she exerts is much






more easily recruited. In the first case, her frugality enables






her to draw new supplies out of the coffers of her neighbours; in






the last, her luxury affords a resource from the wealth of her






own citizens.






    In opening my chapter, I have introduced my reader into a new






country; or indeed I may say, that I have brought him back into






that which we had under our consideration in the first book.






    Here luxury and superfluous consumption will strike his view






almost at every step. He will naturally compare the system of






frugality, which we have dismissed, with that of dissipation,






which we are now to take up; and he may very naturally conclude,






that the introduction of the latter, must prove a certain






forerunner of destruction. The examples found in history of the






greatest monarchies being broken to pieces, so soon as the taste






for simplicity was lost, seem to justify this conjecture. It is,






therefore, necessary to examine circumstances a little, that we






may compare, in this particular also, the oeconomy of the






ancients with our own; in order to discover whether the






introduction of luxury be as hurtful at present, as it formerly






proved to those states which made so great a figure in the world;






and which are known from history only, and judged of from the few






scattered ruins, which remain to bear testimony of their former






greatness.






    Luxury is the child of wealth; and wealth is acquired by






states, as by private people, either by a lucrative, or by an






onerous title, as the civilians speak. The lucrative title, by






which a state acquires, is either by rapine, or from her mines;






the onerous title, or that for a valuable consideration, is by






industry.






    The wealth of the ancient monarchs of Babylon, Persia,






Greece, and Rome, was the effect of rapine; whereas industry






enriched the cities of Sydon, Tyre, Carthage, Athens, and






Alexandria. The luxury of the first, proved the ruin of the






luxurious; the luxury of the last, advanced their grandeur:






because they had no rivals to take advantage of the natural






effects of this luxury, in cutting off the profits of their






foreign trade. Peace was as hurtful to the plunderers, as war was






destructive to the industrious.






    When an empire was at war, its wealth was thereby made to






circulate for an equivalent in services performed. So soon as






peace was restored, every one returned, as it were, to a state of






slavery. The monarch then possessed himself of all the wealth,






and distributed it by caprice. Fortunes were made in an instant,






and no body knew how: they were lost again by transitions equally






violent and sudden. The luxury of those days was attended with






the most excessive oppression. Extraordinary consumption was no






proof of the circulation of any adequate equivalent in favour of






the industrious: it had not the effect of giving bread to the






poor, nor of proportionally diminishing the wealth of the rich.






The great remained constantly great; and the more they were






prodigal, the more the small were brought into distress. In one






word, luxury had nothing to recommend it, but that quality which






solely constitutes the abuse of it in modern times; to wit, the






excessive gratification of the passions of the great, which






frequently brought on the corruption of their manners.






    When such a state became luxurious, public affairs were






neglected because it was not from a right administration that






wealth was to be procured. War, under such circumstances, worked






effects almost similar to the springing up of industry in modern






times; it procured employment, and this produced a more regular






circulation, as has been said.






    On the other hand, the wealth and luxury of the trading






cities above mentioned, which was of the same species with that






of modern times, proceeded from the alienation of their work;






that is, from their industry. Nothing was got for nothing, and






when they were forced to go to war, they found themselves obliged






either to dissipate their wealth, by hiring troops, or to abandon






the resources of it, the labour of their industrious citizens.






Thus the punic wars exalted the grandeur of plundering Rome, and






blotted out the existence of industrious Carthage. I do not here






pretend to vindicate the justness of these reflections in every






circumstance, and it is foreign to my present purpose to be more






particular; all I seek for, is to point out the different effects






of luxury in ancient and modern times.






    Ancient luxury was quite arbitrary; consequently could be






laid under no limitations, but produced the worst effects, which






naturally and mechanically could proceed from it.






    Modern luxury is systematical; it cannot make one step, but






at the expence of an adequate equivalent, acquired by those who






stand the most in need of the protection and assistance of their






fellow citizens; and without producing a vibration in the balance






of their wealth. This balance is in the hands of the statesman,






who may receive a contribution upon every such vibration. He has






the reins in his hand, and may turn, restrain, and direct the






luxury of his people, towards whatever object he thinks fit.






    Luxury here is so far from drawing on a neglect of public






affairs, that it requires the closest application to the






administration of them, in order to support it. When these are






neglected, the industrious will be brought to starve, consumption






and taxes will diminish; that is, luxury will insensibly






disappear, and hoarding will succeed it. These and similar






consequences will undoubtedly take place, and mechanically follow






one another, when a skilful hand is not applied to prevent them.






    It is impossible not to perceive the advantages of supporting






a flourishing inland trade, after the extinction of foreign






commerce. By such means elegance of taste, and the polite arts,






may be carried to the highest pitch. The whole of the inhabitants






may be employed in working and consuming; all may be made to live






in plenty and in ease, by the means of a swift circulation, which






will produce a reasonable equality of wealth among all the






inhabitants. Luxury can never be the cause of inequality, though






it may be the effect of it. Hoarding and parsimony form great






fortunes, luxury dissipates them and restores equality.






    Such a situation would surely be of all others the most






agreeable, and the most advantageous, were all mankind collected






into one society, or were the country where it is established cut






off from every communication with other nations.






    The balance between work and demand would then only influence






the balance of wealth among individuals, and the subversions of






it would do little harm. If hands became scarce, the balance






would turn the quicker in favour of the laborious, and the idle






would grow poor. If hands became too plentiful (which indeed is






hardly to be expected) every thing would be bought the cheaper;






but the same quantity of national wealth would still remain






without any diminution.






    Where is, therefore, the great advantage of foreign trade?






    I answer by putting another question. Where is the great






advantage of a person's making a large fortune in his own






country? A man of a small estate may, no doubt, be as happy as






another with a great one; and the same thing would be true of






nations, were all equally inspired with a spirit of peace and






justice; or were they subordinate to a higher temporal power,






which could protect the weak against the violence and injustice






of the strong.






    It is, therefore, the separate interests of nations who






incline to communicate together, and consume part of one






another's commodities, which renders the consideration of the






principles of trade, a matter of great importance.






    While nations contented themselves with their own






productions, while the difference of their customs, and contrast






of their prejudices were great, the connections between them were






not very intimate.






    From this proceeds the great diversity of languages and






dialects. When a traveller finds a sudden transition from one






language to another, or from one dialect to another, it is a






proof that the manners of such people have been long different,






and that they have had little communication with one another. On






the contrary, when dialects change by degrees, as in the






provinces of the same country, it is a proof that there has been






no great repugnancy in their customs. In like manner, when we






find several languages, at present different, but plainly






deriving from the same source, we may conclude, that there was a






time when such nations were connected by correspondence, or that






the language has been transplanted from one to the other, by the






migration of colonies. But I insensibly wander from my subject.






    I have said, that when nations contented themselves with






their own productions, connections between them were not very






intimate. While trade was carried on by the exchange of






consumable commodities, this operation also little interested the






state: consumption then was equal on both sides; and no balance






was found upon either. But so soon as the precious metals became






an object of commerce, and when, by being rendered an universal






equivalent for everything; they become also the measure of power






between nations, then the acquisition, or at least the






preservation of a proportional quantity of them, became to the






more prudent, an object of the last importance.






    We have seen how a foreign trade, well conducted, has the






necessary effect of drawing wealth from all other nations. We






have seen in what manner the benefit resulting from this trade






may come to a stop, and how the balance of it may come round to






the other side. We are now to examine how the same prudence which






set foreign trade on foot, and supported it as long as possible,






may put an effectual stop to it, and at the same time guard






against a sudden revolution; to the end that a nation enriched by






commerce may not, by blindly or mechanically carrying it on, when






the balance is against her, fall into those inconveniences which






other nations must have experienced during her prosperity.













Chap. XXIII













When a Nation, which has enriched herself by a reciprocal






Commerce in Manufactures with other Nations, finds the Balance of






Trade turn against her, it is her Interest to put a Stop to it






altogether













    Trade having subsisted long in the nation we are now to keep






in our eye, I shall suppose that, through length of time, her






neighbours have learned to supply one article of their own and






other people's wants cheaper than she can do. What is to be done?






Nobody will buy from her, when they can be supplied from another






quarter at a less price. I say, what is to be done? For if there






be no check put upon trade, and if the statesman do not interpose






with the greatest care, it is certain, that merchants will import






the produce, and even the manufactures of rival nations; the






inhabitants will buy them preferably to their own; the wealth of






the nation will be exported; and her industrious manufacturers






will be brought to starve. We may therefore look upon this, as a






problem in trade, to be resolved by the principles already






established.






    First, then, it must be inquired, if, in the branch in which






she is undersold, her rivals enjoy a natural advantage above her,






which no superior industry, frugality, or address on her side,






can counterbalance? If this he the case, there are three






different courses to be pursued, according to circumstances.






    First, To renounce this branch of commerce entirely, and to






take the commodities wanted from foreigners, as they can furnish






them cheaper.






    Secondly, To prohibit the importation of such commodities






altogether.






    Thirdly, To impose a duty upon importation, in order to raise






the price of them so high as to make them dearer than the same






kind of commodity produced at home.






    The first course may be taken, if, upon examining how the






hands employed in a manufacture may be disposed of, it be found,






that they may easily be thrown into another branch of industry,






in which the nation's natural advantages are as superior to her






rivals, as their's are superior to her's in the branch she






intends to abandon; and provided her neighbours will agree to






open their ports to the free importation of the commodities in






question. For though there may be little profit in a trade by






exchange, I still think it advisable to continue correspondence,






and to avoid every occasion of cutting off commerce with other






nations. A laborious, oeconomical, and sagacious nation, such as






I suppose our traders to be, will be able to profit of many






circumstances, which would infallibly turn to the disadvantage of






others less expert in commerce, with whom she trades; and in






expectation of favourable revolutions, she ought not rashly, nor






because of small inconveniences, to renounce trading with them;






especially if luxury should appear there to be on the growing






hand.






    But suppose the rival nation will not consent to receive the






manufactures, which the traders may produce with great natural






advantages, what course is then the best to be taken?






    I think she ought to encourage, for her own consumption, the






branch in which she is rivalled, though she must give over






exporting it; and, in this case, it must be examined, whether the






importation of it should be prohibited altogether, (which is the






second course mentioned above) or whether it be more advisable to






prefer the last scheme, viz. to allow such commodities to be






imported, with a duty which may raise their price to so just a






height as neither to suffer them to he sold so cheap as to






discourage the domestic fabrication, nor so dear, as to raise the






profits of manufactures above a reasonable standard, in case of






an augmentation of demand.






    The second course must be taken, when the natural advantages






of the foreign nations are so great, as to oblige the statesman






to raise duties to such a height as to give encouragement to






smuggling.






    The third course seems the best, when the advantages of the






rivals are more inconsiderable; in which case, the traders may,






in time, and by the progress of luxury among their neighbours, or






from other revolutions, which frequently happen in trading






nations, regain their former advantages.






    This may be the decision, in case a nation be rivalled in a






branch where she has not equal advantages with her neighbours;






and when she cannot compensate this inconvenience, either by her






frugality or industry, or by the means of a proper application of






her national wealth. These operations have been already fully






explained, and are now considered as laid aside; not that we






suppose they can ever cease to operate their effects in all






nations; but in order to simplify our ideas, and to point out the






principles which ought to direct a statesman's conduct upon






occasions, where from different combinations of circumstances, he






finds better expedients impracticable.






    Let me next suppose a nation to be rivalled in her staple






manufactures; that is, in those where she has the greatest






natural advantages.






    Whenever such a case happens, it must proceed from some vice






within the state. Either from the progress of luxury in the






workmen, which must proceed from consolidated profits, or from






accidental disadvantages; such as dearness of subsistence, or






from taxes injudiciously imposed. These (I mean all, except the






taxes, of which afterwards) must be removed upon the principles






above laid down: and if this cannot be compassed, no matter why;






then comes the fatal period, when all foreign reciprocal commerce






in manufactures must be given up. For if no profit can be made






upon branches where a nation has the greatest natural advantages,






it is more than probable, that every other branch will prove at






least equally disadvantageous. If upon this revolution the ports






of the nation be not shut against the importation of foreign






manufactures, merchants will introduce them, and this will drain






off the nation's wealth, and bring the industrious to starve.






    It is upon this principle that incorporations are






established. Of these we shall say a word, and conclude our






chapter.






    Cities and corporations, may be considered as nations, where






luxury and taxes have rendered living so expensive, that goods






cannot be furnished but at a high rate. If labour, therefore, of






all kinds, were permitted to be brought from the provinces, or






from the country, to supply the demand of the capital and smaller






corporations, what would become of tradesmen and manufacturers






who have their residence there? If these, on the other hand, were






to remove beyond the liberties of such corporations, what would






become of the public revenue, collected in these little states,






as I may call them?






    By the establishment of corporations, a statesman is enabled






to raise high impositions upon all sorts of consumption; and






notwithstanding these have the necessary consequence of






increasing the price of labour, yet by other regulations, (of






which afterwards,) the bad consequences thereby resulting to






foreign trade may be avoided, and every article of exportation be






prevented from rising above the proper standard for making it






vendible, in spite of all foreign competition.






    The plan of modern taxation seems first to have been






introduced into cities, while the country was subject to the






barons, and remained in a manner quite free from it. Cities






having obtained the privilege of incorporation, began, in






consequence of the powers vested in their magistrates, to levy






taxes: and finding the inconveniences resulting from external






competition (foreign trade), they erected the different classes






of their industrious into confraternities, or corporations of a






lower denomination, with power to prevent the importation of work






from their fellow tradesmen not of the society.






    Here arises a question.






    Why are corporations complained of in many countries, as






being a check upon industry; if the establishment of them proceed






from so  plain a principle as this here laid down?






    Let me draw my answer from another question. Why are they not






complained of in all countries?






    The difference between the situation of one country and






another, will plainly point out the principle which ought to






regulate the establishment and government of corporations. When






this is well understood, all disputes concerning the general






utility, or harm arising from them will be at an end: and the






question will be brought to the proper issue; to wit, their






relative utility considered with respect to the actual situation






of the country where they are established. In one province a






corporation will be found to be useful, in another just the






contrary.






    First then it must be agreed, on all hands, that the






principle laid down is just. Nobody ever advanced, that the






industry carried on in towns, where living is dear, ought to






suffer a competition with that of the country, where living is






cheap; I mean for the direct consumption of the citizens. But it






may be alleged, that no subaltern corporation should enjoy an






exclusive privilege against those who share of every burthen






imposed by the great corporation from which they draw their






existence: and that they have no right of exclusion against






citizens; but against strangers only, who are not under the same






jurisdiction, nor liable to the same burthens. Here the dispute






lies between the members of the great corporation and those of






the smaller. Now, I say, while no other interest is concerned,






the decision of this question ought to be left to the corporation






itself. But the moment the public good comes to be affected by






certain privileges enjoyed by individuals, such privileges should






either be abolished, or put under limitations.






    In countries where industry stands at a determinate height,






while the consumption of cities neither augments or diminishes;






while those who live upon an income acquired, live uniformly in






the same way; while this regular consumption is regularly






supplied, by a certain number of citizens sufficient to supply






it; while the hands employed for this purpose are in a perfect






proportion to the demand made upon them; in such countries, I






say, any diminution of the privileges of corporations, would be a






mean of overturning the equal balance between work and demand.






    We have said above, that when hands become too many for the






work, profits fall below the necessary standard of subsistence;






that the industrious enter into competition for the






physical-necessary, and hurt one another. Here then is the






principle which the corporation ought to keep in its eye: the






profits under every trade ought to be in proportion to the demand






for it.






    In order the better to support this proportion, many towns in






Germany have the subaltern corporations of trades restrained to






certain numbers. There is a determinate number of apothecaries,






joiners, smiths, &c. allowed in every town, and no more;






according as employment is found for them. This seems a good






regulation. I do not say but it may be abused. But the power of






administration must be lodged somewhere; and if in a country






where industry is making little progress, corporations were laid






open, the consequence would be, that every workman would starve






another, and the consumers would be ill served.






    On the other hand, when industry springs up, when the manners






of a people change all of a sudden, or by quick degrees, as has






been the case in many countries in Europe within these threescore






years: it is a mark of a narrow capacity not to perceive that a






change of administration becomes necessary; and if on such






revolutions those who are at the head of corporations should wish






to profit of the increase of demand, in order to raise prices in






favour of the incorporated workmen, the infallible consequence






would be, to make the city become deserted, and deprived of a






trade, which otherwise would necessarily fall to her share, in






consequence of the advantage she must draw from establishments






already made for supplying every branch of consumption.(1*) But






let the principle above mentioned be constantly followed; let






profits be kept at a right standard; let hands be increased






according to demand; let the city workmen gain no advantage over






those of the country which may not be compensated by the






difference of the price of living; let the disadvantages again on






the side of the town affect their own consumption only, not the






surplus of their industry; let every convenience for carrying on






foreign trade (every thing here is understood to be foreign,






which does not enter into the consumption of the town) be






provided for in the suburbs, or, if you please, in a place out of






the town walled in for this purpose; let markets there be held






for every kind of work coming from the country; and then the true






intent of a corporation will be answered. If it be found that the






prosperity of trade demands still more liberty, then the






corporation may be thrown open; but on the other hand, every






burthen must be taken off, and every incorporated member must be






indemnified by the state, for the loss he is thereby made to






suffer.






    The great change daily operating on the spirit of European






nations, where corporations have been long established, without






any great inconvenience having been found to arise from them,






suggest these reflections, which seem naturally to flow from the






principles to which we refer. I shall only add, that from the






practice of imposing taxes within these little republics (as I






have called them) Princes seem to have taken the hint of






extending this system; by first appropriating to the public






revenue, what the cities had established in favour of themselves,






and then by enlarging the plan as circumstances favoured their






design. That this is the true origin of the modern plan of






taxation (I mean that upon consumption) may be gathered from






hence; that the right of imposing taxes appears no where, almost,






to have been essentially attached to royalty, even in those






kingdoms, where Princes have long enjoyed an unlimited






constitutional authority over the persons of their subjects. An






authority, which I take to be the least equivocal characteristic






of an absolute and unlimited power. I know of no christian






monarchy (except, perhaps, Russia) where either the consent of






states, or the approbation or concurrence of some political body






within the state, has not been requisite to make the imposition






of taxes constitutional; and if more exceptions be found, I






believe it will not be difficult to trace the origin of such an






exertion of sovereign authority, without ascending to a very high






antiquity. The prerogative of Princes in former times, was






measured by the power they could constitutionally exercise over






the persons of their subjects; that of modern princes, by the






power they have over their purse.






    Having, therefore, shewn the necessity of putting a stop to






foreign reciprocal commerce in manufactures, so soon as in every






branch this trade becomes disadvantageous to a nation; the next






question is how to proceed in the execution of so great an






undertaking, so as to avoid a sudden and violent revolution in






the oeconomy of the state, which is of all things the most






dangerous: the hurt, therefore, ought to be foreseen at a great






distance, in order to be methodically prevented.













Chap. XXIV













What is the proper Method to put a Stop to a foreign Trade in






Manufactures, when the Balance of it turns against a Nations?













    It must not be understood, from what was said in the last






chapter, that so soon as the balance of foreign trade, either on






the whole, or on any branch of manufacture, is found to be






against a nation, that a statesman should then at once put a






total stop to it. This is too violent a remedy ever to be applied






with success.






    It is hardly possible, that a considerable revolution in the






trade of a nation should happen suddenly, either to its






advantage, or disadvantage, unless in times of civil discord, or






foreign wars, which at present do not enter into the question.






    A sagacious statesman will, at all times, keep a watchful eye






upon every branch of foreign commerce, especially upon






importations. These consist either in the natural produce of






other countries, or in such produce increased in its value by






manufacture.






    In all trade, two things are to be considered in the






commodity sold. The first is the matter; the second is the labour






employed to render this matter useful.






    The matter exported from a country, is what the country






loses; the price of the labour exported, is what it gains.






    If the value of the matter imported be greater than the value






of what is exported, the country gains. If a greater value of






labour be imported, than exported, the country loses. Why?






Because in the first case, strangers must have paid, in matter,






the surplus of labour exported; and in the second case, because






the country must have paid to strangers, in matter, the surplus






of labour imported.






    It is therefore a general maxim, to discourage the






importation of work. and to encourage the exportation of it.






    When any manufacture begins to be imported, which was usually






made at home, it is a mark that either the price of it begins to






rise within the country, or that strangers are making a new






progress in it. On the other hand, when the importation of






manufactures consumed within a country comes to diminish, and






when merchants begin to lose upon such branches of trade, it is a






proof that industry at home is gaining ground in those articles.






The statesman then must take the hint, and set out by gently






clogging the importation of those commodities, not so as to put a






stop to it all at once; because this might have the effect of






carrying profits too high upon the home-fabrication of them.






    All sudden revolutions are to be avoided. A sudden stop upon






a large importation, raises the prices of domestic industry by






jerks, as it were; they do not rise gradually; and these






extraordinary profits engage too many people to endeavour to






share in them. This occasions a desertion from other branches of






industry equally profitable to the state. Such revolutions do






great harm; because it is a long time before people come to be






informed of their true cause, and during the uncertainty, they






are in a wilderness, as it were, surprised and delighted with the






consequences of them, according as their several interests are






affected by them. Every one accounts for the phenomena in a






different way. Some are for applying remedies against the






inconveniences; while others are totally taken up in profiting to






the utmost of every momentary advantage. In a word, nothing is






more hurtful than a sudden revolution in so complicated an






interest as that of the whole class of the industrious, in a






modern society. When therefore such changes happen, in spite of






all a statesman can do, the best way to prevent the






inconveniences which they draw along with them, is to inform the






public of the true causes of every change, favourable or hurtful






to the several classes of inhabitants. This also seems to be the






best method to engage every one to concur in rendering the proper






remedies effectual, when the inconveniences themselves cannot be






prevented. So much for a scheme for encouraging growing






manufactures, or for supporting them in their decline. I proceed






next to consider the methods for preventing the loss of others






already established.






    We have said, that the importation of any article of






consumption usually provided at home, was a proof by no means






equivocal of a foreign rivalship. I shall say nothing at present,






of the methods to be used as a remedy for this inconvenience:






these have been already discussed. We must now suppose, every one






that might be contrived for this purpose, to have become






ineffectual; and foreign industry to be so far gaining ground, as






daily, more and more, to supply the several branches of domestic






consumption.






    Upon this, the statesman will begin by laying the importation






of such commodities under certain restrictions. If these do not






prove sufficient, they will be increased: and if the augmentation






produces frauds, difficult to be prevented, the articles will be






prohibited altogether. By this method of proceeding, it will be






found, that without any violent or sudden prohibition laid all at






once upon foreign trade. by little and little, every pernicious






branch of it will be cut off, till at last it will cease






altogether, as in the case mentioned above; to wit, when the most






advantageous branches of it cannot be carried on without loss.






    Something, however, must here be added, in order to restrain






so general a plan of administration. Nothing is more complex than






the interests of trade, considered with respect to a whole






nation. It is hardly possible for a people to have every branch






of trade favourable for the increase of her wealth: consequently,






a statesman who, upon the single inspection of one branch, would






lay the importation of it under limitations, in proportion as he






found the balance upon it unfavourable to the nation, might very






possibly undo a flourishing commerce.






    He must first examine minutely every use to which the






merchandize imported is put: if a part is re-exported with






profit, this profit must be deducted from the balance of loss






incurred by the consumption of the remainder. If it be consumed






upon the account of other branches of industry, which are thereby






advanced, the balance of loss may still be more than compensated.






If it be a mean of supporting a correspondence with a






neighbouring nation, otherwise advantageous, the loss resulting






from it may be submitted to, in a certain degree. But if upon






examining the whole chain of consequences, he find the nation's






wealth not at all increased, nor her trade encouraged, in






proportion to the damage at first incurred by the importation; I






believe he may decide such a branch of trade to be hurtful; and






therefore that it ought to be cut off, in the most prudent






manner, according to the general rule.






    The first object of the care of a statesman, who governs a






nation, which is upon the point of losing her foreign trade,






without any prospect or probability of recovering it, is to






preserve the wealth she has already acquired. No motive ought to






engage him to sacrifice this wealth, the safety alone of the






whole society excepted, when suddenly threatened by foreign






enemies. The gratification of particular people's habitual






desires, although the wealth they possess may enable them,






without the smallest hurt to their private fortunes, to consume






the productions of other nations; the motive of preventing






hoards; that of promoting a brisk circulation within the country;






the advantages to be by caring on a trade made by merchants, who






may enrich themselves disadvantageous to the nation; to say all






in one word, even the supporting of the same number of






inhabitants, ought not to engage his consent to the diminution of






national wealth.






    Here follow my reasons for carrying this proposition so very






far as to recommend the incurring of the loss of a part of the






inhabitants to that of any considerable part of the wealth






acquired; and I flatter myself, that when duly examined, I may






avoid the smallest imputation of Machiavellian principles, in






consequence of so bold an assertion.






    While a people are fed with the produce of their own lands,






the preservation of their numbers is quite consistent with the






preservation of their wealth. If, therefore, in such a case,






their numbers should be diminished upon a decay of foreign trade,






either by the exportation of their food, or by their lands






becoming uncultivated, I should never hesitate to lay the blame






upon the statesman's administration.






    But an industrious people may (as has been said) carry their






numbers far beyond the proportion of their own growth. The






deficiency must then be supplied from abroad, and must be paid






for with the balance of the trade in their favour. Now when this






balance comes to turn against them, and when, consequently, a






stop is put to the disadvantageous foreign trade, upon the






principles we have been laying down, the statesman is reduced to






this alternative; either annually to allow a part of the wealth






already got, to be exported, in order to buy subsistence for the






surplus of his people, as I may call them; or to reduce their






numbers by degrees (either by encouragements given to their






leaving the country, or by establishing colonies, &c.) until they






be brought down to the just proportion of the growth of national






subsistence. If he prefers the first, supposing the execution of






such a plan to be possible, the consequence will be, that so soon






as all the wealth is spent, the whole society, except the






proprietors of the lands, and those who cultivate them, must go






to destruction. If he prefers the second, he will remain






independent of all the world with respect to the inhabitants he






will preserve. They will remain in a capacity of maintaining






themselves, and he may alter the plan of his political oeconomy






as best may suit his circumstances, relatively to other nations.






While all his subjects are employed and provided for, he will






remain at the head of a flourishing and a happy people.






    It may be here objected, that the first alternative is an






impossible supposition. I allow it to be so, if you suppose it to






be carried the length to which I have traced it; because no power






whatsoever in a statesman can go so far as to preserve numbers at






the expense of the whole riches of his people. But I can very






easily suppose a case, where numbers may be supported at an






eminent loss to a state which finds itself in the situation in






which we have represented it in our supposition.






    Suppose a prince, upon the failure of his foreign trade, to






increase his army, in proportion as he finds his industrious






hands become idle by a deficiency of demand for their labour;






suppose him to fill his magazines for their subsistence by






foreign importation, leaving the produce of his country to feed






the rest of his subjects. By such a plan, every body will remain






employed, and also provided for, and such a prince may be looked






upon as a most humane governor. This I willingly agree to. I






should love such a prince; but the more I loved him, the more I






should regret that his project must fail, from a physical






impossibility of its being long supported; and when it comes to






fail by the exhausting of his wealth, it will not be his regrets






which will give bread to his soldiers, nor employment to his






industrious subjects, who will no longer find an equivalent for






their labour.






    Let this suffice at present, upon the general principles






which influence the stop necessary to be put to the importation






of foreign commodities, and to the diminution of national wealth,






in the case we have had before us.






    Next, as to the articles of exportation. The most profitable






branches of exportation are those of work, the less profitable






those of pure natural produce. When work cannot be exported in






all its perfection, because of its high price, it is better to






export it with a moderate degree of perfection, than not at all;






and if even this cannot be done to advantage, then will a people






be obliged to renounce manufacturing except for themselves: and






then, if domestic consumption do not increase in proportion to






the deficiency of foreign demand, a certain number of hands will






be idle, and a certain quantity of natural produce will remain






upon hand. The first must disappear in a short time; they will






starve or desert; the last will become an article of exportation.






Here then is a new species of trade which takes place upon the






extinction of the other. When a nation has been forced to reduce






her exportations to articles of pure natural produce, in






conformity to the principles we have been laying down, then the






plan proposed in the title of this chapter is executed. She is






then brought as low in point of trade as she can be, but, at the






same time, she may enjoy her natural advantages in spite of






fortune; and in proportion to them, she may, with a good






government and frugality, retain a balance of trade in her






favour, which will constantly go on in augmenting her national






wealth.






    There is, therefore, a period at which foreign trade may stop






in every article, but in natural produce. I do not know whether






this period be at a great distance, when the state of trade is






considered relatively to certain nations of Europe.






    Were industry and frugality found to prevail equally in every






part of these great political bodies, or were luxury and






superfluous consumption every where carried to the same height,






trade might, without any hurt, be thrown entirely open. It would






then cease to be an object of a statesman's care and concern. On






the other hand, were all nations equally careful to check every






branch of unprofitable commerce, a general stagnation of trade






would soon be brought about. Manufactures would no more be the






object of traffic; every nation would supply itself, and nothing






would be either exported or imported, but natural productions.






    But as industry and idleness, luxury and frugality, are






constantly changing their balance throughout the nations of






Europe, able merchants make it their business to inform






themselves of these fluctuations, and able statesmen profit of






the discovery for the re-establishment of their own commerce; and






when they find that this can no more be carried on with the






manufactures or produce of their own country, they engage their






merchants to become carriers for their neighbours, and by these






means, form as it were a third and last entrenchment, which,






while they can defend it, will not suffer their foreign trade to






be quite extinguished; because, by this last expedient, it may






continue for some time to increase their national stock. It is in






order to cut off even this resource, that some nations lay not






only importations under restraint, but also the importers. Let






such precautions be carried to a certain length on all hands, and






we shall see an end to the whole system of foreign trade, so much






*-la-mode, that it appears to become more and more the object of






the attention as well as of the imitation of all modern






statesmen.




















Chap. XXV













When a rich Nation finds her Foreign Trade reduced to the






Articles of Natural Produce, what is the best Plan to be






followed? and what are the Consequences of such a Change of






Circumstances?













    There is now no more question of a trading nation; this






character is lost, the moment there is a stop put to the export






of the labour and ingenuity of her people.






    The first objects of her care should now be to increase, by






every possible means, the quantity of her natural produce; to be






as frugal as possible in the consumption of it, and to export the






surplus to the best advantage.






    If she find the exportation of subsistence going forward,






while some of her people remain in want, she may rest assured






that industry is suffering from some internal vice; and the most






probable cause of such an effect may be an unequal competition






between those of the lower classes, who work for a physical






necessary. This must be removed, and the statesman should never






rest until he has set the balance of work and demand so far






right, as to prevent the scale of work at least from






preponderating; for this is the door by which misery gets in






among a people.






    The preponderation of the scale of demand will not now be so






hurtful; because this alteration of the balance will only raise






prices, accelerate circulation, and keep the other balance, to






wit, that of wealth (of which we shall treat in the following






chapter), in a constant vibration, without diminution of the






public stock.






    Another object of a statesman's care in these supposed






circumstances, is to prohibit the importation of all work, and






even the natural produce of any other country conducive to






luxury; for although I have said, that superfluous consumption






can do little harm when the interests of foreign trade do not






enter into the question so as to prevent exportation, by raising






prices at home; and though the importation of foreign produce, in






exchange for like commodities of national growth, do no hurt to a






state with respect to her wealth; yet if such importation be an






article of mere superfluity, I think a statesman should prudently






itself a proof of discourage it; because the search after






superfluities is of a luxurious turn, and I should wish to see






this turn improved so as to promote national purposes only, that






is, the augmentation and subsistence of useful inhabitants.






    Let me illustrate this by an example. Foreign wines, I shall






suppose, become *-la-mode, as a part of the luxury of an elegant






table. A statesman by his example, may discourage this, by






introducing many other articles of expense in entertainments






sufficient to compensate it. The furniture of apartments may be






rendered more magnificent, ornaments of the side-board,






decoration of desserts, new amusements immediately after dinner,






may be introduced, which would have an air of refinement and






delicacy.






    By such examples he may easily substitute one expense, which






may become a national improvement, in the place of another, where






the luxury produces no such effect. And when prodigality and






expense have neither the good effect of giving bread to the poor,






nor of accelerating circulation at home in favour of the public,






I can see no reason why a statesman should interest himself for






their support; and much less, why a speculative person, who






investigates the methods only of making mankind happy by






rendering mutual services to each other, should strain a subject,






in order to find arguments proper to make either the apology or






panegyric of the various schemes of dissipation.






    I need not add, as a restriction upon this principle of






discouraging the importation of foreign commodities, that when






such a branch of trade becomes necessary to be carried on, in






order to engage a neighbouring nation reciprocally to consume of






home-superfluities; in this case, the luxury of the consumers of






the foreign produce has an evident tendency to national






improvement. If, for example, delicate wines, and raw silk, be






imported as a return for salt herrings and raw hides, the support






of such trade is evidently the means of making the rich consume






these articles of home-production, by converting them into






burgundy and velvet.






    These considerations regard the augmentation or at least the






preservation of national wealth. If they are attended to, it is






hardly possible that any part of what is already acquired, can go






abroad; and in this case the whole balance of the exportation of






natural produce becomes clear again.






    There are still several things to be observed with regard to






the exportation of natural produce. Such articles as are in great






abundance, and are not produced in other countries, as wines in






the southern countries of Europe, ought always to be exported by






the natives, because considerable profits must be made upon such






a trade; and on such occasions, a people ought to be wise enough






to keep such profits for themselves.






    But if other nations will not receive them, unless they be






imported by their own subjects, then the statesman may impose a






duty upon exportation, which is one way of sharing the profits






with the carriers. All the precaution necessary, in imposing this






duty, is not to raise it so high as to diminish the demand; nor






to give an encouragement to a neighbouring nation, to enter into






competition for such a branch of trade.






    Neighbouring states which furnish the same articles of






natural produce, regulate, commonly, the duties upon exportation,






in such a manner as nearly to compensate all differences which






strangers may find, between trading with one or with the other.






Or they grant particular privileges to the nations with whom they






find it most for their advantage to trade.






    If the natural advantages upon such articles are less






considerable, no duty can be imposed. Exportation may then be






encouraged by granting still greater privileges to strangers or






others, who may promote the exportation at little cost to the






state.






    If, in the last place, the natural produce of a country be






common to others, where it is perhaps equally plentiful, it will






be difficult to procure the exportation of it; and yet it may






happen, that too great an abundance of it at home may occasion






inconveniences. In this case, the statesman must give a premium






or bounty upon exportation, as the only method of getting rid of






a superfluity, which may so much influence the whole mass of the






commodity produced, as to sink the price of the industry of those






employed in it, below the standard of their physical necessary.






By giving, therefore, this premium, he will support industry in






this branch; he will take nothing from the national wealth; and






the exportation, which takes place in consequence of the bounty,






will be clear gain. This is an uncommon operation in trade, but






it has so intimate a connection with the doctrine of taxes, and






the proper application of public money, that I will postpone the






farther consideration of it until I come to these branches of my






subject; and the rather, because this book is swelling beyond its






due proportion.






    I have little occasion to speak of importations into a






country which exports no manufactures. The ruling principle in






such cases, is to suffer no importation but what tends to






encourage the exportation of the surplus of natural produce, and






which, at the same time, has no tendency to rival any branch of






domestic industry. Thus it is much better for a northern country






to pamper the taste of her rich inhabitants with wines and






spices, than to discourage agriculture by the importation of rice






and foreign grain; supposing the alternative offered to her






choice, and the one as well as the other to be the returns for






her own superfluity exported.






    I come next to the consideration of her inland trade, and






consumption of her own manufactures. Here there is no question of






either an increase or diminution of her wealth, but merely of






making it circulate in the best manner to keep every body






employed. Several considerations must here influence our






statesman's conduct, and a due regard must be had to every one of






them. I shall reduce them to three different heads, and pass them






in review very cursorily, as we have already sufficiently






explained the principles upon which they depend.






    First, To regulate consumption and the progress of luxury, in






proportion to the hands which are found to supply them.






    Secondly, To regulate the multiplication of inhabitants






according to the extent of the fertility of the soil. These two






considerations must constantly go hand in hand.






    So long, therefore, as the statesman finds his country still






capable of improvement, so long may he encourage a demand for






work, and even countenance new branches of superfluous






consumption; since the equivalent to be given for them must of






necessity prove an encouragement to agriculture. But whenever the






country becomes thoroughly cultivated and peopled to the full






proportion of its own produce, a check must be put to






multiplication, that is, to luxury, otherwise misery and






depopulation will follow; unless indeed we suppose, that numbers






ought to be supported even at the expence of national wealth; the






fatal consequences of which we have already pointed out.






    Thirdly, He should regulate the distribution of the classes






of his people, according to the political situation of the






country.






    This is the most complicated case of all. It would be






imprudent, for example, in a very small state situated on the






continent, to distribute all its inhabitants into producers and






consumers, as we have called them on several occasions; that is,






into those who live upon a revenue already acquired, and those






who are constantly employed in acquiring one by supplying the






wants of the other. There must be a third class; to wit, those






who are maintained and taken care of at the expense of the whole






community, in order to serve as a defence. This set of men give






no real equivalent for what they receive; that is to say, none






which can circulate or pass from hand to hand; but still they are






usefully employed as members of a society mutually tied together






by the band of reciprocal dependence. Here no vice is implied;






but at the same time, the statesman must attend to the






consequences of such a distribution of classes.






    The richer any state is, the more it has to fear from its






neighbours; consequently, the greater proportion of the






inhabitants must be maintained for its defence, at the expense of






the industry of the other inhabitants. This must diminish the






number of free hands employed in manufactures, and in supplying






articles of consumption: consequently, it would be imprudent to






encourage the progress of luxury, while public safety calls for a






diminution of the hands which must supply it. If in such






circumstances luxury do not suffer a check, demand will rise






above the proper standard; living will become dearer daily,






prices will rise, and they will prove an obstacle to the recovery






of foreign trade; an object of which a prudent statesman will






never lose sight for a moment.






    It is for these and other such considerations, that many






small states are found to fortify their capital; to keep a body






of soldiers in constant pay, bearing a great proportion to the






number of the inhabitants; to form arsenals well stored with






artillery, and to institute sumptuary laws and other regulations






proper to check luxury. Nothing is so wise in every respect!






Their territory cannot be extended nor improved, nor can their






inhabitants be augmented, but at the expence of their wealth; for






such as gain their livelihood at the expence of strangers, are at






present out of the question. Were their own citizens therefore






permitted, out of the abundance of their wealth, to give bread to






as many workmen as their extravagance could maintain, the public






stock would be constantly diminishing, in proportion to the






foreign subsistence imported for these supernumeraries, and paid






for at the expence of the luxurious; which would be just so much






squandered out of the general wealth.






    In other states which are extended, powerful by means of






wealth, and strong by nature and situation, whose safety is






connected with the general system of European politics, which






secures them against conquest; such as Spain, France, Great






Britain, &c. the progress of luxury does little harm (as these






territories are still capable of infinite improvements) provided






it does not descend to the lower classes of the people.






    It ought to be the particular care of a statesman to check






its progress there, otherwise there will be small hopes of ever






recovering foreign trade. Whereas, if the lower classes of a






people continue frugal and industrious, from these very






circumstances trade may open anew, and be recovered by degrees,






in proportion as luxury comes to get footing in other nations,






where the common people are less laborious and frugal.






    Luxury, among those who live upon a revenue already got, and






who, by their rank in the state, are not calculated for industry,






has the good effect of affording bread to those who supply them;






but there never can be any advantage in having luxury introduced






among the lower classes, because it is then a mean only of






rendering their subsistence more chargeable, and consequently






more precarious.






    Having thus briefly laid together the principal objects of a






statesman's care, upon the cessation of the foreign trade of his






people, I shall finish my chapter, by pointing out some general






consequences relative to the spirit, government, and manners of a






people, which reason and experience shew to be naturally






connected with such a revolution.






    Nothing is more certain than that the spirit of a nation






changes according to circumstances. While foreign trade






flourishes, the minds of the monied people are turned towards






gain. Money, in such hands, is generally employed to procure






more, not to purchase instruments of luxury; except for the






consumption of those prodigal strangers who are thereby becoming






daily poorer. It is this desire of becoming rich, which produces






frugality. A man is commonly frugal while he is making a fortune;






another very commonly becomes extravagant in the enjoyment of it;






just so would it be with nations, were a wise statesman never to






interpose.






    When, by the cessation of foreign trade, the mercantile part






of a nation find themselves cut off from the profits they used to






draw from strangers; and on the other hand, perceive the barriers






of the nation gradually shutting against every article of






unprofitable correspondence, they begin to withdraw their stocks






from trade, and seek to place them within the country. This money






is frequently lent to landed men, hitherto living within bounds,






for two most substantial reasons. First, because there was little






money to be borrowed, from the high rate of interest, owing to






the great profits on foreign trade; and because the national






stock was then only forming. The second, because the taste of the






times was frugality. But when once the money usually employed in






buying up loads of work for the foreign markets, comes to fall






into the hands of landed men, they begin to acquire a taste for






luxury. This taste is soon improved and extended by an infinity






of arts, which employ the hands formerly taken up in furnishing






the goods for exportation. Thus by degrees we see a rich,






industrious, frugal, trading nation, transformed into a rich,






ingenious, luxurious, and polite nation.






    As the statesman formerly kept his attention fixed on the






preservation of an equal balance between work and demand, and on






every branch of commerce, in order to prevent the carrying off






any part of the wealth already acquired; he must now direct his






attention towards the effects of the domestic operations of his






wealth. He was formerly interested in its accumulation; he must






now guard against the consequences of its circulation.






    While the bulk of a nation's riches is in foreign trade, they






do not circulate within the country; they circulate with






strangers, against whom the balance is constantly found. In this






case, the richest man in a state may appear among the poorest at






home. In foreign countries you may hear of the wealth of a






merchant, who is your next door neighbour at home, and who, from






his way of living, you never knew to be worth a shilling. The






circulation of money from home-consumption will then be very






small; consequently, taxes must be very low; consequently,






government will be poor.






    So soon as all this load of money which formerly was






continually going backwards and forwards, and scarcely penetrated






into the country, is taken out of foreign trade, and thrown into






domestic circulation, a new scene opens.






    Every one now begins to appear rich. That wealth which






formerly made the admiration of foreigners, now astonishes the






proprietors themselves. The use of money, formerly, was to make






more of it: the use of money now, is to give it in exchange for






those or such like commodities, which were then consumed by






strangers only.






    It is this revolution in the spirit of a people, which






renders the consideration of the balance of their wealth an






object of the greatest political concern: because upon the






constant fluctuation of it, among the several classes of






inhabitants, is laid the foundation of public opulence.






    Government must constantly be respected, feared, and obeyed






by the people governed; consequently, it must be powerful, and






its power must be of a nature analogous to that of the subjects.






If you suppose a great authority vested in the grandees of a






kingdom, in consequence of the number and dependence of their






vassals, the crown must have still a more powerful vassalage at






its command: if they are powerful by riches, the crown must be






rich. Without preserving this just balance, no government can






subsist. All power consists in men, or in money.






    If upon the cessation of foreign trade we suppose a vast






quantity of wealth thrown into domestic circulation, the






statesman must follow new maxims. He must promote the circulation






of it so as to fill up the blank of foreign consumption, and






preserve all the industrious who have enriched him. The quicker






the circulation is found to be, the better opportunity will the






industrious have of becoming rich speedily; and the idle and






extravagant will become the more quickly poor. Another






consequence equally certain is, that the quicker the circulation






be, the sooner will wealth become equally divided; and the more






equally it be divided, the more equality will be found in power.






From these principles it will follow, that upon such a revolution






of national circumstances, a popular government may very probably






take place, if the statesman do not take proper care to prevent






it.






    This may be accomplished by the imposition of taxes, and






these may be differently laid on, according to the spirit of the






government.






    By taxes a statesman is enriched, and by means of his wealth,






he is enabled to keep his subjects in awe, and to preserve his






dignity and consideration.






    By the distribution of taxes, and manner of levying them, the






power is thrown into such hands as the spirit of the constitution






requires it should be found in. Are they imposed in a monarchy,






where every man is taught to tremble at the King's name, the






great men will be made rich by his bounty, and the lower classes






will be loaded and kept poor; that they may, on easier terms, be






engaged to fill those armies which the Prince entertains to






support his authority at home, and his influence abroad.






    Here independent people will always be looked upon with an






evil eye, and considered as rivals to the Prince, who ought to be






the only independent person in the state.






    In limited governments, where the sovereign has not the sole






power of taxation, they will be laid on more equally, and less






arbitrarily; provided the theory of them in general be well






understood. Here every man must know what he is to pay, and when;






and the amount of the tax must bear a proportion, on one hand, to






the exigencies of the state; and on the other, to the quantity of






circulation which takes place upon the payment of it; that is, a






man must not be made to pay all the state can demand of him for a






year, upon his making a trifling, though most essential,






acquisition of a necessary article of subsistence.






    I think I have observed one remarkable difference in the






point of view in levying taxes in countries, where these two






forms of government are established.






    Under the pure monarchy, the Prince seems jealous, as it






were, of growing wealth, and therefore imposes taxes upon people






who are growing richer. Under the limited government they are






calculated chiefly to affect those who from rich are growing






poorer.






    Thus the monarch imposes a tax upon industry; where every one






is rated in proportion to the gain he is supposed to make by his






profession. The poll-tax and taille, are likewise proportioned to






the supposed opulence of every one liable to them. These, with






others of the same nature, are calculated (as it is alleged) to






establish an equality in the load supported by the subjects; by






making the industrious, and money-gatherers, contribute in






proportion to their gains, although the capital stock from which






these profits arise be concealed from the eyes of the public.






    In limited governments, impositions are more generally laid






upon consumption. They encourage industry, and leave the full






profits of it to make up a stock for the industrious person. When






the stock is made, that is, when it ceases to grow, it commonly






begins to decrease: the number of prudent people, who live






precisely upon their income, is very small. It is therefore upon






the dissipation of wealth, in the hands of private people, that






the state is enriched. Thus the carreer towards poverty is only a






little abridged: he who is in the way of spending his estate will






get at the end of it, if his life be spared; and therefore there






is no harm done to him, and much good done to the state, in






making a part of his wealth circulate through the public coffers.






    The only precaution necessary to be taken in taxing






consumption, is, to render the impositions universally equal, and






to prevent their affecting what is purely necessary. or producing






an unequal competition between people of the same denomination.






Such impositions have still a worse effect, than those which fall






upon growing wealth: they prevent the poor from being able to






subsist themselves. A fellow-feeling excites compassion among






those of the lower classes; they endeavour to assist each other,






and by this operation, like a pack of cards, set up by children






upon a table, the first that is thrown down tumbles down another,






until all are laid flat; that is, misery invades the lower






classes: more than one half of a people.






    From these principles (which I have been obliged to






anticipate) we may gather the necessity of taxes, in states where






foreign trade begins to decay. Without them, there is no security






for government against the power of domestic wealth. Formerly,






Princes lived upon their domain, or patrimonial estate. What






domain would be sufficient, at present, to support the expence of






government? And if government be not able to hold the reins of






every principle of action within the state, it is no government,






but an idol, that is, an object of a voluntary respect. The






statesman, therefore, must hold the reins; and not commit the






management of the horses to the discretion of those whom he is






employed to conduct.






    Another consequence of taxes, is, that the more luxury






prevails, the more the state becomes rich: if luxury, therefore,






breeds licentiousness, it at the same time provides a curb






against its bad effects.






    This augmentation of wealth produces a double advantage to






the statesman: for, besides the increase of the public revenue,






the progress of luxury changing the balance of wealth constantly,






by removing it from the rich and extravagant, to the poor and






laborious, renders those who were formerly rich, and consequently






powerful, dependent upon him for their support. By the






acquisition of such persons, he gains additional credit, and






supports his authority. Thus wealth and power circulate and go






hand in hand.






    It may be asked, how these principles can be reconciled with






the vigour and strength commonly found in the government of






flourishing trading nations; for in such we must suppose few






taxes, consequently a poor and therefore a weak government; and a






rich, consequently, a powerful people?






    I answer, that under such circumstances, a people are






commonly taken up with their trade, and are therefore peaceable;






and as their wealth does not appear, being constantly in






circulation with strangers, the influence of it is not felt at






home. While wealth is employed in pursuit of farther gains, it






cannot give power. consequently, as to all political effects at






home, it is as if it did not exist; and therefore there is no






occasion for the state to be possessed of a wealth they have no






occasion to employ. If such a nation be attacked by her enemies,






she becomes wealthy in an instant; every one contributes to ward






off the common danger: but if, on the contrary, her tranquillity






be disturbed at home, the rebellion generally proves successful;






which is a confirmation of the principles laid down. I might






illustrate this from many historical remarks. I shall suggest






only to my reader, to examine the nature of the Dutch






revolutions, and to compare the success of rebellions in France






and England, during the last century, with others of a fresher






date. Here the reader may consult the learned Mr Hume's






observation upon the commencement of the civil war. History of






Great Britain, vol. i. p. 325.






    When, therefore, foreign trade has ceased for some time, and






luxury has filled up the void, a considerable part of national






wealth begins to circulate through the public treasury. It is






natural then for great men to resort to court, in order to






partake of the profits of government; and for the statesman to be






fond of attaching such people to his interest, in order to be a






constant check upon the turbulent spirit, which new-gotten wealth






may excite in the minds of one set of people, and desperate






fortunes raise in those of others.






    While there was little circulation of money in Europe, and






few taxes, there was small profit to be made in the following of






Kings. These were more formidable to their enemies than






profitable to their friends. The great men of the state lived






upon their lands, and their grandeur resembled that of the






Prince; it consisted in the number and dependence of their






vassals; who got as little by their Lord, as he did by the King.






The poor in those days were plundered of the little money they






had, by the great; now the great are stripped of the largest






sums, by the numbers of poor, who demand from them on all hands,






the just equivalent for their industry.






    When Princes find their great men all about them, all asking,






and all depending for different marks of their favour, they may






perceive the great change of their situation, produced by luxury,






and a swift circulation. This revolution has not been sudden, it






has been the work of several centuries; and I think we may






distinguish three different stages during this period.






    The first during the grandeur of the feudal government: then






the great barons were to be consulted, and engaged to concur in






the King's wars, because they were those who paid the expence,






and suffered the greatest loss. These are called by some the days






of liberty; because the states of every country in Europe almost,






were then in all their glory: they are called so with great






reason, when we consider the condition of the great only.






    In those days there were seldom any troubles or disturbances






in the state, seldom any civil wars levied against the King, but






such as were supported by the grandees; who, either jealous of






their own just rights, or ambitious of acquiring others at the






expence of the crown, used to compel their vassals, or engage






them by the constitutional influence they had over them, to






disturb the public tranquillity.






    The second stage, I think, may be said to have begun with the






times of industry, and the springing up of trade. Such Princes,






whose subjects began to enrich themselves at the expence of other






nations, found, on one side, the means of limiting the power of






the great lords, in favour of the extension of public liberty.






The lords, on the other side, when they wanted to disturb the






public tranquillity, did not, as formerly, vindicate their own






privileges, so much as they combined with the people and moved






them to revolt, on popular considerations.






    This may be called the period of confusion, out of which has






arisen certain determinate forms of government; some drawing






nearer to the monarchical, others nearer to the popular form,






according as the power of Princes has been more or less able to






support itself, during the shock of the revolution, and the






overturn of the balance between public and private opulence.






    The third and last stage, of which I shall speak at present,






may be fixed at the period when the proportion of the public






revenue became adequate to the mass of national wealth; when






general laws were made to govern, and not the arbitrary power of






the great. The grandees now, from being a bridle on royal






authority, are often found dependent upon it for their support.






The extraordinary flux of money into the treasury, enables






Princes to keep splendid courts, where every kind of pleasure and






amusement is to be had. This draws together the rich men of the






state. The example of the sovereign prompts these to an imitation






of his expence, this imitation increases consumption, which in






its turn augments the King's income, as it diminishes that of






every other person.






    When the great men of a kingdom have exhausted their estates,






in paying a regular court to the Prince, they employ the credit






they have acquired with him during the time of their dissipation,






to obtain marks of his favour, in order to support them in their






decline. By these they are enabled to live in as much state as






before. They find no difference in their situation; unless






perhaps they should accidentally reflect, that the fund which






produced their former opulence, was in their own possession;






whereas that of their present wealth is in the hands of their






master.






    To compensate this difference, they are made to acquire, by






the favour of the court, advantages which they never could have






enjoyed from the largest independent fortune.






    The luxurious system of living, every where introduced, draws






the wealthy together, either in the capital or in other great






cities of the kingdom; where every one compares the expence and






figure he makes, with that of others who are about him. A person






honoured with the King's favour, of the same quality with






another, acquires, from this circumstance, a great superiority.






He commands, I shall suppose, in the place; he is the person to






whom people must apply, in order to obtain favours, perhaps






justice; he is adorned with a title, or outward mark of






distinction, which procures him respect and consideration; and,






which is still more, he is on the road to a farther elevation. It






requires a great stock both of philosophy and good sense, not to






be dazzled with these advantages. Independence, compared with






them, is but a negative happiness. To be truly happy, we must






have power, and have other people to depend on us.













Chap. XXVI













Of the Vibration of the Balance of Wealth between the Subjects of






a modern State













    We have frequently mentioned this balance, as an object of






great importance to a statesman who is at the head of a luxurious






nation; which having lost its foreign trade, has substituted in






the place of it, an extensive inland commerce. This will supply






the loss of the former, so far, as equally to provide employment,






and, consequently, subsistence, to every one inclined to be






industrious; although it must prove quite ineffectual for






augmenting the national wealth already acquired.






    I shall first explain what I mean by the balance of wealth






vibrating between the members of society; from which will be seen






why I rank this also among the political balances of a modern






state.






    It has been observed in the beginning of the nineteenth






chapter, that the great characteristic of what we call liberty,






is the circulation of an adequate equivalent for every thing






transferred and every service performed.






    By wealth I understand the circulating adequate equivalent.






    The desires of the rich, and the means of gratifying them,






make them call for the services of the poor: the necessities of






the poor, and their desire of becoming rich, make them chearfully






answer the summons; they submit to the hardest labour and comply






with the inclinations of the wealthy, for the sake of an






equivalent in money.






    This permutation between the two classes, is what we call






circulation; and the effects produced by it upon the political






situation of the parties, at the precise time of the circulation,






and the consequences, after it is completely effected, explain






what is called the balance of wealth.






    To render our ideas more correct, let us consider the money






on one side, and the prestations, as the civilians call them, or






performances of any kind, on the other, as reciprocal equivalents






for one other; and then let us examine the nature of those






prestations which tend to put these equivalents into circulation;






that is to say, what are the things which money can purchase.






    These we may divide, with the lawyers, into corporeal and






incorporeal. The corporeal may again be divided into consumable






and inconsumable; and the incorporeal into personal service, and






what the lawyers call jura, rights in or to any thing whatever. I






cannot fully explain myself without the help of this






distribution.






    Let us next consider the effects of the circulation of money,






as it has for its object, the acquisition of the four several






species here laid down.






    First, of inconsumable things. Secondly, of things






consumable. Thirdly, of personal service. Fourthly, of rights






acquired in or to any thing whatever.






    First, the only thing inconsumable is the surface of the






earth. This must not be taken in a philosophical, and far less in






a chemical sense. A thing is consumed, so far as it concerns our






inquiry, the moment it becomes useless, or even when it is lost.






    The surface of the earth, therefore, is the only thing






inconsumable; because, generally speaking, it never can cease to






be useful, and never can be lost; it may be changed, but the






earth must always have a surface. What is said of the surface,






may be understood likewise of that small part of its body






accessible to man, for supplying him with what he finds useful






there, as the produce of mines.






    Next to the earth itself, nothing is less consumable than her






metals, consequently coin may very properly be classed under the






head of things inconsumable; although it may be lost, and even






worn out in circulation.






    Let us now consider the effects of circulation in the






purchase of land. (A), I shall suppose, has a piece of land, and






(B) has one thousand pounds weight of gold coin, which the laws






of society have constituted to be an adequate circulating






equivalent for every thing vendible. They agree to make an






exchange. Before the exchange, the balance of their wealth is






equal; the coin is worth the land, the land is worth the coin;






the exchange makes no alteration, nor has it the effect of making






any afterwards; the new landlord may apply himself to the






improvement of the soil, the moneyed man to the turning of his






thousand weight of gold coin to the best advantage; consequently,






by this transaction, no vibration of the balance seems to be






affected.






    If coin itself be the object of sale, the consequences are






much the same. (A) has a guinea, (B) has twenty-one shillings,






the exchange they make produces no alteration in their






circumstances. The same holds good in other species of






circulation, such as the transmission of money by inheritance.






(A) dies and leaves his money to (B); here the possessor of the






money changes only his name, perhaps his inclinations, and that






is all. In like manner, a person pays his debts, and withdraws






his bond, or other security; no balance is affected by this






circulation, matters stand between the parties just as before.






    The nature, therefore, of circulation, when one inconsumable






commodity is given for another, is, that it operates no vibration






in the balance of wealth between the parties; because, in order






to produce this, one must remain richer than he was before, and






the other proportionately poorer.






    Secondly, under the second head of alienation, to wit, that






of consumable commodities, is comprehended every thing corporeal,






except money, and land, which money may purchase. Here two things






deserve our attention. First, the simple substance, or the






production of nature; the other, the modification, or the work of






man. The first I shall call the intrinsic worth, the other, the






useful value. The value of the first must always be estimated






according to its usefulness after the modification it has






received is entirely destroyed, and when by the nature of the






thing both must be consumed together, then the total value is the






sum of both. The value of the second must be estimated according






to the labour it has cost to produce it. An example will make






this plain.






    The intrinsic worth of any silk, woollen, or linen






manufacture, is less than the primitive value employed, because






it is rendered almost unserviceable for any other use but that






for which the manufacture is intended. But the intrinsic






substance of a loaf of bread loses nothing by the modification,






because the last cannot be consumed without the first. In a piece






of silver-plate curiously wrought, the intrinsic worth subsists






entire, and independent of the useful value, because it loses






nothing by the modification. The intrinsic value, therefore, is






constantly something real in itself; the labour employed in the






modification represent a portion of a man's time, which having






been usefully employed, has given a form to some substance which






has rendered it useful, ornamental, or, in short, fit for man,






mediately or immediately.






    Let us now apply these distinctions to the different






circumstances which attend consumption, in order to perceive






their effects.






    The consumption of the intrinsic value of any commodity,






takes place the moment the matter employed begins to diminish,






and is completed so soon as it is consumed totally. The






consumption of the useful value proceeds in like manner, in






proportion as the use it is put to makes the value of it






diminish, or disappear altogether.






    Let us next take an example, and examine the effects of






circulation in the purchase of things consumable, as to the






vibration of the balance of wealth. (A) has a piece of coin, (B)






has something which his labour has produced; they make an






exchange. (A) hitherto has neither gained or lost, neither has






(B); but (A) begins to make use of what he had purchased with his






coin, and in using it a part disappears; that moment the balance






begins to turn against him. (B), on the other hand, exchanges his






piece of coin with another, whom we shall call (C), and gets in






return a piece of wood; if (B) puts this piece of wood into the






fire, in proportion as the wood consumes, the balance is






returning to its level between (A) and (B), and is changing in






favour of (C). If (B), instead of burning his wood, makes a beam






of it for supporting his house, the balance will turn more






slowly, because the wood is then longer in consuming; but if he






makes some useful piece of furniture of one part of his wood, he






may warm himself with the remaining part of it, and with the coin






he gets for his work, may buy a beam for his house, and even food






to eat. If (B) stops at this period, and works no more, he will






find himself just upon a level with (A), so soon as his fire is






burnt out, his beam rotten, and his food consumed; and the whole






balance will be found in favour of (C); provided that by his






industry he has been able to procure for himself all his






necessaries, and preserve the piece of coin entire. Here then is






the spur to industry; to wit, the acquisition of this balance,






which gives a relative superiority even among those of the lowest






classes, and determines their rank as well as their






political-necessary, according to the principles laid down in the






twenty-first chapter.






    The essential characteristic of this vibration of the balance






of wealth, is the change in the relative proportion of riches






between individuals. But it must be observed, that under this






second species we are to consider the change of proportion no






farther than as it is produced by the circulation of a free






adequate equivalent, of such a nature as to be transferable to






another hand without any diminution. The consumption, therefore,






is the only thing which makes the balance turn. While the






consumable commodity remains entire in the hands of the






purchaser, he still remains possessor of the value, and may, by






inverting the operation, return to the possession of the same






species of wealth he had before.






    Here it may be asked, if money be absolutely necessary for






producing a vibration of this balance by the means of






consumption. We may easily conceive the greatest inequality






between the members of a state, without supposing the existence






of money. We may suppose the property of lands unequally divided,






and a great surplus of subsistence found in the hands of one






individual, which may by him be given in exchange for the produce






of industry. Under such circumstances then it may be asked, if






without money there can be such a thing as a vibration in the






balance of wealth? supposing in this case the term wealth to






imply, in general, the means of purchasing whatever man can






perform or produce.






    I answer, that no doubt the balance may be susceptible of






small vibrations, because even in the exchange of consumable






commodities, the consumption may go on faster on one side than on






the other; but I think, unless the inconsumable fund of wealth






(which is what gives the superiority, and which in the example






alleged, we supposed to be coin) can be made to change hands






according to the adequate proportion of the consumption made, we






cannot say properly, that a vibration can be operated in any






considerable degree.






    Let us suppose (A) to be a proprietor of a bit of land, and






(B) an industrious workman; in order that (B) may purchase the






land of (A), it must be supposed that (A) is very extravagant,






and that he inclines to consume a much greater proportion of work






than what is equivalent to all the surplus produce of his land.






Now in order to supply (A) to the value of the land itself, (B)






must distribute his work to many different persons, and take in






exchange, not such things as he has use for himself, but such as






may be found useful to (A). But so soon as (A) has paid to (B)






the whole surplus of his land, what fund of credit will he find






in order to engage (B) to furnish more? He cannot pay him in






land, because this fund is not susceptible of circulation; and






every expedient that could be fallen upon to keep accounts clear






between them, is neither more or less than the introduction of






money, either real or symbolical.






    By real money, is meant what we call coin, or a modification






of the precious metals, which by general agreement among men, and






under the authority of a state, carries along with it its own






intrinsic value.






    By symbolical money, I understand what is commonly called






credit, or an expedient for keeping accounts of debt and credit






between parties, expressed in those denominations of money which






are realized in the coin. Bank notes, credit in bank, bills,






bonds, and merchants' books (where credit is given and taken) are






some of the many species of credit included under the term






symbolical money.






    In the example before us, we may suppose that (A) having no






more circulating equivalent to give (B) for his work, and being






desirous to consume of it to the value of his land, shall agree






to issue notes of hand, every one of which shall carry in it a






right to an acre of land, to a fruit tree, to ten yards of the






course of a river, &c. and that every such parcel of property,






shall be esteemed at a certain proportion of work. This agreement






made, he goes on with his consumption, and pays regularly, and






adequately, the value of what he receives; and in proportion as






consumption proceeds on the side of (A), the balance of wealth






must turn in favour of (B); whereas while (A) kept his bit of






land, and (B) his faculty of working up an equivalent for the






surplus of it, the balance stood even: because the land on one






hand, and the industry on the other, produced adequate






equivalents for each other. The produce of both was consumable,






and was supposed to be consumed; which operation being over, the






land and the industry remained as before, ready to produce anew.






Here then is the effect of credit or symbolical money. Now I ask,






whether the notes of hand given by (A) to (B), do not contain as






real a value, as if he had given gold or silver? and farther,






whether it appears, that the country where they live becomes any






richer by this invention? does this note any more than declare,






who is the proprietor of the value contained?






    Nothing is so easy as to invent a money which may make land






circulate as well as houses, and every other thing which is of a






nature to preserve the same value during the time of circulation.






Whatever has a value, may change hands for an equivalent, and






whenever this value is determined, and cannot vary, it may be






made to circulate, as well as a pound of gold or silver made into






coin, and in the circulation to produce a vibration in the






balance of wealth.






    Those nations, therefore, who circulate their metals only,






confine industry to the proportion of the mass of them. Those who






can circulate their lands, their houses, their manufactures, nay






their personal service, even their hours, may produce an






encouragement for industry far beyond what could be done by






metals only. And this may be done, when the progress of industry






demands a circulation beyond the power of the metals to perform.






    This anticipation of the subject of the following books, is






here thrown in merely to enable my reader to form to himself an






idea of the extent of the subject we are at present upon, and to






help him to judge to what length luxury, that is consumption, may






be carried. Since, by what we have said, it appears that there is






no impossibility for a people to throw the whole intrinsic value






of their country into circulation. All may be cut into paper, as






it were, or stamped upon copper, tin, or iron, and made to pass






current as an adequate equivalent for the produce of industry:






and as there are no bounds to be set to consumption and






prodigality, it might be possible, by such an invention, in the






compass of a year, to circulate an equivalent in consumable






commodities produced by industry, for the whole property of the






most extended and most wealthy kingdom. That this is no






chimerical supposition, appears plain by the activity of many






modern geniuses, who, in an inconsiderable space of time, find






means to get through the greatest fortunes; that is to say, in






our language, they throw them into circulation by the means of






the symbolical money of bonds, mortgages, and accounts. But does






this species of circulation increase the riches of the state?






surely no more than it would increase the riches of France or






England, to carry all the plate in the two kingdoms to be coined






at the mint. The use of symbolical money is no more than to






enable those who have effects, which by their nature cannot






circulate (and which, by-the-bye, are the principal cause of






inequality), to give, to the full extent of all their worth, an






adequate circulating equivalent for the services they demand. In






other words, it is a method of melting down, as it were, the very






causes of inequality, and of rendering fortunes equal.






    The patrons therefore of Agrarian laws and of universal






equality, instead of crying down luxury and superfluous






consumption, ought rather to be contriving methods for rendering






them more universal. If they blame what is called perpetual






substitutions of property or entails (made by parents in favour






of their posterity as yet unborn), because they are in some






respects prejudicial to industry; they should not, I think, find






fault with this charming leveller dissipation, the nurse of






industry, and the only thing intended to be prevented by such






entails.






    Some have persuaded themselves, that an equality of fortune






would banish luxury and superfluous consumption. Among the rest,






is M. de Montesquieu, an author for whom I have the highest






esteem, and who has, in this respect, been copied by many others.






But I never found his idea set in a clear light. Equality of






fortune would certainly change the nature of luxury, it would






diminish the consumption of some, and would augment the






consumption of others; but without making people idle, it could






never destroy industry itself, and while this subsists in an






equal degree, there must be the same quantity of what it produces






regularly consumed. Farther this proposition never can be






advanced, but on the supposition that the luxurious person, that






is, the consumer, must be richer than he who supplies him. This I






cannot by any means admit to be true. Must the carter who drinks






a pot of beer be richer than the ale-houseman? Must a






country-girl, who buys a bit of ribband, be richer than the






haberdasher who sells it? Must the beau be richer than his






taylor? the traveller than the banker who gives him his money?






the client than the lawyer? the sick than the physician?






    How then does it appear that equality must prevent luxury,






unless we suppose every one confined to an absolute






physical-necessary, and either deprived of the faculty of






contriving, or of the power of acquiring any thing beyond it.






This principle Lycurgus alone laid down for the basis of his






republic; and yet riches were known in Sparta, as well as






poverty.






    Absolute equality, de facto, is an absurd supposition, if






applied to a human society. Must not frugality amass, and






prodigality dissipate? These opposite dispositions are of






themselves sufficient to destroy, at once, the best regulations






for supporting equality; and, when carried to a certain length,






must substitute in its place as great an inequality as the






quantity of circulation is capable to produce. Whatever






circulates may stagnate. Why was there so great an equality at






Sparta? because there was little circulation. Why are the






Capucins in a state of perfect equality? because among them there






is no circulation at all.






    If therefore such variations in the balance of wealth depend






on the difference of genius among men, what scheme can be laid






down for preserving equality, better than that of an unlimited






industry equivalent to an universal circulation of all property,






whereby dissipation may correct the effects of hoarding, and






hoarding again correct those of dissipation? This is the most






effectual remedy both against poverty and overgrown riches;






because the rich and the poor are thereby perpetually made to






change conditions. In these alterations in their respective






situations, the parties who are changing by degrees, must surely






in their progress towards a total alteration, become, at one time






or other, upon a level, that is, to an equality; as the buckets






in a well meet, before they can pass one another.






    Thirdly, The first species of things incorporeal, which may






be purchased with money, is personal service; such as daily






labour, the attendance of a menial servant, the advice of a






physician, of a lawyer, the assistance of skilful people in order






to acquire knowledge, the service of those employed in the






administration of public affairs at home and abroad, or for the






defence of a kingdom by sea or land; the residence of great men






at court, who do honour to princes, and make their authority






respected; and even when money is given to procure amusement,






pleasure, or dissipation, when no durable and transferable value






is given in return.






    There is a kind of resemblance between the species here






enumerated, and what we called the useful value in consumable






commodities. In the one and the other, there is an equivalent






given for a man's time usefully employed; but the difference






between them lies in this: that the useful value being supported,






or having for a substratum, as the schoolmen call it, the






intrinsic substance, is thereby rendered permanent and vendible;






whereas here, for want of a permanent and transferable substance,






the personal services, though producing advantages which are






sufficiently felt, cannot however be transferred for the adequate






price they cost.






    The circulation produced by this third species of






acquisition, operates an instantaneous vibration of the balance.






The moment the personal service is performed, it may be said to






be consumed; and although the purchaser has received a just






equivalent for the money given, and in some cases may even be






thereby put in a situation to indemnify himself of all his






expence, by performing the like services to others, yet every






body must perceive that such services cannot properly be






considered as a circulation of the former.






    Fourthly, The acquisition of the other species of things






incorporeal, that is, rights, produces little more balance, when






an adequate circulating equivalent is given for them, than the






sale of land; because a right implies no more than a power to






use, that is, to consume; and, by the use, the right is not






diminished: it is balanced by the use of the money; the money






therefore and the right being both permanent, there is no






vibration in the scales. Of this species are all servitudes; the






purchasing of privileges or immunities, even the lending of money






at interest, may here not improperly be classed.






    Here it will, perhaps, be alleged, that an example may be






given, where the creation of such a right, though purchased with






an adequate circulating equivalent, produces the greatest






vibration possible in the balance of wealth. It is when a state






contracts debts, and when the public creditors acquire a right to






general impositions on the people for the payment of their






interest. This objection requires a little explanation in order






to be removed and I have proposed it chiefly for the sake of






introducing an illustration of my subject.






    If it be said, that in this example a vibration in the






balance of wealth within the state is implied, then I say that it






must take place either, first, between the creditors and the






state, or, secondly, between the state and the people, or,






thirdly, between the creditors and the people. But,






    First, The creditors acquire no balance against the state






because they have given one inconsumable commodity for another;






to wit, money for an annual income. The money is worth the






income, the income is worth the money. If therefore any change in






the balance comes afterwards to take place, it must be in






consequence of other operations quite independent of this






transaction. But let us suppose, which is but too frequently the






case, that here money must be considered as a consumable






commodity, because it is only borrowed in order to be spent. In






this light does not the creditor seem to acquire a balance in his






favour against the state, so soon as the money is actually spent?






I answer in the negative: because a state, by expending the money






borrowed remains with respect to the creditors just as wealthy as






before. It is the people who pay the interest, for which the






state gives them in return no adequate transferable equivalent.






    Secondly, Here it is urged, that this being the case, the






state has acquired a balance against the people according to the






principles above laid down, where it was said, that upon






occasions, where money is given for personal service, and where






nothing transferable is given in return, the balance turns






instantaneously in favour of him who received the money.






    To this I answer, that as to the interest paid by the people,






the state does not receive it for herself, but for the creditors.






The personal services are then supposed to be already paid for,






and the vibration has taken place before the interest becomes






due. Therefore the balance does not turn between the state and






the people.






    In the levying of taxes which are destined to pay the






interest of money already spent, the public gives no adequate






equivalent on one hand; and on the other, it is not enriched with






respect to the people, any more than it was impoverished with






respect to the creditors, by spending the money borrowed; and






since there is no reciprocal change in the situation of the two






parties, I do not see how we can infer any vibration in the






balance of wealth between them. We shall presently see between






whom the balance is made to vibrate.






    Thirdly, The balance between the creditors and the people is






what at first sight appears to be principally affected; because






the first receive a constant retribution from the latter, in






consequence of the loan. But neither is any true vibration found






here, either adequate to the loan, or to the money spent. First,






because the creditors themselves are part of the people who






contribute towards all impositions on consumptions, which are






commonly the most regular, the most permanent, the most generally






appropriated for the payment of the interest. Secondly, because






the money spent by the state, if spent at home, returns to other






hands indeed, but still returns to the people, of whom we are






here speaking. And, thirdly, because there is no transaction at






all between the creditors and the people.






    Objection. By this way of reasoning it would appear, that the






exhausting of a people by taxes, makes no vibration in the






balance of their wealth.






    Answer. If the people be exhausted, it must be by enriching






strangers. This case should at present be excluded, as we have






laid aside the consideration of foreign relations. But allowing






this circumstance also to be implied in the objections made, I






agree that every penny of money sent out of a country, for no






real and permanent equivalent received in return, operates a






vibration in the wealth between nation and nation; but none






between subject and subject. To this it is answered, that when






taxes are high, many people are ruined while others are enriched:






this operates a vibration. I allow it; but then I reply, that by






the very supposition in every such case, the money must remain at






home; whereas in the former, it was supposed to be expended






abroad. Now we are not at present examining the effects of debts






and taxes, in changing the balance between man and man, but only






between the three cumulative interests above specified, the






state, the people and the creditors.






    Let me now ask, what is the effect of taxes on the vibration






of the balance of wealth between individuals?






    I answer, that whoever pays a tax, appears to pay for a






personal service. He receives no corporeal equivalent which can






be alienated by him for the same value; and he who is employed by






the state, and is paid with the produce of taxes, acquires a






balance in his favour against those who pay them. When the amount






of taxes goes abroad for foreign services, there can be no






alteration upon the balance at home, as has been said; neither is






there any when it remains at home: the people, that is, the whole






nation taken together, and the creditors, are as rich as before.






Let this suffice at present, as to the effects of debts and taxes






upon the balance of national wealth.






    Industry is the only method of making wealth circulate, so as






to change its balance between the parties; all kinds of






circulation which produce no such change, are foreign to the






present purpose.






    A man dies and leaves his wealth to another, nobody loses by






this, but he who is no more; a second pays his debts, neither






debtor, or creditor can be said to change circumstances by the






operation. A merchant buys a quantity of merchandize for ready






money, he thereby loses no balance of his wealth; it is true he






has given money for consumable effects; but the balance does not






operate until the consumption takes place, and as he is not






supposed to buy in order to consume, I rank this branch of






circulation among those which do not influence the balance.






    Thus we find two different kinds of circulation in a state;






one which makes the balance turn, and one which does not. These






objects are of no small consequence to be attended to in the






right imposition of taxes, as shall, in its proper place, be more






fully explained. At present it is sufficient to observe, that the






proper time of laying On taxes is at the time of circulation:






because the imposition may then be always exactly proportioned to






the sum circulating; consequently, to the faculties of the






persons severally interested.






    In all excises, or taxes upon consumption, it is the money of






the consumer which is taxed, in the instant of the payment; so






that he against whom the balance is to turn, has the additional






load to pay. This species of tax, imposed at the time of






circulation, is what produces the largest sums to a state. I






never heard of a proper expedient for taxing the person in whose






favour the balance is to turn, though from the principles which






are afterwards to be laid down, we may perhaps discover one.






    As for the other species of circulation, where the balance






does not turn, it is not so much the custom to impose very






considerable taxes upon it: there are however several examples to






be met with, which point out how they may be imposed. The






casualities paid upon the change of vassals or upon the fall of






lives, in leases upon lands in England; the confirmation of






testaments in Scotland; investitures in Germany; the centiéme






denier, the lods et ventes, and the control upon the acts of






notaries in France; the emoluments of the Rota in Spain, and in






many Roman Catholic countries, are of this species. Upon the same






principle, taxes more or less considerable might be laid upon






every branch of this kind of circulation; for which purpose, it






would be highly necessary to find out all the ramifications of






it, by analysing it to the bottom, as we have hitherto run






through it very superficially.













Chap. XXVII













Circulation and the Balance of Wealth, objects worthy of the






attention of a modern Statesman













    Having explained the nature of circulation, and of this






balance, we are next to point out the objects of a statesman's






attention concerning them.






    I. He ought to form to himself a clear and distinct idea of






the nature, properties, and effects of circulation; a word






frequently made use of without much meaning, and in a vague and






undeterminate sense.






    The term circulation is, perhaps, one of the most expressive






in any language, and is therefore easily understood. It






represents the successive transition of money, or transferable






commodities, from hand to hand, and their return, as it were in a






circle, to the point from which they set out. This is the rough






idea which every one, who understands the word at all, must form






its meaning. But a statesman's perceptions should be more






accurate as well as more complex.






    He must combine the consequences which result from this






successive transition, and attend to the effects produced by it.






He must not consider the money only, which is a permanent value,






passing from hand to hand, but weigh the consequences of the






variety of consumption which it draws along with it, in its






progress.






    Before a guinea can travel from London to York, it may be the






means of consuming a thousand times its value, and as much more,






before it can return to London again. Every stop the guinea makes






in its course, marks a want of desire to consume, in him who






possesses it, for the time. If, therefore, in any country, there






were but one guinea in circulation, all consumption would stop






(or barter would take place) the moment it fell into the hands of






a miser. This leads us to the second object of a statesman' s






attention.






    II. He ought at all times to maintain a just proportion






between the produce of industry, and the quantity of circulating






equivalent, in the hands of his subjects, for the purchase of it;






that, by a steady and judicious administration, he may have it in






his power at all times, either to check prodigality and hurtful






luxury, or to extend industry and domestic consumption, according






as the circumstances of his people shall require the one or the






other corrective, to be applied to the natural bent and spirit of






the times.






    For this purpose, he must examine the situation of his






country, relatively to three objects, viz. the propensity of the






rich to consume; the disposition of the poor to be industrious;






and the proportion of circulating money, with respect to the one






and the other.






    If the quantity of money in circulation is below the






proportion of the two first, industry will never be able to exert






itself; because the equivalent in the hands of the consumers, is






then below the proportion of their desires to consume, and of






those of the industrious to produce. Let me illustrate this by a






familiar example taken from a party at quadrille.






    When, on dealing the cards, every one puts in a fish into the






stake, according to the old English fashion, a very few fishes






are sufficient for the circulation of the game: but when you play






the aces, the consolation and the multiplication of beasts






according to the French custom, you must have a box with






contracts, fishes, and counters; so reducing all to the lowest






denomination, every player has occasion for above five hundred






marks. It is therefore plain, that the number of marks ought to






be in proportion to the circulation of the game. But at play, as






in a state, circumstances render this circulation very irregular.






Fortune may run so equally among the players, during a






considerable time, that none of them may have occasion to pay






away above the value of a hundred counters, and while this






equality continues, there will not be found the smallest






interruption in the circulation. But let one of the players have






a run of good luck, you will soon see three of the boxes empty






and all the circulating marks heaped up before the winner.






Fortune at quadrille, forms stagnations of the circulating






equivalent, as industry and frugality form them in a state. At






this period of the game, must not the players stop, or must they






not fall upon a way of drawing back their marks into circulation?






If they borrow back from the winner, this represents loan. If






they buy back their marks with money from their purses, it






represents what I call throwing solid property into circulation.






    From this familiar example, we may judge how necessary it is






that the circulating fund be constantly kept up to the proportion






of the occasions for it. It is impossible to determine the






proportion of coin necessary for carrying on the circulation of a






country, especially of one where neither loan, or paper-credit,






that is, the melting down of solid property, are familiarly






known. Here is the reason: the solution of the question does not






depend upon the quantity of coin alone, but also upon the






disposition of those who are the possessors of it; and as these






dispositions are constantly changing, the question thereby






becomes insoluble.






    It is, therefore, the business of a statesman, who intends to






promote circulation, to be upon his guard against every cause of






stagnation; and when he has it not in his power to remove these






political obstructions, as I may call them, by drawing the coin






of the country out of its repositories; he ought (in proportion






as the other political interests of his people are found to






require it) to facilitate the introduction of symbolical money to






supply its place.






    A great political genius is better discovered by the extent






of his perceptions, than by the minute exactness of them in every






part of the detail. It is far better for a statesman to be able






to discern (though superficially) every object of government






under all its relations, than to be able to trace any one with






the greatest accuracy. This is apt to occupy him too much, and no






one relation should ever engross his whole attention.






    I cannot omit in this place taking notice of a very judicious






remark of M. de Melon, an eminent political French writer, who






was employed by the Duke of Orleans in state affairs, during his






regency of the kingdom.






    'It belongs only (says he) to one who has had the direction






of every branch of government to lay down a general plan of






administration, and even then, one must not expect from such a






person, very particular details with respect to many objects, of






which he himself is entirely ignorant, and which he has been






obliged to confide to the care of others subordinate to him. A






person who can stoop to a minute exactness in small affairs,






proves commonly very unequal to the administration of great ones.






It is enough for such a person to know principles by experience






and reflection, and how to apply fundamental maxims as occasion






requires.'






    I apply this observation to the point in hand. A statesman






who allows himself to be entirely taken up in promoting






circulation, and the advancement of every species of luxurious






consumption, may carry matters too far, and destroy the industry






he wishes to promote. This is the case, when the consequence of






domestic consumption raises prices, and thereby hurts






exportation.






    A principal object of his attention must therefore be, to






judge when it is proper to encourage consumption, in favour of






industry: and when to discourage it, in favour of a reformation






upon the growth of luxury.






    If the country he governs be in a state of simplicity, and






that he wishes to awaken a taste for industry and refinement, he






must, as has been said, encourage domestic consumption, for the






sake of multiplying, and giving bread to the industrious; he must






facilitate circulation, by drawing into the hands of the public






what coin there is in the country, in case he finds any part of






it locked up; and he must supply the actual deficiency of the






metals, by such a proportion of paper-credit, as may abundantly






supply the deficiency.






    In every country where simplicity prevails, and where there






is any considerable quantity of coin, a great proportion of it






must be locked up: because there the consumption must be small;






consequently, little circulation; consequently, either little






coin, or many treasures. In such cases, therefore, a statesman






must engage the possessors of these riches to part with them, at






the desire of those who can give security for their worth: and he






must establish the standard of an annual retribution for the






loan. If this be difficult to be brought about, from the want of






confidence in the moneyed men, he may, in their favour, contrive






expedients to become the borrower himself, at the expence of the






alienation of certain rights, or the creation of new privileges,






in lieu of interest; and when he has engaged them to part with






their coin, he may lend it out to such as have both solid






property and a desire to consume; but who, for want of a






circulating fund to purchase superfluities, have hitherto lived






in simplicity.






    The introduction, therefore, of loans upon interest, is a






very good expedient to accelerate circulation, and to give birth






to industry.






    Objection. But here it is objected, that such a plan is






looked upon by some nations to be contrary to the precepts of the






christian religion, and therefore a statesman cannot permit it.






    To this I can make no answer, because I am no casuist; but I






can propose an expedient which will supply the defect of






borrowing at interest; and, as it may serve to illustrate the






principles I am now upon, I shall here introduce it.






    The intention of permitting loans upon interest, is not to






provide a revenue to those who have ready money locked up, but to






obtain the use of a circulating equivalent to those who have a






sufficient security to pledge for it. If the statesman,






therefore, shall find himself withheld by the canons of his






church, from drawing the coin of his subjects into circulation,






by permitting the loan of it upon interest, nothing is more easy






than to invent another species of circulation, where no interest






at all is necessary.






    Let him open an office, where every proprietor of lands may






receive, by virtue of a mortgage thereon, a certain proportional






value of circulating paper of different denominations, the most






proper for circulation. He may therein specify a term of payment






in favour of the debtor; in order to give him an opportunity to






call in his obligation, and relieve the engagement of his






property. But this term being elapsed, the land is to belong to






the creditor, or the paper to become payable by the state, if






required, which may in consequence become authorised either to






sell the land engaged, or to retain a proportional value of the






income, or of the property of the land itself, as shall be judged






most expedient.






    Farther, let him constitute a real security for all debts






upon every species of solid property, with the greatest facility






in the liquidation of them, in favour of those who shall have






given credit to the proprietors for merchandise of any kind. To






compass this, let all entails, substitutions, and fidei commissa,






or trusts, restraining the alienation of land-property, be






dissolved; and let such property be rendered as saleable as






household furniture. Let such principles influence the spirit of






the government; let this sort of paper-credit be modified and






extended according to circumstances, and a taste for consumption






will soon take place.






    The greatest of all obstacles to industry in its fancy, is






the general want of credit on both sides. The consumers having no






circulating value, the difficulty of liquidating what they owe by






the alienation of their lands, prevents their getting credit; and






the many examples of industrious people giving way, on account of






bad payments, discourages others from assisting them in the






beginning of their undertaking.






    From these principles we may gather, that a statesman who






intends to increase industry and domestic consumption, should set






out by providing a circulating fund of one kind or other, which






ought always to be ready, and constantly at the command of those






who have any sort of real equivalent to give for the consumption






they incline to make; for as specie may oftentimes be scarce, a






contrivance must be fallen upon immediately to supply the want of






it.






    The utility of this kind of credit, or paper-money, is






principally at the instant of its entering into circulation;






because it is then only that it supplies the want of real specie;






and by this invention the desire to consume creates, as it were,






the circulating equivalent, without which the alienation of the






produce of industry would not have taken place; consequently, the






industry itself would have suffered a check.






    But in the after-circulation of this paper-money from hand to






hand, this utility comes to cease; because the subsequent






consumer, who has another man's paper to give in exchange, is






already provided with a circulating equivalent, and therefore,






were it not for the wearing of the specie, or difficulty of






procuring it, it is quite indifferent both to the state, as well






as to circulation, whether this paper continue to pass current,






or whether it be taken up, and realized by the debtor, and gold






and silver be made to circulate in its place.






    Let me now endeavour to make this whole doctrine still more






plain, by an example.






    Suppose a country where there is a million of pieces of gold






employed necessarily in carrying on the ordinary circulation, a






million of pieces of the same value locked up, because the






proprietors have no desire to spend them. Suppose the revenue of






the solid property of the country to be worth also a million a






year; and that if the fund itself could be sold, it might be






worth twenty millions of the same specie. Suppose no such thing






as credit or paper-money to be known, and that every man who






inclined to make any consumption, must be previously provided






with a part of the circulating million, before he can satisfy his






inclination.






    Under these circumstances, the statesman resolves to






establish industry, and finding that by his people's taking a






taste for a greater consumption, the million which was formerly






sufficient for carrying on circulation, is no longer so; he






proposes to those who have the other million locked up, to borrow






it from them at 5 per cent and the better to engage them to






comply with his proposal, he offers to impose duties upon the






whole of the inhabitants to the annual amount of fifty thousand






pieces of gold, to be paid annually to the creditors, in return






for their treasure. If this scheme be adopted, he may, upon good






security, lend out his million in small sums, to every one who






inclines to borrow; or by premiums and other encouragements given






to his infant manufactures, he may throw it into the hands of the






public, that is, into circulation. Here is one method for






increasing the quantity of a circulating fund, when an






augmentation upon the consumption of the produce of industry






comes to demand it.






    But let us now suppose this regular plan of borrowing to be






contrary to what is called the constitution of the state, to






religion, or to the spirit of the people, what must be done to






supply the place of such a scheme?






    The statesman must then fall upon another contrivance, by






extending the use of pledges, and instead of moveables, accept of






lands, houses, &c. The Monte pieta at Rome issues paper money






upon moveable security deposited in their hands. Let the






statesman, without exacting interest, do the same upon the lands






of his subjects, the best of all securities. While the lands






subsist, this paper-money must retain its value; because I






suppose the regulations to be such as to make it convey an






indisputable right to the lands engaged. The advantage of such an






establishment will be, that as formerly no man could purchase the






smallest produce of industry, without having a part of the






circulating million of pieces of gold; every body now who has an






inclination to consume, may immediately procure paper-money in






proportion to his worth, and receive in return whatever he






desires to possess.






    Now let me suppose that this paper-money shall in time, and






from the growing taste for superfluities, amount to the value of






five millions of pieces of gold. I ask, whether the real value of






this paper is any way diminished, because it exceeds, by far, all






the gold and silver in the country, and consequently cannot all






at once be realized by the means of the coin? Certainly not:






because it does not draw its value from any representation of






these metals, but from the lands to which it conveys a right.






Next, I ask, if the country is thereby become any richer? I






answer, also, in the negative: because the property of the lands,






if sold being supposed worth twenty millions, the proprietors of






the paper are here supposed to have acquired, by their industry,






five millions of the twenty; and no more than the remaining






fifteen millions belong to the landlords.






    Let us now suppose a million of this paper-money to fall into






the hands of those who have no inclination to spend it. This is






the case of the frugal, or money-hoarding persons: will they not






naturally choose to realize their paper, by taking possession of






the lands represented by it? The moment this operation takes






place, the million of paper-money is annihilated, and the






circulating capital is reduced to four millions of paper, and one






million of specie. Suppose, on the other hand, that those who






have treasures which they cannot lend at interest, seeing a paper






money in circulation, which conveys a right to solid property,






shall first purchase it with their million of pieces of gold, and






afterwards lay hold of a proportional part of the land: what






effect will this double operation produce upon the circulating






fund? I answer, that the currency, instead of being composed, as






formerly, of one million of coin and five millions of paper,






will, at first, on the buying up of the paper, consist of two






millions of coin and five millions of paper; and so soon as the






million of paper bought up comes to be realized upon the land, it






will be thereby extinguished; consequently the circulating coin






will be raised to two millions, and the paper will be reduced to






four. Here then is a very rational method of drawing all the coin






of the country from the treasures of the frugal, without the help






of interest. Let me take one step farther, and then I will stop,






that I may not too far anticipate the subject of the fourth book.






    I suppose, that the statesman, perceiving that the constant






circulation of the coin insensibly wears it away, and reflecting






that the value of it is entirely in proportion to its weight, and






that the diminution of the mass must be an effectual diminution






of the real riches of his country, shall call in the metals and






deposit them in a treasure, and shall deliver, in their place, a






paper-money, having a security upon the coin locked up. Is it not






plain, that while the treasure remains, the paper circulated will






carry along with it as real (though not so intrinsic) a value as






the coin itself could have done? But if this treasure comes to be






spent, what will the case be then? It is evident, that the paper,






conveying a right to the coin, will then as effectually lose its






value, as the other species of paper conveying a right to the






lands, and issued, as we have supposed, by the proprietors of






them, would have lost its value, had an earthquake swallowed up,






or a foreign conqueror seized, the solid property engaged as a






security for it.






    The expedient, therefore, of symbolical money, which is no






more than a species of what is called credit, is principally






useful to encourage consumption, and to increase the demand for






the produce of industry. And bringing the largest quantity of






coin possible into a country, cannot supply the want of it in






this respect; because the credit is constantly at hand to every






one who has property, and the other may fail them on a thousand






occasions. A man who has credit may purchase at all times, though






he may frequently be without a shilling in his pocket.






    Whenever, therefore, the interest of a state requires that






the rich inhabitants should increase their consumption, in favour






of the industrious poor, then the statesman should fall upon






every method to maintain a proportion between the progress of






industry, and the gradual augmentation of the circulating fund,






by enabling the inhabitants to throw with ease their solid






property into circulation whenever coin is found wanting. Here






entails are pernicious.






    On the other hand, when luxury begins to make too great a






progress, and when it threatens to be prejudicial to foreign






trade, then may solid property be rendered more unwieldy, and






entails may then become useful: all moveable debts, except bills






of exchange in foreign circulation, may be stripped of their






privileges, and particularly, as in France, of the right of






arresting the person of the debtor. Usury ought then to be






punished severely; even something like the Senatus Consultum






Macedonianum, which made the contract of loan void on the side of






the borrowers, while they remained under the power of their






fathers, may be introduced. Merchants' accounts should no more be






allowed to enjoy a preference to other debts; but on the






contrary, be made liable to a short prescription. In a word,






domestic circulation should be clogged, and foreign circulation






accelerated. When foreign trade again comes to a stop, then the






former plan may be taken up a-new, and domestic circulation






accelerated and facilitated, in proportion as the produce of






industry and taste for superfluity require it.






    III. A statesman ought carefully to distinguish between those






branches of circulation which operate a vibration in the balance






of wealth, and those which do not, in order to regulate the taxes






which he may think proper to lay upon his people.






    In treating of this third object of a statesman's attention,






I shall confine myself to the application of those principles






which point out the necessity of taxation among a luxurious






people, become wealthy by the means of a foreign trade which they






now have lost; and where the industrious can no longer be made to






subsist but by means of a great domestic circulation. This is the






object of our present inquiry.






    In every case where the balance of wealth is made to vibrate






by circulation, there is an opportunity of imposing a tax upon






consumption, perfectly proportioned to the quantity of the






circulation. Now by the imposition of taxes, and the right






employment of the amount of them, a statesman has it in his power






to retard or to promote the consumption of any branch of






industry. By the imposition of duties he may either check luxury






when he finds it calling off too many hands from other more






necessary occupations; or by granting premiums, he may promote






consumption or exportation upon branches where it is expedient to






increase the hands employed, which last is the reverse of






taxation; or in the third place, when foreign trade begins to






bear a small proportion to domestic consumption, he may profit of






luxury, and draw a part of the wealth of the luxurious into the






public treasure, by gently augmenting the impositions upon it;






for when taxes are gently increased, consumption is not checked;






consequently, this is the proper method to be followed, when






luxury does no harm. But when it proves hurtful, the rise in the






impositions should be sudden, that they may operate the effects






of violent revolutions which are always accompanied with






inconveniences, and on such occasions every inconvenience will






mark the success of the operation. An example will make this






plain.






    If you want to check the drinking of spirituous liquors, let






every alteration of your oeconomy concerning them, either as to






the impositions upon the consumption, or regulations in retailing






them, proceed by jerks as it were; if you want to increase the






revenue, from the propensity people have to poison themselves






with spirits, your augmentations and alterations may be gentle






and progressive.






    Here let me observe by the way, that the best method for a






statesman to curb any sort of vice among his people, is to set






out by facilitating the gratification of it, in order to bring it






once upon a regular and systematical footing, and then by sudden






and violent revolutions in the administration of the oeconomy of






it, to destroy it and root it out.






    Were all the strumpets in London received into a large and






convenient building, whither the dissolute might repair for a






while with secrecy and security, in a short time, no loose women






would be found in the streets. And it cannot be doubted, but that






by having them all together under certain regulations, which






might render their lives more easy than they are at present, the






progress of debauchery, and its hurtful consequences, might in a






great measure be prevented. At Paris, they are to be found in






their houses, because the police never troubles them there, while






they commit no riot or disturbance. But when they are persecuted






in their habitations, they break forth into the streets, and by






the open exercise of their profession, the delicacy of modesty is






universally hurt and but too frequently blunted, and the example






which those prostitutes openly set to their own sex, debauches






more women than all the rakes in town do.






    I hope this digression will not be misconstructed into an






apology for public stews, in which, instead of following good






regulations for suppressing the vices with which they are filled,






the principal object is frequently to encourage the abuses for






the sake of making them turn to account as a branch of revenue.






Such a plan of administration represents a statesman who turns






against his people those arms, which he had provided for their






defence. My intention is very different, it is to curb vice as






much as possible, and to shut up what cannot be rooted out within






the bounds of order, and to remove it as a nuisance from the eyes






of the public, and from the contagious imitation of the innocent.






I now come to the object of a statesman's attention, relative to






that branch of circulation which implies no vibration of the






balance of wealth between the parties concerned.






    The more perfect and the more extended any statesman's






knowledge is of the circumstances and situation of every






individual in the state he governs, the more he has it in his






power to do them good or harm. I always suppose his inclinations






to be virtuous and benevolent.






    The circulation of large sums of money brings riches to light






for a moment, which before and after are commonly hid from the






eyes of the public. These branches of property therefore, which






have once made their appearance in this species of circulation,






should not be lost sight of until they come naturally to melt






away, by returning into the other branch of which we have been






speaking; that is, until they be fairly spent, and the balance be






made to turn against the former proprietors of them. After this






revolution, they will circulate for a while in small sums, and






remain imperceptible; until with time they come to form new






stagnations; then they will be lent out again, or employed in the






purchase of lands; and falling once more under the eye of the






state, they will again become an object of the same attention as






formerly.






    Nothing is more reasonable, than that all property which






produces an annual determinate income, should be made to






contribute to the common burthens of a state. But those taxes






which are intended to operate upon so moveable a property as






ready money, ought to be imposed with a most gentle hand, and






even so as not to appear directly to affect it. The statesman






here must load his wealthy citizens with duties, as Horace loads






his sovereign with adulation, never addressing his compliments






directly to the emperor, but conveying them to him in the most






elegant manner, through the channel of an interposed person. Thus






people, possessing large capitals of ready money, which in a






moment they can transport beyond the reach of the most extended






jurisdiction, may have certain privileges granted them which may






attach them to the country, (in England, for example, a vote in a






county or borough,) and then in consequence of their rank, not






because of their money, be made to come under a sort of






capitation, or other similar imposition bearing another name.






Might not the creditors of this nation be represented in






parliament, and in consequence of so great a privilege, and the






additional security thereby granted to the funds, be made






afterwards to come under taxation as well as other proprietors of






a determinate revenue? An admirable hint for the imposition of






such taxes, is to be met with in a certain great European






monarchy, where the highest order of knighthood is distinguished






with a ribband, a star, and a pension of about an hundred and






thirty pounds sterling a year. But so soon as any one is raised






to this dignity, he pays exactly this very sum in lieu of






capitation. The pension was given by the prince who instituted






the order; the capitation followed in a subsequent reign, and now






appears rather a mark of distinction than a burthen.






    IV. The next object of a statesman's attention, proper to be






taken notice of, is the different political considerations which






must occur to him when he compares the consequences of turning






the balance of wealth against the industrious members of a state,






with those vibrations which take place against the not working






part of the inhabitants. In other words, the different effect of






taxes, as they severally affect those who consume in order to






reproduce, and those who consume in order to gratify their






desires.






    The one and the other consumption implies a vibration in the






balance of wealth, and whenever there is a vibration, there we






have said that a proportional tax may be imposed.






    But as the intention of taxes, as I understand them, is to






advance only the public good, by throwing a part of the wealth of






the rich into the hands of the industrious poor, and not to






exhaust one part of a nation in order to enrich another; from






hence it follows, that no necessary article of consumption should






ever be taxed to an industrious person, but in such a way as to






enable him to draw back the full amount of it, from those who






consume his work. By this means, the whole load of taxes, must






fall upon the other class of inhabitants, to wit, those who live






upon the produce of a fund already acquired.






    Let me here observe, by the way, that if taxes are rightly






laid on, no industrious person, any more than another who lives






upon his income, will ever be able to draw back one farthing of






such impositions as he has paid upon his consumption of






superfluity. This shall in its proper place be made sufficiently






plain; at present it would be a superfluous anticipation of the






doctrine of taxation, to point out the methods of compassing this






end. My intention at present is to recapitulate only the objects






of a statesman's attention, with regard to the consequences of






circulation, and the vibrations of the balance of wealth; and






having shewn how nearly those principles are connected with those






of taxation, this alone is sufficient to shew their importance.






    V. A statesman ought to attend to the difference between the






foreign and domestic circulation of the national wealth.






    This object, though in part relative to foreign commerce,






must not be passed over without observation. In fact, there is no






nation entirely deprived of foreign communications; therefore,






although a statesman, who is at the head of a luxurious people,






may act in general as if there were none at all, yet still he






ought to be attentive to the consequences of circulation with his






neighbours, so far as it does or may take place.






    Every commercial correspondence with foreign nations, not






carried on by the exchange of consumable commodities, must






produce a vibration of the balance of wealth, either in favour or






prejudice of the interest we have in our eye. But it does not






follow, because there is a vibration, that therefore a statesman






has the same liberty of imposing taxes upon every article of






consumption, as if the two scales were vibrating within the






country subject to his administration.






    When the consumers are his subjects, he may safely impose a






tax on the goods imported; and although he should gradually






augment the duty, so as to diminish the consumption of such






goods, as well as the amount of the duty, he will, by






discouraging the importation of them, most amply indemnify his






people by keeping their wealth at home.






    When the foreigners are the consumers, the case is very






different: for you cannot oblige a man who is not your subject,






to pay beyond the advantage he gains by your correspondence. It






is therefore, as has been said, upon the exportation only of






goods, where the nation has great natural advantages over her






neighbours, that any duty can be raised.






    VI. The last object I shall mention as worthy of a






statesman's attention, is, the rules of conduct he should






prescribe to himself, as to extending or contracting taxation,






according as he finds a variation in the proportion between the






FOREIGN and DOMESTIC circulation of his country.






    For this purpose he must know exactly the proportions of the






one and the other; he must compare the quantity of domestic






consumption, with the produce of industry and quantity of






importations.






    If domestic consumption be equal to the sum of both, the






country must annually lose the value imported. In this case,






taxes are to be raised by sudden jerks, especially upon






importations; not to increase the produce of them, but to prevent






the increase of luxury and dissipation of national wealth.






    If domestic consumption do not exceed the produce of






industry, this will prove that exportation is at least equal to






importation. In this case the exportation must be supported; and






when this can no otherwise be done, a part of the taxes levied






upon home-consumption must be distributed in premiums upon the






articles of exportation; and when this also becomes ineffectual,






then all importations for home-consumption must be cut off






according to the principles above laid down.






    If the domestic consumption should really fall short of the






produce of industry, it marks a flourishing foreign trade. Prices






then must be kept low, as has been abundantly explained;






consequently there will be less profit from taxes; because every






penny imposed, which affects the price of exportable goods, must






be refunded out of the net produce of them, and all the expence






of collecting this part will be entirely lost to the public: the






remainder, therefore, will be greater or less, according as






foreign trade is great or small.






    In proportion, therefore, as domestic circulation gains






ground, foreign trade must decay, and taxes become necessary; in






order, with the amount of them, to correct the bad effects of






luxury, by giving larger premiums to support exportation. And in






proportion as a statesman's endeavours to support by these means






the trade of his country becomes ineffectual, from the growing






taste of dissipation in his subjects, the utility of an opulent






exchequer will be more and more discovered; as he will be thereby






enabled both to support his own authority against the influence






of a great load of riches thrown into domestic circulation, and






to defend his luxurious and wealthy subjects from the effects of






the jealousy of those nations which enriched them.






    To conclude: the exportation of work, and the supporting of a






superiority in the competition of foreign markets (as has been






said, and as shall be farther explained) seem to be the most






rational inducements to engage a statesman to begin a scheme of






imposing considerable taxes upon his people, while they enjoy any






share of foreign commerce. If such taxes continue to subsist






after the extinction of it, and are then found necessary; this






necessity is itself a consequence of the change in the spirit and






manners of a people become rich and luxurious.






    The charge of government, under such circumstances, must






greatly increase, as well as the price of every commodity. Is it






not very natural, that he who is employed by the state should






receive an equivalent proportioned to the value of his services?






Is it to be supposed, that a person born in a high rank, who,






from this circumstance alone, acquires an advantage in most






nations, hardly to be made up by any acquired abilities, will






dedicate his time and his attendance for the remuneration which






might satisfy an inferior? The talents of great men deserve






reward as much as those of the lowest among the industrious; and






the state is with reason made to pay for every service she






receives. This circulation of an adequate equivalent, we have






said to be the palladium of liberty, the band of gentle






dependence among freemen; and the same spirit ought to animate






every part of the political body. That nothing is to be done for






nothing, is a fundamental political maxim in every free






government, and obligations, not liquidated by a just equivalent,






form pretensions beyond their worth; and are constantly






accompanied with discontent at one time or other.






    Another use of taxes, after the extinction of foreign trade,






is to assist circulation, by performing, as it were, the function






of the heart of a child, when at its birth that of the mother can






be of no farther use to it. The public treasure, by receiving






from the amount of taxes, a continual flux of money, may throw it






out into the most proper channels, and thereby keep that industry






alive, which formerly flourished, and depended upon the






prosperity of foreign commerce only.






    In proportion, therefore, as a statesman perceives the rivers






of wealth (as we have called them above), which were in brisk






circulation with all the world, begin to flow abroad more slowly,






and to form stagnations, which break out into domestic






circulation, he ought to set a plan of taxation on foot, as a






fund for premiums to indemnify exportation for the loss it must






sustain from the rise of prices, occasioned by luxury; and also






for securing the state itself, against the influence of domestic






riches, as well as for recompensing those who are employed in its






service.






    This system ought to be carried on and extended in proportion






to the decay of foreign trade; and when this comes in a manner to






cease, then the increase of taxes, and the judicious application






of them, going hand in hand, the state itself will support






circulation, by receiving with one hand, while it is giving out






with the other; until by a prudent management under the care and






direction of an able statesman, through time and perseverance,






every internal vice be corrected, and foreign commerce be made






once more to flourish from the principles we have been laying






down, and from what may be farther said to illustrate them in the






subsequent books of this inquiry.






    While industry is kept alive there is still ground for hope.






Manners change, and the same luxury which extinguished foreign






trade, by calling home the wealth employed in that species of






circulation, may afterwards, by keeping industry alive at home,






and by throwing a sufficient power of wealth into the hands of a






good statesman, render the recovery of that trade no difficult






project, to one who has an instrument in his possession so






irresistible in removing every obstacle in the way of his






undertaking.






    This represents a kind of circulation of the spirit and






manners of a people, who, under the government of able statesmen,






may be rendered happy in every situation; and since, from the






nature of man, no prosperity can be permanent, the next best






thing to be done, is, to the yield to the force which cannot be






resisted; and, by address and management, to reconduct a people






to the height of their former prosperity, after having made them






travel (as I may say) with as little inconvenience as possible,






through all the stages of decline.













Chap. XXVIII













Circulation considered with regard to the Rise and Fall of the






Price of Subsistence and Manufactures













    The intention of this chapter is to apply the principles we






have been in search of, to the solution of some questions, which






have been treated by those great masters of political reasoning,






Messrs de Montesquieu and Hume. The ideas they have broached are






so pretty, and the theory they have laid down for determining the






rise and fall of prices so simple, and so extensive, that it is






no wonder to see it adopted by almost every one who has written






after them.






    I have not forgot how much I was pleased when I first perused






these authors, from the easy distribution which a general theory






enabled me to make of certain classes of my ideas then lying






without order, in that great repository of human crudities, the






memory; which frequently retains more materials, than people,






commonly, have either time, or perhaps capacity rightly to






digest.






    I am very far from pretending to any superiority of






understanding over those gentlemen whose opinions I intend to






review. accident alone has led me to a more minute examination of






the particular circumstances, upon which they have founded their






general maxims; and, in consequence of my inquiries, I think I






have discovered, that in this, as in every other part of the






science of political oeconomy, there is hardly such a thing as a






general rule to be laid down.






    There is no real or adequate proportion between the value of






money and of goods; and yet in every country we find one






established. How is this to be accounted for?






    We have, in the fourth chapter of this book, already inquired






into the principles which point out the influence of trade upon






the variation of the price of goods; but the question now comes






to be, how to fix and determine the fundamental price, which is






the object of variation. It has been said, that the price of a






manufacture is to be known by the expence of living of the






workman, the sum it costs him to bring his work to perfection,






and his reasonable profit. We are now to examine what it is,






which in all countries must determine the standard prices of






these articles of the first necessity; since the value of them






does necessarily influence that of all others.






    The best way to come at truth, in all questions of this






nature, is to simplify them as much as possible, that they may be






first clearly understood.






    Whenever a question arises about price, an alienation is






necessarily implied; and when we suppose a common standard in the






price of any thing, we must suppose the alienation of it to be






frequent and familiar. Now I must here observe, that in countries






where simplicity reigns (which are those where the decision of






this question ought regularly to be sought for, since it is there






only where a complication of circumstances do not concur to raise






the prices of subsistence) it is hardly possible to determine any






standard for the price of articles of the first necessity.






    Let us examine the state of those hunting Indians who live by






their bow, and of other nations where the inhabitants exercise, I






may say universally, that species of agriculture which I have






called a direct method of subsistence, and we shall find that the






articles of food and necessaries are hardly found in commerce: no






person purchases them; because the principal occupation of every






body is to procure them for himself. What answer would a Scotch






highlander have given any one, fifty years ago, who should have






asked him, for how much he sold a quart of his milk, a dozen of






his eggs, or a load of his turf? In many provinces, unacquainted






with trade and industry, there are many things which bear no






determinate price; because they are seldom or never sold.






    Sale alone can determine prices, and frequent sale only can






fix a standard. Now the frequent sale of articles of the first






necessity marks a distribution of inhabitants into labourers, and






what we have called free hands. The first are those who produce






the necessaries of life; the last are those who must buy them:






and as the fund with which they purchase is produced from their






industry, it follows, that without industry there can be no sale






of articles of subsistence; consequently, no standard price






determined.






    Another consequence of this reasoning, is, that the sale of






subsistence implies a superfluity of it in the hands of the






seller, and a proper equivalent for it in the hands of the buyer;






and when the equivalent is not money, it also implies a






superfluity of the produce of some sort of industry;






consequently, by the exchange of superfluities upon certain






articles, a man procures to himself a sufficiency upon every one.






This represents that gentle dependence which unites the members






of a free society.






    Does it not follow from this analysis of the question, that






the prices of articles of the first necessity depend rather upon






the occupation and distribution of the classes of inhabitants,






than either upon the abundance of these necessaries, or of the






money to purchase them; since many examples may be found, where






these articles have borne little or no price, even in countries






where money was not wanting. The reason therefore of low prices,






is not the vast abundance of the things to be sold, but the






little occasion any body has to buy them; every one being






provided with them in one way or other, without being obliged to






go to market.






    How many familiar examples occur every where of this






oeconomy! do we not find in every country, even where the numbers






of the industrious free are multiplied exceedingly, more than one






half of the inhabitants fed directly from the earth? Few of the






class of farmers ever go to market for subsistence. Ask a country






gentleman the expence of his living, he will tell you the sum of






money he yearly spends, perhaps the quantity of his rents in






kind, which he consumes in his house, and the rent of the lands






he holds himself in farm; but it will never come into his head to






reckon the value of every chicken, sheep, or bullock, with which






his farm provides him, which he consumes without estimation, and






which in many countries he could not dispose of for any






determinate value.






    From this I still conclude, that it is in countries of






industry only where the standard prices of articles of the first






necessity can be determined; and since in these, many






circumstances concur to render them either higher or lower than






in other places, it follows, that in themselves they bear no






determinate proportion whatsoever, to the quantity of gold and






silver in the country, as I hope presently to make still more






evident.






    What is it then which determines the standard value of these






articles, in countries of industry? Here follows the best answer






I can give to this question.






    The standard price of subsistence is determined from two






considerations. The first from the number of those who are






obliged to buy, that is to say, of those who have them not of






their own, and who are not provided with them, in lieu of






service, by those who have. The second is, from the degree of






employment found for those who are obliged to purchase them.






    The number of the buyers of subsistence, nearly determines






the quantity to be sold: because it is a necessary article, and






must be provided in a determinate proportion for every one: and






the more the sale is frequent, the more the price is determinate.






Next as to the standard: this, I apprehend, must depend upon the






faculties of the buyers; and these again must be determined by






the extent of those of the greatest numbers of them; that is to






say, by the extent of the faculties of the lower classes of the






people. This is the reason why bread, in the greatest famine,






never can rise above a certain price; for did it exceed the






faculties of the great classes of a people, their demand would be






withdrawn, which would leave the market overstocked for the






consumption of the rich; consequently, such persons, who in times






of scarcity are forced to starve, can be such only whose






faculties fall, unfortunately, below the standard of those of the






great class; consequently, in countries of industry, the price of






subsistence never can rise beyond the powers to purchase of that






numerous class who enjoy nothing beyond their physical necessary;






consequently, never to such an immoderate height as to starve






considerable numbers of the people; a thing which very commonly






happens in countries where industry is little known, where






multitudes depend merely upon the charity of others, and who have






no resource left, so soon as this comes to fail them.






    The faculties, therefore, of those who labour for a






physical-necessary, must, in industrious nations, determine the






standard value of subsistence, and the value in money which they






receive for their work will determine the standard of their






faculties, which must rise or fall according to the proportion of






the demand for their labour.






    By this exposition of the matter, I do not pretend to have






dissipated every obscurity. The question still remains complex,






as the nature of it requires it should do; and the solution of it






depends upon farther considerations, which now lead me to the






examination of the doctrine of Messrs de Montesquieu and Hume,






concerning the influence of riches upon the increase of prices. I






shall begin by shortly laying this doctrine before my readers, in






three propositions.






    First, The prices (say they) of commodities are always






proportioned to the plenty of money in the country. So that the






augmentation of wealth even fictitious, such as paper, affects






the state of prices, in proportion to its quantity.






    Secondly, The coin and current money in a country is the






representation of all the labour and commodities of it. So that






in proportion as there is more or less of this representation






(money), there goes a greater or less quantity of the thing






represented (commodities, &c.) to the same quantity of it. From






this it follows that






    Thirdly, Increase commodities, they become cheaper; increase






money, they rise in their value.






    Nothing can be more beautiful than these ideas. They appear,






at first sight, sufficiently extensive to comprehend every






variation of circumstances which can happen. Who was the first






author of this doctrine, I cannot say. I find it in Mr Locke, and






in the Spectator for the 19th of October 1711; but they have been






beautifully illustrated by Monsr de Montesquieu; and Mr Hume has






extended the theory, and diversified it prettily in his political






discourses; which have done much honour to that gentleman, and






drawn the approbation of the learned world so much, that there is






hardly a nation in Europe which has not the pleasure of reading






them in their own language.






    Upon examining this theory, when I came to treat of the






matters it is calculated to influence, I found I could not make






it answer to the principles I had pursued, in the most natural






order in which I had been able to deduce them: and this






consideration obliged me, with regret, to lay it aside, and to






follow another, much more complex. I have already expressed the






mortification I have always had upon finding myself forced to






strike out a general rule, and this, of all others, had at first






hit my fancy the most; but I am obliged to say, that upon a close






examination of the three propositions, I am forced to range this






ingenious exposition of a most interesting subject, among those






general and superficial maxims which never fail to lead to error.






    In order to set the matter in as clear a light as possible, I






shall make a short application of my own principles, relating to






the decision of the main question, namely the causes of the rise






and fall of prices, and conclude my chapter with some remarks






upon the three propositions above laid down, submitting the whole






to the better judgment of my reader. I have laid it down as a






principle, that it is the complicated operations of demand and






competition, which determines the standard price of everything.






If there be many labourers, and little demand, work will be






cheap. If the increase of riches, therefore, have the effect of






raising demand, work will increase in its value, because there






competition is implied; but if it has only the effect of






augmenting demand, prices will stand as formerly. What then will






become of the additional quantity of coin, or paper-money? I






answer, that in both cases it will enter into circulation, in






proportion to the rise or augmentation of demand; with this






difference, that in the first case, it will have the effect of






raising prices; because the supply is not supposed to augment in






proportion: in the second, prices will stand as they were;






because the supply is supposed to augment in proportion. These






are the consequences of the augmentation of wealth, when it has






the effect of either raising or augmenting demand. But if upon






the increase of riches it be found that the state of demand






remains without any variation, then the additional coin will






probably be locked up, or converted into plate; because they who






have it, not being inspired with a desire of increasing their






consumption, and far less with the generous sentiment of giving






their money away, their riches will remain without producing more






effect than if they had remained in the mine. As for paper-money,






so soon as it has served the first purpose of supplying the






demand of him who borrowed it, because he had at that time no






coin) it will return upon the debtor in it, and become realized;






because of the little use found for it in carrying on






circulation.






    Let the specie of a country, therefore, be augmented or






diminished, in ever so great a proportion, commodities will still






rise and fall according to the principles of demand and






competition; and these will constantly depend upon the






inclinations of those who have property or any kind of equivalent






whatsoever to give; but never upon the quantity of coin they are






possessed of.






    Let the quantity of the coin be ever so much increased, it is






the desire of spending it alone, which will raise prices. Let it






be diminished ever so low, while there is real property of any






denomination in the country, and a competition to consume in






those who possess it, prices will be high, by the means of






barter, symbolical money, mutual prestations, and a thousand






other inventions. Let me give an example.






    Suppose a country where prices are determined, and where the






specie is sufficient for the circulation: is it not plain, that






if this country have a communication with other nations, there






must, in carrying on trade, be a proportion between the prices of






many kinds of merchandize, and that the sudden augmentation or






diminution of the specie at home, supposing it could of itself






operate the effects of raising or sinking prices, would be






restrained in its operation by foreign competition? But let us






suppose it cut off from every communication whatsoever, which






seems the only case where this theory can operate with any






appearance of justness, will any body pretend, that the frugal or






extravagant turn of the inhabitants will have no influence upon






prices; and will it be asserted, that no variation in the spirit






of a people, as to frugality and dissipation, can take place,






except upon a variation in the quantity of their gold and silver?






    It may be answered, that as to articles of superfluity, no






doubt the genius of a people, together with the quantity of the






specie, may influence prices; but that in articles of






indispensible necessity, they must constantly remain in






proportion to the mass of riches. This I cannot admit to be just.






Let me take the example of grain, which is the most familiar. Is






it not plain, from what we have said above, that the proportion






of wealth, found in the hands of the lowest class of the people,






constantly regulates the price of it; consequently, let the rich






be ever so wealthy, the price of subsistence can never rise above






the faculties of the poor industrious. And is it not also plain,






that those of the lowest class of the people, who purchase






subsistence must buy it with the returns they receive from the






rich for their industry? Now if the quantity of the wealth of the






rich does not regulate their demand for the service of the poor,






must it not follow, that the price of grain, as well as of every






other thing offered to sale, must depend upon the degree of






competition among the rich for the labour of the poor, that is,






upon the demand for industry and not on the quantity of wealth in






the country?






    Nobody ever denied, that the extraordinary demand for a






commodity had the effect of raising the price of it: and






certainly nobody will deny, that the demand for a particular






commodity may be greater at one time than at another, though the






same quantity of this commodity be found at both times in the






country; and the same quantity of specie likewise not only in the






country, but also in circulation.






    I acknowledge that in a country where there is much coin, and






where credit is little known, a high and extraordinary demand for






an article of superfluity may raise the price more than in






another where the coin is more scarce; because, on certain






occasions, the price of a thing may have no other bounds than the






extent of the faculties of the buyer. In like manner, in other






countries, where there is scarcely coin, or credit, it may be






impossible for the highest demand to raise the price of such






things even to the common standard established in those where






there is great wealth. But these instances appear to be too






particular to serve for the foundation of a general rule, with






respect to the state of prices in the present situation of the






nations of Europe, which, less or more, are all in communication






with one another.






    I cannot here omit taking notice of two very remarkable






circumstances which we learn from undoubted historical authority,






which seem to contradict one another, and which throw a great






obscurity upon the principles I have been endeavouring to






explain. I shall therefore introduce them by way of illustration,






and when they are examined, I hope they will confirm my doctrine.






    The first is, that in Scotland, formerly, when coin and






credit were certainly very rare, the price of eight pounds weight






of oatmeal, which is now commonly sold at eight pence sterling,






was then valued at no more than two-thirds of one penny: and that






a labouring man used to receive one penny and one third of a






penny sterling for his week's subsistence; that is to say, the






value of sixteen pounds of oatmeal, which to this day is the






regulated quantity given for this purpose.






    There is a very curious confirmation of the authenticity of






this computation, in an hospital at old Aberdeen; where in former






times, some proprietors of lands had settled a certain quantity






of oatmeal in favour of the poor of the hospital, with a liberty






to the hospital to accept the meal in kind, or the conversion at






two-thirds of a penny for every eight pounds weight. They






imprudently chose the last, and to this very day they are paid






according to this standard. Now it is certainly impossible that






any degree of plenty whatsoever, or any failing of demand, could






at present reduce the price of this commodity so very low






consequently, it may be said that it is the augmentation of






wealth, not that of demand, which raises prices.






    The second fact we learn from antiquity, that at the time






when Greece and Rome abounded in wealth, when every rarity, and






the work of the choicest artists was carried to an excessive






price, an ox was bought for a mere trifle, and grain was cheaper






perhaps than ever it was in Scotland.






    If the application of our principles to the circumstances of






those times, produce a solution of these apparent






inconsistencies; and if we thereby can discover that the low






prices of grain, both in Scotland, where there was little money,






and at Rome where there was a great deal, was entirely owing to






the little demand for articles of subsistence; will it not






follow, that our principle is just, and that the other,






notwithstanding the ingenuity of the thought, must fail in






exactness; since it will appear, that low prices may be equally






compatible with wealth, and with poverty.






    Now as to Scotland in former times, as in all countries where






there is little industry; where the inhabitants are mostly fed






directly from the earth, without any alienation of her fruits






taking place; where agriculture is exercised purely as a method






of subsisting; where rents are low, and where, consequently, the






free hands, who live upon them for the price of their industry,






must be few; the demand for grain in the public markets must be






very small; consequently, prices will be very low, whether there






be little, or whether there be much money in the country. The






reason is plain. The demand is proportioned here, not to the






number of those who consume, but of those who. buy now those who






consume, are all the inhabitants, but those who buy, are the few






industrious only who are free, and who gain an independent






livelihood by their own labour and ingenuity: now the price of






their week's subsistence in Scotland was formerly one penny one






third, consequently the subsistence they bought could not rise






above this standard.






    Next as to the state of Greece and Rome, where slavery was






established. Those who were fed by the labour of their own






slaves, by those of the state, or by the grain gratuitously






distributed to the people, had no occasion to go to market;






consequently, they did not enter into competition with the






buyers. Farther, the simplicity of manners, and the few






manufactures then known, made wants in general less extensive;






consequently, the number of the industrious free was small, and






they were the only persons who could have occasion to purchase






food and necessaries; consequently, the competition of the buyers






must have been small in proportion, and prices low.






    Add to this the reflections which naturally present






themselves upon examining the nature of supplying the markets.






These were supplied partly from the surplus produced upon the






lands of the great men, laboured by slaves; who being fed from






the lands, the surplus cost in a manner nothing to the






proprietors; and as the number of those who had occasion to buy,






were very few, this surplus was sold cheap. Besides, the grain






distributed to the people gratis, must necessarily have kept down






the market, as a part of it would naturally, sometimes, be found






superfluous to those who received it; and consequently, come to






be sold in competition with that raised at private expence.






    But when a fine mullet was brought to market, or when an






artist appeared with a curious piece of work, the case was very






different. The rich had plenty of money, who all appeared in






competition for the preference; consequently, prices rose to an






extravagant height. The luxury of those times, though excessive,






was confined to a few, and as money, in general, circulated but






slowly through the hands of the multitude, it was constantly






accumulating in those of the rich, who found no measure, but






their own caprice, in regulating the prices of what they wished






to possess, and had money to purchase.






    From what has been said, it appears, that the riches of a






country have no determinate influence upon prices; although, I






allow, they may accidentally affect them: (what I mean is, that






they may influence them; but they cannot regulate them:) and if






we depart from the principles above laid down, to wit, that






prices are regulated by the complicated operation of demand and






competition, in order to follow the other, we must add a






restriction (which I observe Mr Hume has attended to on one






occasion, although he has lost sight of it on several others), to






wit, that the price of every commodity is in proportion to the






sum of money circulating in the market for that commodity; which






is almost my proposition in other words: for the money to be






employed in the purchase of any commodity, is just the measure of






the demand. But even here, the money in the market destined only






for the purchase of a particular commodity, does not regulate the






price of it. Nothing but the finishing of the transaction, that






is, the convention between the buyer and seller, can determine






the price, and this must depend upon inclination, not weight of






money, as an example will make plain.






    I shall suppose grain to have been at forty shillings per






quarter, in a country market, for several months together, where






the ordinary demand for the current consumption is twenty






quarters every market day. If at any time an extraordinary demand






should happen, which may exceed all that is to be found in the






market, there will be a competition among the buyers, which will






have the effect of raising the market. Now, according to the






doctrine of our learned author, it may be said, that the corn






rises in proportion to the quantity of the specie which is in the






market, and that it is because of this increase of specie, that






the grain rises in its price. I answer, first, allowing this to






be true, can it be said, that a particular temporary, or perhaps






accidental demand for a few quarters of corn, more than usual,






implies any augmentation of the quantity of money, or the






smallest diminution either upon the total consumption, or total






quantity of grain contained in the country? For if the demand






have risen in one market, it must probably have diminished in






another, since the Same inhabitants cannot consume in two places.






This I think every person must agree to, without farther






illustration. But I say farther, that prices will not rise in






proportion to the money in the market; but in proportion to the






desire of acquiring grain in those who have this money.






    Suppose the whole quantity of grain in the market to be






thirty quarters; if there be no demand for more, these will be






sold at forty shillings as the twenty quarters would have been.






But suppose the demand to be for sixty quarters, and that there






is a hundred and twenty pounds sterling ready to be employed for






corn, does it follow, that grain will rise to four pounds a






quarter, because the money in the market bears this proportion to






the quantity of grain? Certainly not.






    We must therefore, I think, adopt the other principle, and






follow the proportions of demand and competition; and then we






shall find, that if the sellers want to raise their price up to






the proportion of the money in the market, all demand will cease,






as effectually as if it had never been made; and the sellers will






afterwards be obliged to accept of such a moderate augmentation






as shall be in proportion to the urgency of the demand, but never






in proportion to the money ready to be employed.






    The circulation of every country, as we have shewn above,






must ever be in proportion to the industry of the inhabitants,






producing the commodities which come to market: whatever part of






these commodities is consumed by the very persons who produce






them, enters not into the it. If the coin circulation of grain,






nor does it in anywise affect prices of of a country, therefore,






fall below the proportion of the produce of industry offered to






sale, industry itself will come to a stop; or inventions, such as






symbolical money, will be fallen upon to provide an equivalent






for it. But if the specie be found above the proportion of the






industry, it will have no effect in raising prices, nor will it






enter into circulation: it will be hoarded up in treasures, where






it must wait not only the call of a desire in the proprietors to






consume, but of the industrious to satisfy this call.






    We may therefore conclude, in consequence of the principles






we have laid down, that, whatever be the quantity of money in any






nation, in correspondence with the rest of the world, there never






can remain in circulation, but a quantity nearly proportional to






the consumption of the rich, and to the labour and industry of






the poor inhabitants. The value of each particular species of






which consumption is determined by a complication of






circumstances at home and abroad; consequently, the proportion is






not determined by the quantity of money actually in the country.






    If the contrary is maintained, and if it be still affirmed






that the proportion between specie and manufactures must be






reciprocal and determinate, then I am authorised to draw this






conclusion, to wit: That if the greatest produce of industry must






be sold for what specie is found in the country, let the sum be






ever so small; so in like manner, the smallest produce of






industry must be sold for all the specie found in the country,






let the sum be ever so great. Consequently, in the first case, we






must suppose, that the industrious will never seek for a better






price from abroad; and in the second, that the moneyed people






must spend all they have in supplying their most moderate wants,






and never seek for cheaper merchandize than what they can find at






home. Consequently there can be no foreign trade, nor can there






ever be any hoarding.






    I shall now conclude my chapter, with a few observations upon






the three propositions as they stand in their order.






    Prop. 1. Prices are in proportion to the plenty of money. And






thus the augmenting even of fictitious wealth, such as paper,






affects the state of prices, according to its quantity.






    From this, Mr Hume disapproves of the introduction of paper






money, when specie is wanting, and says, that if nothing were






allowed to circulate but gold and silver, the quantity being






less, prices would be lower.






    This is neither more or less than a project to destroy






credit, with a view to support trade and industry. Because it






would effectually prevent any person from making a consumption,






except at the time he happened to be provided with ready money.






Does the paper-money in England keep up the prices of grain at






present, January 1759? And will not every article of necessaries






fall, in a short time, as low in this country as in any other in






Europe; if the same measures continue to be followed?






    Were all paper-money in this kingdom proscribed at once, no






doubt the prices of many things would fall very considerably; but






such a fall would neither be universal or equable. The reason of






this fall would not be, because the specie would become






proportionally divided among all the inhabitants, according to






the value of their property; nor because of the small quantity of






it, since prices abroad would still regulate many at home: but






because of the sudden revolution, and the violent overturn






thereby produced on the balance of work and demand. The scale of






the first would preponderate to such a degree, that those classes






of the industrious, who work for daily subsistence in furnishing






superfluities, would enter into so strong a competition with one






another, that the price of their work would fall to nothing,






while subsistence would remain at the price of exportation. If it






be asked what could occasion this difference, I answer, because






the workmen who supply superfluities, adapted to the taste of






their own nation, would find no more demand for them, from the






want of credit, or of a circulating fund at home to buy with; and






strangers would not profit of the fall in the price of a






superfluity not adapted to their own taste; but they would very






willingly become purchasers of every bushel of grain become






superfluous, and thereby starve so many of the inhabitants; and






this last circumstance would keep the price of subsistence upon a






pretty even level with that of other countries.






    But if we suppose all communication cut off with strangers,






would this proportion between money and prices then hold true? By






no means. Here is the reason: there are many ways of alienating






goods or natural produce, without the assistance of specie.






Immense quantities of both may be consumed by barter, or in lieu






of service, where money is never heard of; now all this portion






alienated, enters into the mass of what is called produce and






manufactures which come to market; but can have no influence upon






the specie, nor can specie have any upon it, since the money






remains inactive during these operations.






    Another reason is, that there is no such thing as preserving






specie of a country in an equal repartition, so as to serve the






occasions of every body in proportion to their worth. The reason






is manifest: money, like every other thing, will come into the






hands of those who give the greatest value for it, and when the






quantity of it is small in any country, where nothing can be






procured without it, such proprietors of lands as have the






greatest desire to consume, will purchase the specie by giving a






higher interest, or by selling their lands cheaper than other






people.






    This alone is sufficient to prove that the repartition of






specie can never be in proportion to property; and this also






destroys the supposition of prices rising and falling according






to the proportion of it, even in a country cut off from every






foreign communication. But here is still another proof: any






individual who has, by mortgaging his lands, got together a large






proportion of the specie of his country, will raise prices in his






own neighbourhood, by making an extraordinary demand for work;






and the rest of the same country, drained of their circulating






value, must diminish their demand; consequently, prices will fall






elsewhere. I now come to the second proposition.






    The coin and current money of a country, is the






representation of all its labour and commodities; so that in






proportion as there is more or less of this representation, a






greater or less quantity of it will go for the same quantity of






the thing represented.






    To this representation I cannot agree, and I apprehend this






to be the source of the error. A proper equivalent for labour and






manufactures may, in one sense, be called a representation; but






there is no necessity for this equivalent to consist in coin. Are






not meat and clothes an equivalent for personal service? Is not a






free house and a bit of land, a very good equivalent for all the






manufactures a country weaver can work up for me who am his






landlord? Were there not one penny of coin in the country, would






it follow, that there could be no alienation, or that every thing






might there be got for nothing?






    Coin has an intrinsic value; and when it comes into a






country, it adds to the value of the country, as if a portion of






territory were added to it: but it has no title to represent any






thing vendible, by preference, or to be considered as the only






equivalent for all things alienable. It is made a common price,






on no other account than because of its rarity, its solidity, its






being of a nature to circulate; and suffers a correct division






without end, and because it carries its value along with it,






which is a proper equivalent for every thing; and at the same






time is by its nature little liable to vary.






    Were, indeed, a statesman to perform the operation of






circulation and commerce, by calling in, from time to time, all






the proprietors of specie in one body, and all those of alienable






commodities, workmen, &c. in another'. and were he, after






informing himself of the respective quantities of each, to






establish a general tariff of prices, according to our author's






rule; this idea of representation might easily be admitted;






because the parcels of manufactures would then seem to be adapted






to the pieces of the specie, as the rations of forage for the






horses of an army are made larger or smaller, according as the






magazines are well or ill provided at the time: but has this any






resemblance to the operations of commerce?






    The idea of coin being the representation of all the industry






and manufactures of a country, is pretty; and has been invented






for the sake of making a general rule for operating an easy






distribution of things extremely complex in their nature. From






this comes error. We substitute a complex term, sometimes in one






sense, and sometimes in another, and we draw conclusions as if it






expressed a fixed and determinate idea.






    If in algebra, x, y, z, &c. ever stood for more than a single






idea, the science would become useless; but as they never






represent but the very same notion, they never change their






nature through all manner of transpositions.






    It is not the same of terms in any other science, as






abundantly appears from the question now before us: coin is






called a representation because it is an equivalent; and because






it is a representation, it must bear an exact proportion to the






thing represented. And since in some particular examples, this






representation appears to hold; therefore the rule is made






general, although circumstances may be different. If, for






example, a merchant, or a private person, has in hand a thousand






pounds worth of grain, no doubt that the thousandth part of the






merchandize is worth the thousandth part of the sum; because both






are determinate in their quantity and quality. but the parcels of






this corn, though exactly proportioned to the price of the whole,






do not draw their value from this proportion, but from the total






value of the whole mass; which is determined from the complicated






operations of demand and competition, as has been said, and not






from the specie of the country which can bear no proportion






either to the quantity or quality of the grain.






    There may be vast quantities of coin in a country of little






industry; and, vice versa, coin is constantly an equivalent, but






never a representation more than any other equivalent which may






be contrived. Were the doctrine of this second proposition true,






every commodity in a country should be sold like a parcel of the






grain in the foregoing example, by the rule of three; as the






property of all the labour and manufactures of the country is to






the part I intend to alienate, so is all the gold and silver in






the country to the part I am entitled to receive. This ideal of






regulating prices may be very philosophical, but it is not very






mercantile. I now proceed to the third and last proposition.






Increase the commodities, they become cheaper: increase the






money, they rise in their value.






    This proposition is much too general; the first part of it is






commonly true, the last part is more commonly false.






    What can increase commodities, but a demand for them? If the






demand be equal to the augmentation, there will be no alteration






in the price.






    Let extraordinary plenty increase subsistence, it will






naturally fall in the price; but it may be hoarded up, and made






to rise in spite of the plenty; it may be demanded from abroad;






this also will make it rise.






    Let the production of superfluities, not exportable, be






produced by workmen whose branch is overstocked, prices will






undoubtedly fall. The same observations are true of a diminution






in the quantity of commodities. If this diminish by degrees, from






a diminution of demand, the price of them will not rise.






    If the quantity of subsistence fall below the necessary






consumption of the inhabitants, the price of it will undoubtedly






rise.






    If the articles of superfluity be diminished, prices will






rise in proportion only to the eagerness to buy, that is, to the






competition, not to the deficiency. On the other hand, as to coin






or money.






    Increase the money, nothing can be concluded as to prices,






because it is not certain that people will increase their






expences in proportion to their wealth; and although they should,






the moment their additional demand has the effect of producing a






sufficient supply, prices will return to the old standard.






    But diminish the quantity of specie usually employed in






circulation, you both retard this, and hurt the industrious;






because we suppose the former quantity exactly sufficient to






preserve both in the just proportion to the desires and wants of






the inhabitants.






    These are but a few of the numberless modifications necessary






to be applied to this general rule; and I hope what I have said






will justify the observation I have made on the whole doctrine;






to wit, that it is much more specious than solid, in every one of






its three branches.






    Let me just propose one question more upon this subject, and






then I shall conclude.






    Suppose the specie of Europe to continue increasing in






quantity every year, until it amounts to ten times the present






quantity, will prices rise in proportion?






    I answer, that such an augmentation might happen, without the






smallest alteration upon prices, or that it might occasion a very






great one, according to circumstances. Were industry to increase






to ten times what it is at present, that is to say, were the






produce of it to increase to ten times its present value,






according to the actual standard of prices, the value of every






manufacture and produce might remain without alteration. This






supposition is possible: because no man can tell to what extent






demand may carry industry. If, on the other hand the scale of






demand could be supposed to preponderate, so as to draw all the






wealth into circulation, without having the effect of augmenting






the supply (which I take to be impossible) then prices would rise






to ten times the present standard, at least in many articles.






    This solution is entirely consistent both with Mr Hume's






principle and mine; because nothing is so easy in an hypothesis,






as to establish proportions between things, which in themselves






are beyond all the powers of computation.













Chap. XXIX













Circulation with foreign Nations, the same thing as the Balance






of Trade













    We have endeavoured to shew in a former chapter, how the






circulation of money, given in exchange for consumable






commodities, produces a vibration in the balance of domestic






wealth: we are now to apply the same principles to the






circulation of foreign trade; in order to find out, if there can






really be such a thing as a balance upon it, which may enrich one






country, and impoverish another.






    It has been said, that when money is given for a consumable






commodity, the person who gets it acquires a balance in his






favour, so soon as he with whom he has exchanged, has begun to






consume.






    That if two consumable commodities are exchanged, the balance






comes to a level, when both are consumed. That it is the wealth






only which is found in circulation, which can change its balance;






the remainder must be found locked up, made into plate, or






employed in foreign trade. And it has been observed, that the






quantity of money found in circulation, is ever in proportion to






the sale of the produce of industry and manufactures; and that






when the precious metals are not sufficient to carry on a






circulation, proportionable to the demands of those who have any






real equivalent to give, symbolical money may be made to fill up






the void, when the interest of the state comes to require it.






    We have also laid it down as a kind of general rule, that






while luxury tends only to keep up demand to the reasonable






proportion of the power and inclination in the industrious part






of a people to supply it, then it is advantageous to a nation;






and that so soon as it begins to make the scale of home-demand






preponderate, by forming a competition among the natives, to






consume what strangers seek for, then it is hurtful, and has an






evident tendency to root out foreign trade. These principles are






all analogous to one another, and should be retained while we






examine the question before us.






    I must still add, that the fluctuation of the balance of






wealth is constantly inclining in favour of the industrious, and






against the idle consumer. This however admits of a restriction,






viz. the industrious must be supposed to be frugal; and the idle,






extravagant. For if the industrious man consume the full produce






of his own industry, he will have laboured to increase his






consumption only, not his wealth: and if the idle person, by his






frugality, keeps within the bounds of his yearly income, he will






thereby repair every disadvantage incurred by his sloth, the






balance then will stand even between them; the industry in one






scale, and the fund already provided in the other, will keep both






parties on a level as before.






    In order, therefore, to make the balance of domestic wealth






turn in favour of a poor man, he must be both industrious and






frugal.






    Now let us apply these principles to a whole nation,






considered as an individual in the great society of mankind. An






industrious person who conducts his affairs with prudence, must






either be in a way of growing richer by his industry, or of






spending his income with oeconomy and discretion: so I must






suppose a nation which is well governed, either to be growing






richer by foreign trade, or at least in a state of not becoming






poorer by it.






    It is as much the duty of every statesman to watch over the






conduct of those who hold the foreign correspondence of his






people, as it is the duty of the master of a family to watch over






those he sends to market.






    I find it is the opinion of the learned Mr Hume, that there






is no such thing as a balance of trade, that money over all the






world is like a fluid, which must ever be upon a level, and that






so soon as in any nation this level is destroyed by any accident,






while the nation preserves the number of its inhabitants, and its






industry, the wealth must return to a level as before.






    To prove this, he supposes four fifths of all the money in






Great Britain to be annihilated in one night, the consequence of






which he imagines would be, that all labour and commodities would






sink in their price, and that foreign markets would therefore be






entirely supplied by this industrious people, who would






immediately begin to draw back such a proportion of wealth, as






would soon put them again upon a level with their neighbours.






    This reasoning is consistent with the principles we have






examined, and humbly rejected in the preceding chapter. both






stand upon the same foundation, and lead to a chain of






consequences totally different from the principles laid down in






this inquiry.






    My intention is not so much to refute the opinions of others,






as briefly to pass them in review. General propositions, such as






those we have been treating of, are only true or false, according






as they are understood to be accompanied with certain






restrictions, applications, and limitations: I shall therefore






say nothing as to the proposition itself, but examine only how






far the sudden annihilation of a great proportion of a nation's






wealth, can naturally be followed by the consequence which has






been supposed.






    For this purpose, let me suggest another consequence






(different from that of the author, and flowing from the doctrine






we have established) which possibly might happen, upon the






annihilation of four fifths of all the money in Great Britain. I






shall take no notice of the effects which so sudden a revolution






might occasion; these have not been attended to by the author,






and therefore I shall consider them as out of the question. I






shall suppose the event to have happened, prices to have been






reduced, and every immediate inconvenience to have been






prevented. My only inquiry shall be concerning the unavoidable






consequences of such a revolution, as to foreign trade, as to






drawing back the money annihilated, and as to the preserving the






same number of inhabitants, and the same degree of industry as






before. If I can shew, that the event alone of annihilating the






specie, and reducing prices in proportion (which I shall allow to






be the consequence of it) will have the effect of annihilating






both industry and the industrious, it cannot afterwards be






insisted on, that the revolution can have the effect of drawing






back a proportional part of the general wealth of Europe: because






the preservation of the industrious is considered as the






requisite for this purpose.






    Here then is the consequence, which, in my humble opinion,






would very probably happen upon so extraordinary an emergency;






and I flatter myself that my reader has already anticipated my






decision.






    The inhabitants of Great Britain, who, upon such an occasion,






would be found in possession of all the exportable necessaries of






life, and of many other kinds of goods demanded in foreign






markets, instead of selling them to their poor countrymen, for a






price proportioned to our author's tariff, namely to the






diminution of the specie, which he takes to be the representation






of them, would export them to France, to Holland, or to any other






country where they could get the best price, and the inhabitants






of Britain would starve.






    If it be replied, that the exportation would not be allowed.






I answer, that such a prohibition would be highly seasonable; but






quite contrary to the principle of laying trade open, and






impossible to be effectual, as this author justly observes, when






he says, 'Can one imagine, 'that all commodities could be sold in






France, for a tenth of the price 'they would yield on the other






side of the Pyrenées, without finding 'their way thither, and






drawing from that immense treasure?' Suppose this phrase to run






thus: Can any one imagine, that provisions could be sold in






Britain, for a fourth part of the price they would yield on the






other side of the water, without finding their way thither, and






drawing from that immense treasure? This is entirely inconsistent






with our principles, and ruins the whole of Mr Hume's former






supposition: because the exportation of them would annihilate the






inhabitants.






    From this I conclude, that a nation, though industrious and






populous, may reduce itself to poverty in the midst of wealthy






neighbours, as a private person, though rich, may reduce himself






to want, in the midst of the amusements and luxury of London or






of Paris. And that both the one and the other, by following a






different conduct, may amass great sums of wealth, far above the






proportion of it among their neighbours.






    This is not a matter of long discussion. It is not by the






importation of foreign commodities, and by the exportation of






gold and silver, that a nation becomes poor; it is by consuming






these commodities when imported. The moment the consumption






begins, the balance turns; consequently, it is evidently against






the principles which we now examine, either to sell at home, or






destroy, confiscated goods. The only way of repairing the damage






done by such frauds, is to export the merchandize, and, by






selling it cheap in other countries, to hurt the trade of the






country which first had furnished it. From this also we may






conclude, that those nations which trade to India, by sending out






gold and silver, for a return in superfluities of the most






consumable nature, the consumption of which they prohibit at






home, do not in effect spend their own specie, but that of their






neighbours who purchase the returns of it for their own






consumption. Consequently, a nation may become immensely rich by






the constant exportation of her specie, and importation of all






sorts of consumable commodities. But she would do well to beware






of this trade, when her inhabitants have taken a luxurious turn,






lest she should come to resemble the drunkard, who commenced






wine-merchant, in order to make excellent cheer in wine with all






his friends who came to see him; or the milliner, who took it






into her head to wear the fine laces she used to make up for her






customers.






    If a rich nation, where luxury is carried to the highest






pitch, where a desire of gain serves as a spur to industry, where






all the poor are at work, in order to turn the balance of






domestic wealth in their favour; if such a nation, I say, be






found to consume not only the whole work of the inhabitants, but






part of that of other countries, it must have a balance of trade






against it, equivalent to the amount of foreign consumption; and






this must be paid for in specie, or in an annual interest, to the






diminution of the former capital. Let this trade continue long






enough, they will not only come at the end of their metals, but






they may render themselves virtually tributary to other nations,






by paying to them annually a part of the income of their lands,






as the interest due upon the accumulated balances of many years'






unfavourable trade.






    Is it not, therefore, the duty of a statesman to prevent the






consumption of foreign produce? If tapestry or other elegant






furniture, such as is seen in a certain great capital in Europe,






were allowed to be imported into a neighbouring nation; who






doubts but this article would carry money out of that nation?






    It may be answered, that as much elegance of another kind may






be sent in return. True; and it would be very lucky if this could






be the case; but then you must suppose an equality of elegance in






both countries; and farther, you must suppose a reciprocal taste






for the respective species of elegance. Now the taste of one of






the countries may be common to both; but not that of the other,






though nothing inferior, perhaps, in the opinion of a third






party. And the difference may proceed from this; that the young






people of one country travel into the other, where the






inhabitants stay at home: a circumstance which would prove very






prejudicial to the country of the travellers, if a wise statesman






did not, by seasonable prohibitions upon certain articles of






foreign consumption, prevent the bad consequences of adopting a






taste for what his subjects cannot produce.






    This furnishes a hint, that it might not be a bad maxim in a






great monarchy, to have houses built and furnished in the capital






for every foreign minister, where the general distribution of the






apartments of each might be, as much as possible, analogous to






the taste of the country for whose minister it is calculated: but






as to the furniture, to have it made of the most elegant domestic






manufactures easily transportable, nicely adapted also to the






uses and fashions of each foreign country. Such a regulation






could never fail of being highly acceptable, as it would prove a






great saving to foreign ministers, and would insensibly give them






a taste for the manufactures and luxury of the country they






reside in. On the other hand, I should be so far from expecting a






return of this civility, that I would recommend the bestowing of






a set of furniture, as a gratification to every minister sent






abroad by the state, who should regularly sell it off in the






place of his residence, upon the expiration of his commission.






Such an expence would not cost one penny to the nation, and would






be a means of captivating unwary strangers, who might be thereby






made to pay dearly for such marks of politeness and civility. I






return.






    Without being expert in the computation of exports and






imports, or very accurate in examining the different courses of






exchange between the different cities of Europe, a statesman may






lay it down as a maxim, that whatever foreign commodity, of






whatsoever kind it be, is found to be consumed within the nation






he governs, so far the balance of trade is against her; and that






so far as any commodity produced either by the soil, or labour of






the inhabitants, is consumed by foreigners, so far the balance is






for her.






    A nation may in some measure be compared to a country






gentleman, who lives upon his land. This I suppose to be his all.






From it he draws directly his nourishment, perhaps his clothes






are wrought up in his family. If he be so very frugal as never to






go to market for any thing, all the spare produce which he can






sell will be clear money in his purse. If he indulge now and then






in a bottle of wine, which his farm does not produce, he must go






to market with his purse in his hand; and so soon as his bottle






is out, I think he is effectually so much poorer than he was






before. If he go on, and increase his consumption of such things






as he is obliged to buy, he will run out the money he had in his






purse, and be reduced to the simple production of his farm. If






then this country gentleman be poorer, certainly somebody must be






richer; and as it is nobody in his family it must be some of his






neighbours.






    Just so a nation which has no occasion to have recourse to






foreign markets, in order to supply her own consumption, must






certainly grow rich in proportion to her exportation.






    These riches again will not circulate at home, in proportion






to the domestic consumption of natural produce and manufactures,






but in proportion to the alienation of them for money: the






surplus wealth will stagnate in one way or other, in the hands of






the money gatherers, who are the small consumers.






    While there is found a sufficient quantity of money for






carrying on reciprocal alienations; those money gatherers will






not be able to employ their stagnated wealth within the nation;






but so soon as this gathering has had the effect of diminishing






the specie, below the proportion found necessary to carry on the






circulation, it will begin to be lent out, and so it will return






to circulate for a time, until by the operation of the same






causes it will fall back again into its former repositories.






    Should it be here objected, that upon the augmentation of a






nation's riches, no money can stagnate; because prices rising in






proportion to the augmentation of riches, all the additional






wealth must be thrown into circulation; surely both reason and






experience must point out the weakness of such an objection.






    While a favourable balance, therefore, is preserved upon






foreign trade, a nation grows richer daily; and still prices






remain regulated as before, by the complicated operations of






demand and competition; and when one nation is growing richer,






others must be growing poorer: this is an example of a favourable






balance of trade.






    When this superfluity of riches is profited of by the






luxurious individuals only, instead of being turned to profit by






the state itself, with a view to secure the advantages thereby






acquired, then the balance takes a contrary turn: this is the






case whenever foreign importations for consumption are either






permitted as a gratification to the luxurious desires of the






wealthy., or because of the rise in the price of goods at home,






in consequence of domestic competition. If it be permitted purely






in favour of the first, it marks a levity and want of attention






unworthy of a statesman; if on account of the second, it shows






either an ignorance of the real consequences of so temporary an






expedient, or a disregard for the welfare of the lower classes of






the people.






    Every augmentation of prices at home, must be a necessary






consequence of many domestic circumstances, and must be removed






by correcting them, as has been, I think, made clear. But let it






be supposed, that from the augmentation of wealth alone,






manufacturers can no more produce work so cheap as other nations;






I think that both in humanity and prudence, a people should






submit to the inconvenience of paying dearer. In humanity,






because by the introduction of foreign manufactures, you starve






those very people, who by their labour have enriched you: in






prudence, because by opening your ports to such importation you






deliberately throw away that superiority of riches you have been






at so much pains to acquire.






    I freely grant, that particular people do not regulate either






their expence or their schemes of getting money, with a view to






promote the public good. One who has a coat to buy, will be very






glad to find a piece of foreign manufacture at a cheap rate; a






merchant will wish to smuggle goods on which there is a high






duty. But the question is, Whether a statesman is to wink at such






abuses? I think it is much the same question, as if it were






asked, whether the master of a family should, in good oeconomy,






allow his servants to invite their friends to drink in his






cellar, instead of carrying them to a public house.






    But suppose it be said, that 'by laying trade open, you are






sure that wealth will naturally come to a balance, in all






countries, and that all fears of a wrong balance of trade are






only the effect of a gloomy imagination'. See Hume's Political






Discourses, Sect. v.






    Several answers may be made to this objection. The first,






that it is in order to prevent this kind of balance, that a






nation ever gives itself disquiet: for by balance here, is






understood an equality of wealth; and rich nations are they only






who are anxious, lest they should be brought to such an equality.






In the question here before us, it is the loss of this






superiority of wealth which is understood by a balance turning






against a trading nation. If, therefore, it be the interest of a






nation, poor in respect of its neighbours, to have trade laid






open, that wealth may, like a fluid, come to an equilibrium; I am






sure it is the interest of a rich nation, to cut off the






communications of hurtful trade, by such impediments as






restrictions, duties, and prohibitions, upon importation; in






order that, as by dykes, its wealth may be kept above the level






of the surrounding element.






    Another answer is, that laying trade open would not have the






effect proposed; because it would destroy industry in some






countries, at least, if not every where. A manufacture must be






very solidly established indeed, not to suffer any prejudice, by






a permission to import the like commodities from other countries.






The very nature of luxury is such, that it frequently prompts






people to consume, from caprice and novelty, what is really






inferior to home-production. It may be answered, that this






argument cuts two ways: for if a nation from caprice consume






foreign commodities, why may not other nations from caprice






likewise, take off those which are left on hand? This reasoning






may appear good, in a theory which does not take in every






political consideration. But a poor manufacturer who cannot find






work, because the branch he works in is supplied from abroad,






cannot live till the caprice of foreigners shall make them demand






his labour. If a certain number of inhabitants be employed in a






necessary branch of Consumption, there must be a certain demand






preserved for it; and whatever can render this precarious, will






ruin the undertaking, and those employed in it.






    A third answer is, that any nation who would open its ports






to all manner of foreign importation, without being assured of a






reciprocal permission from all its neighbours, would, I think,






very soon be ruined; and if this be true, it is a proof that a






balance of trade is a possible supposition, and that proper






restrictions upon importation may turn to the advantage of a






state.






    In order to promote industry, a statesman must act, as well






as permit and protect. Could ever the woollen manufacture have






been introduced into France, from the consideration of the great






advantage England had drawn from it, had not the king undertaken






the support of it, by granting many privileges to the






undertakers, and by laying strict prohibitions on all foreign






cloths? Is there any other way of establishing a new manufacture






any where?






    Laying, therefore, trade quite open would have this effect;






it would destroy, at first at least, all the luxurious arts;






consequently, it would diminish consumption; consequently,






diminish the quantity of circulating cash; consequently, it would






promote hoarding; and consequently, would bring on poverty in all






the states of Europe. Nothing, I imagine, but an universal






monarchy, governed by the same laws, and administered according






to one plan well concerted, can be compatible with an universally






open trade. While there are different states, there must be






separate interests; and when no one statesman is found at the






head of these interests, there can be no such thing as a common






good; and when there is no common good, every interest must be






considered separately. But as this scheme of laying trade quite






open, is not a thing likely to happen, we may save ourselves the






trouble of inquiring more particularly into what might be its






consequences; it is enough to observe, that they must, in their






nature, be exceedingly complex, and if we have mentioned some of






them, it has been to apply principles only, and shew how






consequences may follow one another: to foretel what must follow






is exceedingly difficult, if not impossible.






    In discoursing of the balance of trade, I have hitherto






considered it so far only as the specie of a country is augmented






by it. In the subsequent books, where we shall have occasion to






bring this subject once more upon the carpet, I shall shew how a






balance may be extremely favourable without augmenting the mass






of the precious metals; to wit, by providing subsistence for an






additional number of inhabitants; by increasing the quantity of






shipping, which is an article of wealth; by constituting all






other nations debtors to it; by the importation of many durable






commodities, which may be considered also as articles of wealth;






as a well furnished house, a well stored cellar, an ample






wardrobe, and a fine stable of horses, are articles which enhance






the value of the inheritance of a landed man.






    Then we shall have occasion to shew how industry heightens






the permanent value of a nation, as agriculture increases its






annual produce.













Chap. XXX













Miscellaneous Questions and Observations relative to Trade and






Industry













    In the former chapters, we have been treating of the nature






and consequences of circulation, the effects of augmentations and






diminutions of specie, and the doctrine of Mr Hume concerning the






balance of trade. The perspicuity with which this author writes,






renders his ideas easy to be conceived; and when people






understand one another, most disputes are soon at an end.






    In order, therefore, to throw a little more light upon the






nature of the balance of trade between nations, let me examine






the following questions while we have the subject of the last






chapter fresh in our memory.






    Quest. 1. Can any judgment be formed concerning the state of






the balance of trade of a nation, barely from the quantity of






specie that is found in it?






    I answer in the negative. A great proportion of all the






specie of Europe, may be found in a country against which the






balance of trade has stood regularly for many years. An






inconsiderable proportion of it may be found in another, which






has had it as regularly in its favour for the same time. Here






follows the proof of this proposition.






    The balance upon every article of trade may be favourable to






a nation, which squanders away more than the returns of it, upon






foreign wars. The balance of every article of trade may be






against a country, which receives more than all the loss






incurred, either from her mines, or from countries tributary to






her, or who willingly furnish subsidies upon many political






considerations.






    Besides these varieties, there are still other circumstances






to be combined, relative to the specie itself. The money found in






a country, may either be said to belong absolutely to the






country, when neither the state itself, or the particular people






of it, are in debt to foreigners; or only so by virtue of a loan.






Now, whether it is borrowed or not, the property of it belongs to






the country; but the difference consists in this, that when it is






borrowed, the acquisition of the metals adds nothing to the






national patrimony, that is to say, there is no acquisition of






wealth thereby made; but when it is gained by industry, the money






adds to the real value of the country, in consequence of the






principles laid down in the 26th chapter.






    May not a nation, then, having very little gold and silver,






open a subscription for millions, at so much per cent? Will not






strangers lend to her, when her own subjects cannot? May she not






yearly, by paying away the interest of the money borrowed, and by






a heavy balance of trade against her, be constantly diminishing






her specie, and yet by new contracts, keep up, and even increase






the mass of the circulating value, to such a degree, as to be






possessed of a greater proportion of specie than any of her






neighbours? Farther.






    Is it not certain, that all nations will endeavour to throw






their ready money, not necessary for their own circulation, into






that country where the interest of money is high with respect to






their own, and where consequently the value of property in land






is low; since they may either draw a high interest from it, or






make the acquisition of solid property? Forbidding therefore the






acquisition of solid property to strangers, is, in effect, a






prohibition upon the gratuitous importation of specie. I allow






there may be examples of people who make such purchases, with a






view to draw the rents of the lands bought, out of the country;






but whatever be the intention at the time of purchase, such






however is the effect of an established fortune in a country,






that, sooner or later, it draws the proprietor to it; and when






this does not happen, a subsequent alienation commonly takes






place.






    Were the purchase, therefore, of lands permitted universally,






and were it established, that property in land, to a certain






value, should give a right to naturalization, I have little doubt






but large sums would be brought into those countries, where lands






are found to be the cheapest; and as no exportable commodity is






given in return, the specie of such counties will mark the






quantity of lands sold, as well as that of merchandize exported.






For want of a sufficient extension of these and many other






combinations, which it would be easy to contrive, Mr Belloni, in






his Dissertation upon Commerce, Chap. 1. Sect. 5. falls into






several mistakes, when he judges of the exportation of






commodities of a particular country, by the quantities of money






found in it.






    'It being the case (says he) that the plenty of coin,






wherever it be found, points out the plenty of those goods of






which it is the measure: Such persons, therefore, have justly






been called rich, and such kingdoms wealthy, where there is found






a great quantity of coin. On the other hand again, if we consider






the state of a kingdom, and of the coin which is in it, supposing






always the intrinsic value of the coin to be preserved (which is






nothing else but the measure of the goods and of the price which






is given for them), we must necessarily conclude, as every one






must acknowledge, that in such countries where we find plenty of






coin there must be a considerable trade in exporting goods for






the use of strangers; and on the contrary, wherever coin is found






to be scarce we may conclude that a great importation of foreign






goods has taken place of the coin, which must have gone abroad






for the payment of them.'






    These consequences are just, only so far as money comes into






a country or goes out of it, as the price of merchandize exported






or imported. But how much money has not this author himself drawn






into Rome from England, for the exportation of nothing but the






bills of travellers?






    On the other hand, may not a country, which is actually in






possession of great quantities of gold and silver, call in these






metals and circulate, in their place, a symbolical money; may not






a nation then, as well as a private person, employ this specie in






a profitable foreign trade, and gain daily by it? May she not,






after some time, withdraw her stock, by calling in her debts? And






may she not also call in her paper, and remain with an additional






acquisition of specie in her pocket? Consequently, during the






circulation of the paper, no judgment can be formed as to the






balance of her trade, by examining the state of her specie;






because I can suppose that at this time every shilling of it may






be in the hands of strangers. Consequently, the richest nation in






Europe may be the poorest in circulating specie.






    'The writings of Mr Gee (says Mr Hume in his Political






Discourse upon the Balance of Trade) struck the nation with an






universal panic, when they saw it plainly demonstrated, by a






detail of particulars, that the balance was against them for so






considerable a sum as must leave them without a single shilling






in five or six years. But, luckily, twenty years have since






elapsed, along with an expensive foreign war; and yet 'tis






commonly supposed that money is still more plentiful among us






than in any former period.' I quote from the French translation.






    Mr Gee was in the wrong to conclude, that the balance of






trade would have the effect of carrying off the coin: and Mr Hume






has been misled by this mistake, to conclude, that Mr Gee's






calculations were false. I know nothing as to the matter of fact;






nor whether Mr Gee was a good or a bad judge of the question he






treated; but, from what has been said, I hope it appears, that






the state of the coin in England, at the time Mr Hume wrote, was






no proof on either side.






    To judge of the balance of trade is one thing; to judge of






the wealth of a nation as to specie is another. England may






greatly increase her specie by her trade, and greatly diminish it






by her wars: perhaps this may be the fact. She may also, at






certain times, have a balance of trade against her; and great






sums laid out in foreign wars may be the means of making it






return in her favour. Should this nation begin to pay off her






debts to strangers, in ready coin, might she not soon diminish,






perhaps exhaust, the specie she is now possessed of; yet surely






none ever became poorer by paying off their debts. Nothing is so






easy as to have specie, when one has solid property to pledge for






it; and nothing can be worse judged, than to purchase specie from






strangers, at the expence of paying an interest for it, when one






can contrive a circulating value in paper-money, representing the






solid value which must be pledged to strangers for the loan of






their metals.






    But still it may be asked, how it happens, that






notwithstanding the most unfavourable balance of trade, no nation






ever found herself entirely drained of her specie; and since we






have proved, that the specie of a country may be diminished by a






disadvantageous trade, what are the principles which prevent the






total dissipation of it?






    This is a very curious question, and opens a door to a






multitude of new ideas, which will furnish abundant matter of






speculation, when we come to treat more directly of credit. I






shall here examine it in general, for the sake only of applying






the principles we have laid down.






    First, It may be said, that as common prudence prevents a






private person from spending to his last shilling; so the like






prudence commonly engages a people to put a stop to trade, before






it has time totally to drain them. Although most people drink






wine, there is no reason why every body should be drunk.






    Secondly, Nothing is so complicated as the balance of trade,






considered among many nations. The general wealth circulates from






one to another, as the money which the farmer gives the landlord






circulates back to the farmer. In the number of hands through






which the money passes, some are of the class of the luxurious,






some of the frugal; the first represents those nations who lose






by the balance, the latter those who gain. But the most






industrious nations of all, and those who, considered






abstractedly from extraordinary accidents, appear in the way to






swallow up the wealth of all the rest, are, by the means of such






accidents, made liable to terrible restitutions. How many






millions, for example, has England restored to the continent, in






consequence of her wars and subsidies? She then lays a foundation






for many more years of favourable balance, and accordingly we see






it return to her, as the money which the state spends within the






nation returns into the Exchequer at the end of the year.






    Thirdly, It may be asked, how it happens that no nation has






ever spent to its last farthing, as many an individual has done?






I answer, that I am far from believing that this has never






happened; nay, I believe there is nothing more frequent or






familiar than this very case, provided the riches of a country be






here supposed to mean no more than the specie absolutely






belonging to herself, not borrowed from other nations.






    I have said above, that the acquisition of money by industry






increased the real value of a country, as much as the addition of






a portion of territory; now what should hinder a people from






spending their ready money, and preserving their land at the same






time? Because a young gentleman, whose father has left him a fine






estate in land, and ten thousand pounds in ready money, has spent






the ten thousand pounds, does it follow, that he is not worth a






shilling? Upon this view of the question, it will, I believe, be






granted, that Dr Swift's idea that all the specie of Ireland






would in a short time be exported, in consequence of an






unfavourable balance of trade, is very far from being chimerical,






and may be exactly true; although at this time there be six times






more coin in circulation than ever; just as a person who is






running through his fortune, has commonly more money in his hands






than his father used to have, when he was acquiring it. Let






Ireland pay her debts to England, and then reckon her specie. Let






England pay hers to all the world, and then weigh her gold and






silver. Suppose that on summing up the accounts, there is not






found one shilling in either country, is this any proof of their






being undone? By no means: coin is one article of our wealth, but






never can be the measure of it.






    I know little of the state of Ireland; but if it be true,






that paper money is increasing daily in that country, it is, I






suppose, because the specie is daily exported to England, as the






returns of estates belonging to people who reside there, and that






the Irish, instead of buying it back again for their own use in






circulation, augment their paper, in proportion to the progress






of their industry; and buy such quantities only of specie as are






necessary for paying the balance of their trade. Now by buying






specie, I do not suppose, that they bring any over to Ireland, in






order to send it back to England; but that they send over goods






to the value, which the English merchants pay in specie, or in






English paper, to those who are creditors upon Ireland, for the






value of their rents, &c.






    Suppose then, for a farther illustration of some principles,






that all the lands of Ireland belonged to Englishmen residing in






their own country, and annually drawing from Ireland the income






belonging to them, what would the consequence be? I answer, that






as long as this portion of the produce of lands, which goes for






rent, (and which we have said to be the fund provided for the






subsistence of the free hands who purchase their own






necessaries,) can be bought and consumed by the Irish themselves,






that is, in other words, while in Ireland there is a demand for






this portion of the fruits, it will be paid for, either in coin,






to the diminution of their specie, or in something which may be






converted into money; that is, by the produce of their industry,






and thus, by the means of trade, will come into the hands of the






English proprietors, either in specie, or in any other form they






judge proper.






    That so soon as the demand for this portion of fruits comes






to fail, for want of money, or industry, in Ireland, to purchase






it, what remains on hand will be sent over to England in kind;






or, by the way of trade, be made to circulate with other nations






(in beef, butter, tallow, &c.) who will give silver and gold for






it, to the proprietors of the Irish lands. By such a diminution






of demand in the country, for the fruits of the earth, the






depopulation of Ireland is implied; because they who consumed






them formerly, consume them no more; that is to say, they are






dead, or have left the country.






    To conclude; a great part of the value of a country is its






produce and manufactures; but it does not follow that these






should as necessarily draw into a country a proportional sum of






the gold and silver of Europe, as a shoal of small fishes draws






water-fowl, or as charity draws the poor, or as beauty draws






admiration.






    Quest. 2. Can no rule be found to judge of the balance of






trade from the state of specie, or at least to perceive the






effects of this balance in augmenting or diminishing the mass of






riches?






    Could it be supposed that specie never circulated between






nations, but in the way of trade, and in exchange for exportable






commodities, the following rules might be laid down.






    First, In nations where the earth produces neither gold or






silver, and where these metals are imported as the returns of






industry only, the balance in their favour, from the introduction






of specie, to this day, would be measured by the quantity of it






which they possess. Here Mr Belloni's opinion is just.






    Secondly, The consumption made by any nation for the same






term of years, is equal to the whole natural produce and labour






of the inhabitants for that time, minus the quantity of such






produce and labour, as is, or has been, equal in value to the






actual national specie.






    Thirdly, On the other hand, in nations where gold and silver






are produced by the earth, the balance of trade against them,






from the time these metals became the object of trade to this






day, may be estimated by the quantity of them which has been






exported.






    Fourthly, and farther; the consumption made by such nations,






for the same term of years, is equal to the whole natural produce






and labour of the inhabitants for that time, plus the quantity of






such produce and labour, as is, or has been, equal to the






quantity of these metals exported.






    These rules are by much too general to be laid down as






principles; because trade is not concerned in every acquisition






or alienation of specie; but they may serve, in the mean time, to






illustrate the doctrine we have been considering, and even in






many cases may be found pretty exact. For example:






    If it be true, that in any nation of Europe, there be now






just as much silver and gold as there was ten years ago, and if






that nation, during this period, has supported, without borrowing






from strangers, an expensive war which may have cost it, I






suppose, five millions fairly exported in coin, it is certain






that, during this period, the home-consumption must have been the






value of five millions less than the natural produce, labour, and






industry of the inhabitants; which sum of five millions must have






come from abroad in coin, and in return for a like value of the






production, labour, &c. remaining over and above their own






consumption, and exported for this return in ready specie.






    In this supposition, the national wealth (the metals) stands






as before; the balance of it only is changed. How this change is






performed, and what are its consequences, may be discovered by an






application of the principles already laid down.






    Quest. 3. What were the effects of riches before the






introduction of trade and industry?






    I never can sufficiently recommend to my readers to compare






circumstances in the economy of the ancients, with these of






modern politics; because I see a multitude of new doctrines laid






down, which, I think, never would have been broached, had such






circumstances been properly attended to. I have endeavoured to






shew, that the price of goods, but especially of articles of the






first necessity, have little or no connection with the quantities






of specie in a country The slightest inspection into the state of






circulation, in different ages, will fortify our reasoning: but






the general taste of dissipation, which is daily gaining ground,






makes people now imagine, that wealth and circulation are






synonymous terms; whereas nothing is more contrary both to reason






and matter of fact. A slight review of this matter, in different






ages, will set it in a clearer light than a more abstract






reasoning can do.






    It is a question with me, whether the mines of Potosi and






Brazil, have produced more riches to Spain and Portugal, within






these two hundred years, than the treasures heaped up in Asia,






Greece, and Egypt, after the death of Alexander, furnished to the






Romans, during the two hundred years which followed the defeat of






Perseus, and the conquest of Macedonia.






    From the treasures mentioned by all the historians who have






written of the conquest of these kingdoms by the Romans, I do not






think I am far from truth, when I compare the treasures of the






frugal Greeks to the mines of the new world.






    What effect, as to circulation, had the accumulation of these






vast treasures? Not any to accelerate it, surely: and no person,






the least conversant in antiquity, will pretend that the






circulating specie in those times bore as great a proportion to






their treasures, as what is at present circulating among us bears






to the wealth of the most oeconomising Prince in Europe. If any






one doubt of this particular, let him listen to Appian, who will






inform him, that the successors of Alexander, the possessors of






these immense riches, lived with the greatest frugality. These






treasures were then, as I have said, a real addition to the value






of their kingdoms but had not the smallest influence upon prices.






In those days of small circulation, the prices of every thing






must have been vastly low, not from the great abundance of them,






but because of the little demand; and as a proof of this, I cite






the example of a country, which, within the space of fifty years,






possessed in specie, at one time, considerably beyond the worth






of the land, houses, slaves, merchandize, natural produce,






moveables, and ready money, at another. The example is mentioned






by Mr Hume; and I am surprized the consequence of it did not






strike him. For if the money they possessed was greatly above the






worth of all their property, moveable and immoveable, surely it






never could be considered as a representation of their industry,






which made so small a part of the whole. Athens possessed, before






the Peloponnesian war, a treasure of ten thousand talents; and






fifty years afterwards, all Athens, in the several articles above






specified, did not amount to the value of six thousand. Hume's






Political Discourses upon the Balance of Trade.






    These treasures were spent in the war, and they had been laid






up for no other purpose. Therefore I was in the right, when I






observed above, Chap. 22., that war in ancient times had the






effect that industry has now: it was the only means of making






wealth circulate. But, peace producing a general stagnation of






circulation, people returned to the ancient simplicity of their






manners, and the prices of subsistence remained on the former






footing; because there was no increase of appetite, or rising of






demand upon any necessary article. So much for the state of






wealth during the days of frugality.






    The Romans subdued all those kingdom of the Greeks, and drew






their treasures to Rome. The republic went to destruction, and a






succession of the most prodigal princes ever known in history






succeeded one another for about two hundred years. Those






monstrous treasures were then thrown into circulation: and I must






now give an idea of the effects produced by such a revolution.






    I have already observed (Chap. 28.), that in consequence of






the great prodigality of those times, the price of superfluities






rose to a monstrous height; while the price of necessaries kept






excessively low. The fact is indisputable; and any one who






inclines to satisfy himself father, may look into that valuable






collection of examples of ancient luxury, wealth, and, at the






same time, of simplicity, found in Dr Wallace's Dissertation upon






the Numbers of Mankind in ancient and modern Times, p. 132. et






seq.






    But how is it to be accounted for, that the price of






superfluities should stand so high, while the price of






necessaries was so low? The reason is plain, from the principles






we have laid down. The circulation of money had no resemblance to






that of modern times: fortunes were made by corruption, fraud,






concussion, rapine, and penury; not by trade and industry. Seneca






amassed in four years 2,400,000 pounds sterling. An augur was






found to be worth 3 millions sterling. M. Antony owed on the ides






of March, 322,916 pounds sterling, and paid it before the calends






of April. We know of no such circulation. Every revolution was






violent: the powerful were rapacious and prodigal, the weak were






poor and lived in the greatest simplicity: consequently, the






objects of the desires for the rich were immensely dear; and the






necessaries for the poor were excessively cheap. This is a






confirmation of the principles we have laid down in Chap. 28.,






that the price of subsistence must ever be in proportion to the






faculties of the numerous classes of those who buy: that the






price of every thing must be in proportion to the demand for it;






and that in every case, where the supply can naturally be






increased in proportion to the demand, there must be a






determinate proportion between the price of such articles and






that of subsistence. Now in the examples given by Dr Wallace, of






things which sold at monstrous prices, we find such only as could






not be increased according to demand: here is the enumeration of






them. Large asses brought from Spain, peacocks, fine doves,






mullets, lampreys, peaches, large asparagus, purple, wool,






jewels, carpets, vestes Byssinae, slaves skilled in the finer






arts, pictures, statues, books, and rewards to those who taught






the sciences. By casting a glance upon the catalogue, we may






easily perceive that the extraordinary price must have proceeded






from the impossibility of augmenting the supply in proportion to






the demand; not from the abundance of the money, which had no






effect in raising the price of necessaries. The cheapness, again,






of these did not proceed from the vast plenty of them; but






because the price remained in proportion to the faculties of the






numerous poor; and because the augmentation of the wealth of the






rich never could increase their consumption of any necessary






article. Had the Roman empire been governed with order and






tranquillity, this taste of luxury, by precipitating money into






the hands of the numerous classes, would, in time, have wrought






the effects of multiplying the number of the industrious;






consequently, of increasing the demand for vendible subsistence;






consequently, of raising the price of it. And, on the other hand,






the introduction of a more adequate proportion between services






and rewards given by the public, would have checked the other






branch of circulation which produced those monstrous fortunes, to






wit, rapine and corruption: and, industry receiving a regular






encouragement, every article of extraordinary demand for delicate






aliments, birds, fishes, fruits, &c. would have been supplied






with sufficient abundance; and consequently, would have fallen in






its price. But while either despotism or slavery were the






patrimonial inheritance of every one on coming into the world, we






are not to expect to see the same principles operate, as in ages






where the monarch and the peasant are born equally free to enjoy






the provision made for them by their forefathers.













    Quest. 7. In what manner, therefore, may a statesman






establish industry, so as not to destroy simplicity, nor occasion






a sudden revolution in the manners of his people, the great






classes of which are supposed to live secure in ease and






happiness; and, at the same time, so as to provide with






necessaries every one who may be in want?






    The observations we are going to make will point out the






answer to this question: they will still farther unfold the






political economy of the ancients, and explain how manners






remained so pure from vicious luxury, notwithstanding the great






and sumptuous works carried on, which strike us with so lofty an






idea of their useful magnificence and noble simplicity. These






observations will also confirm the justness of a distinction






made, in the first chapter of this book, between labour and






industry; by shewing that labour may ever be procured, even by






force, at the expence of furnishing man with his






physical-necessary, from which no superfluity can proceed:






whereas industry cannot be established, but by means of an






adequate equivalent, proportioned, not to the absolutely






necessary, but to the reasonable desire of the industrious; which






equivalent becomes afterwards the means of diffusing a luxurious






disposition among all the classes of a people.






    If a statesman find certain individuals in want, he must






either feed them, in which case he may employ them as he thinks






fit; or he must give them a piece of land, as the means of






feeding themselves. If he give the land, he can require no






equivalent for it, because a person who has nothing can give






nothing but his labour; and if he be obliged to labour for his






food, he cannot purchase with labour the earth itself, which






produces it. If it be asked, whether a statesman does better to






give the food, or to give the land? I think it will appear very






evident, that the first is the better course, because he can then






exact an equivalent; and since in either way the person is fed,






the produce of his labour is always clear gain. But in order to






give the food, he must have it to give; in which case it must






either be a surplus-produce of public lands, or a contribution






from the people. In both which cases, is implied an industry






carried on beyond the personal wants of those who labour the






ground. If this fund be applied in giving bread to those whom he






employed in improving the soil of the country in general, it will






have no immediate effect in destroying the simplicity of their






manners; it will extend the fund only of their subsistence. If he






employs them in making highways, aqueducts, common sewers,






bridges, and the like; it will extend the correspondence between






the different places of the country, and render living in cities






more easy and agreeable: and these changes have an evident






tendency towards destroying simplicity. But here let it be






remarked, that the simplicity of individuals is not hurt by the






industry carried on at the expence of the public. The superfluous






food at the statesman's disposal, is given to people in






necessity, who are employed in relieving the wants of the public,






not of private persons. But if, for example, in consequence of






the roads made, any inhabitant shall incline to remove from place






to place in a chariot, instead of riding on horseback, or






walking, he must engage somebody to make the machine: this is a






farther extension to occupation, on the side of those who labour.






but the consequence of the employment is very different, when






considered with regard to the simplicity of manners. The reason






is plain: the ingenuity here must be paid for; and this






superfluity in the hands of the workman is a fund for his






becoming luxurious.






    Industry destroys simplicity of manners in him who gives an






equivalent for an article of superfluity; and the equivalent






given frequently gives rise to a subordinate species of luxury in






the workman. When industry therefore meets with encouragement






from individuals, who given an equivalent in order to satisfy






growing desires, it is a proof that they are quitting the






simplicity of their manners. In this case, the wants and desires






of mankind are the sources of industry, which was the supposition






in the first book; because, in fact, the industry of Europe is






owing to this cause alone.






    But the industry of ancient times was very different, when






the multitude of slaves ready to execute whatever was demanded,






either by the state or by their masters, for the equivalent of






simple maintenance only, prevented wealth from ever falling into






the hands of industrious free men; and he who has no circulating






equivalent to give for satisfying a desire for superfluity, must






remain in his former simplicity. The labour therefore of those






days producing no circulation, could not corrupt the manners of






the people; because, remaining constantly poor, they never could






increase their consumption of superfluity.






    I must, in this place, insert the authority of an ancient






author, in order both to illustrate and to prove the justness of






this representation of the political oeconomy of the ancients.






    There remains a discourse of Xenophon upon the improvement of






the revenue of the state of Athens. Concerning the authenticity






of this work, I have not the smallest doubt. It is a chef






d'oeuvre of its kind, and from it more light is to be had, in






relation to the subject we are here upon, than from any thing I






have ever seen, ancient or modern.






    From this ancient monument we learn the sentiments of the






author with regard to the proper employment of the three






principal classes of the Athenian people, viz. the citizens, the






strangers, and the slaves. From the plan he lays down we plainly






discover, that, in the state of Athens, (more renowned than any






other of antiquity for the arts of luxury and refinement,) it






never entered into the imagination of any politician to introduce






industry even among the lowest classes of the citizens; and






Xenophon 's plan was to reap all the benefits we at present enjoy






from it, without producing any change upon the spirit of the






Athenian people.






    The state at this time used to impose taxes upon their






confederate cities, in order to maintain their own common people,






and Xenophon's intention in this discourse was to lay down a plan






for improving the revenue of the state in such a manner as out of






it to give every citizen a pension of three oboli a day, or three






pence three farthings of our money.






    I shall not here go through every branch of his plan, nor






point out the resources he had fallen upon to form a sufficient






fund for this purpose; but he says, that in case of any






deficiency in the domestic revenue of the state, people from all






quarters, Princes and strangers of note, in all countries, would






be proud of contributing towards it, for the honour of being






recorded in the public monuments of Athens, and having their






names transmitted to posterity as benefactors to the state in the






execution of so grand a design.






    In our days, such an idea would appear ridiculous; in the






days of Xenophon, it was perfectly rational. At that time great






quantities of gold and silver were found locked up in the coffers






of the rich: this was in a great measure useless to them, in the






common course of life, and was the more easily parted with from a






sentiment of vanity or ostentation.






    In our days, the largest income is commonly found too small






for the current expence of the proprietor. From whence it






happens, that presents, great expence at funerals and marriages,






godfathers' gifts, &c. so very familiar among ourselves in former






times, are daily going out of fashion. These are extraordinary






and unforeseen expences which our ancestors were fond of; because






they Battered their vanity, without diminishing the fund of their






current expence: but as now we have no full coffers to fly to, we






find them excessively burthensome, and endeavour to retrench them






as soon as we can, not from frugality, God knows, but in






consequence of a change in our manners.






    Besides providing this daily pension of three pence three






farthings a day for every citizen of Athens, rich and poor, he






proposed to build, at the public charge, many trading vessels, a






great many inns and houses of entertainment for all strangers in






the sea-ports, to erect shops, warehouses, exchanges, &c. the






rents of which would increase the revenue, and add great beauty






and magnificence to the city. In short, Xenophon recommends to






the state to perform, by the hands of their slaves and strangers,






what a free people in our days are constantly employed in doing






in every country and industry. While the Athenian citizens






continued to receive their daily pensions, proportioned to the






value of their pure physical-necessary, their business being






confined to their service in the army in time of war, their






attendance in public assemblies, and the theatres in times of






peace, clothed like a parcel of capucins, they, as became






freemen, were taught to despise industrious labour, and to glory






in the austerity and simplicity of their manners. The pomp and






magnificence of the Persian Emperors were a subject of ridicule






in Greece, and a proof of their barbarity, and of the slavery of






their subjects. From this plain representation of Xenophon's






plan, I hope, the characteristic difference between the ancient






and modern economy is manifest; and for such readers as take a






particular delight in comparing the systems of simplicity and






luxury, I recommend the perusal of this most valuable discourse.






    To put this matter past all dispute, and to prove that the






simplicity of the manners, as well as the idleness of the common






people of Athens in Xenophon's time, proceeded from refinement






not from ignorance, I shall here insert a passage from President






Goguet's Origin of Laws, Arts, and Sciences, with the authorities






he cites in part 3d, book 4th, chap. 3d.






    'Hesiod and Plutarch have observed,' says he, 'that, in the






ages I am now speaking of (before the reign of Cyrus) commerce






was held in great honour among the Greeks. No labour, say these






authors, was accounted shameful, no art, no trade, placed any






difference among men. This maxim, so reasonable and so useful to






such a nation as the Greeks, was, nevertheless, altered. We see






by the works of Xenophon, of Plato, of Aristotle, and of many






other writers of merit, that, in their age, all professions which






were calculated to gain money, were regarded as unworthy of a






freeman. Aristotle maintains, that, in a well ordered state, they






will never give the right of citizens to artisans. Plato would






have a citizen punished who should enter into commerce. In fine,






we see these two philosophers, whose sentiments, on the






principles and maxims of government, are otherwise so opposite,






agreeing to recommend that the lands should be cultivated by






slaves: only. It is very surprising,' concludes the President,






'that with such principles, which all the Greeks appear to have






imbibed, they should ever have been so intelligent in commerce,






and so powerful at sea, as they are known to have been in some






ages.'






    Putting, therefore, all these circumstances together, and






comparing them with the contrast, which is found, as to every






particular, in our times, I think it is but doing justice to the






moderns, to allow, that the extensive luxury, which daily






diffuses itself through every class of a people, is more owing to






the abolishing of slavery, the equal distribution of riches, and






the circulation of an adequate equivalent for every service, than






to any greater corruption of our manners, than what prevailed






among the ancients.






    In order to have industry directed towards the object of






public utility, the public, not individuals, must have the






equivalent to give. Must not the employment be adapted to the






taste of him who purchases it? Now, in ancient times, most public






works were performed either by slaves, or at the price of the






pure physical-necessary of free men. We find the price of a






pyramid, recorded to us by Herodotus, in the quantity of turnips,






onions, and garlic, consumed by the builders of it. Those who






made the via appia, I apprehend, were just as poor when it was






finished as the day it was begun; and this must always be the






case, when the work requires no peculiar dexterity in the






workmen. If, on the other hand, examples can be brought where






workmen gained high wages, then the consequences must have been






the same as in our days.






    As long, therefore, as industry is not directed to such






objects as require a particular address, which, by the principles






laid down in the twenty-first chapter, raises profits above the






physical-necessary, the industrious never can become rich; and if






they be paid in money, this money must return into the hands of






those who feed them: and if no superfluity be found any where but






in the hands of the state, such industry may be the means of






consuming a surplus of subsistence, but never can draw one penny






into circulation. This I apprehend to be a just application of






our principles, to the state of industry under the Roman






republic: and it is this species of industry which we call






labour. We are not therefore to ascribe the taste for simplicity






in those days to the virtue of the times. A man who had riches,






and who spent them, spent them no doubt then, as at present, to






gratify his desires; and if the simplicity of the times furnished






no assistance to his own invention, in diversifying them, the






consequence was, that the money was not spent, but locked up. I






have heard many a man say, had I so much money I should not know






how to spend it. The thing is certainly true; for people do not






commonly take it into their head to lay it out for the public.






    Nobody, I believe, will deny that money is better employed in






building a house, or in producing something useful and permanent,






than in providing articles of mere transitory superfluity. But






what principle of politics can influence the taste of the






proprietors of wealth? This being the case, a statesman is






brought to a dilemma; either to allow industry to run into a






channel little beneficial to the state, little permanent in its






nature, or to deprive the poor of the advantage resulting from






it. May I not farther suggest, that a statesman, who is at the






head of a people, whose taste is directed towards a trifling






species of expence, does very well to diminish the fund of their






prodigality, by calling in, by the means of taxes, a part of the






circulating equivalent which they give for it? When once he is






enriched by these contributions, he comes to be in the same






situation with ancient statesmen, with this difference, that they






had their slaves at their command, whom they fed and provided






for; and that he has the free, for the sake of an equivalent with






which they feed and provide for themselves. He then can set






public works on foot, and by his example, inspire a taste for






industry of a more rational kind, which may advance the public






good and procure a lasting benefit to the nation.






    I have frequently said, that the acquisition of money, by the






sale of industry to strangers, or in return for consumable






commodities, was a way of augmenting the general worth of a






nation. Now I say, that whoever can transform the most consumable






commodities of a country into the most durable and most






beneficial works, makes a high improvement. If therefore meat and






drink, which are of all things the most consumable, can be turned






into harbours, high roads, canals, and public buildings, is not






the improvement inexpressible? This is in the power of every






statesman to accomplish, who has subsistence at his disposal; and






beyond the power of all those who have it not. There is no






absolute occasion for money to improve a country. All the






magnificent buildings which ornament Italy, are more properly the






representation of a scanty subsistence, than of the gold and






silver in that country at the time they were executed. Let me now






conclude with a few miscellaneous observations on what has been






said.






    Obser. 1. When I admire the magnificence and grandeur of






public works in any country, such as stupendous churches,






amphitheatres, roads, dykes, canals; in a word, when I examine






Holland, the greatest work perhaps ever done by man, I am never






struck with the expence. I compare them with the numbers of men






only who have lived to perform them. When I see another country






well inhabited, where no such works appear, the contrast suggests






abundance of reflections.






    As to the first, I conclude, that while these works were






carrying on, either slavery or taxes must have been established;






because it seldom happens, that a prince will, out of his own






patrimony, launch out into such expences, purely to serve the






public. Public works are carried on by the public; and for this






purpose, either the persons or purses of individuals, must be at






its command. The first I call slavery; that is service: the






second taxes; that is public contributions in money or in






necessaries.






    Obser. 2. I farther conclude, that nothing is to be gathered






from those works, which should engage us to entertain a high






opinion of the wealth, or other species of magnificence in the






people who executed them. All that can be determined positively






concerning their economy as to this particular, is, that at the






time they were performed, agriculture must have been exercised as






a trade, in order to furnish a surplus sufficient to maintain the






workmen; or that subsistence must have come from abroad, either






as a return for other species of industry, or gratuitously, that






is, by rapine, tribute, &c.






    Obser. 3. That the consequence of such works, is, to make






meat, drink, and necessaries circulate from the hands of those






who have a superfluity of them, into those who are employed to






labour; or to oblige those who formerly worked for themselves






only, to work also in part for others. To execute this, there






must be a subordination: for who will increase his labour,






voluntarily, in order to feed people who do not work for himself,






but for the public? This combination was neglected throughout the






first book; because we there left mankind at liberty to follow






the bent of their inclinations. This was necessary to give a






right idea of the subject we then intended to treat, and to point






out the different effects of slavery and liberty; but now, that






we have formed trading nations, and riveted a multitude of






reciprocal dependences, which tie the members of them together,






there is less danger in introducing restraints; because the






advantages which people find, from living in a well ordered






society, make them put up the better with the inconveniences of






supporting and improving it. It is an universal principle, that






instruction should be given with gentleness. A young horse is to






be carressed when the saddle is first put upon his back: any






thing that appears harsh, let it be ever so useful or necessary,






must be forborn in the beginning, in order to captivate the






inclination of the creature which we incline to instruct.






    Obser. 4. When a statesman knows the extent and quality of






the territory of his country, so as to be able to estimate what






numbers it may feed; he may lay down his plan of political






economy, and chalk out a distribution of inhabitants, as if the






number were already compleat. It will depend upon his judgment






alone, and upon the combination of circumstances, foreign and






domestic, to distribute, and to employ the classes, at every






period during this execution, in the best manner to advance






agriculture, so as to bring all the lands to a thorough






cultivation. A ruling principle here, is, to keep the husbandman






closely employed, that their surplus may be carried as high as






possible; because this surplus is the main spring of all






alienation and industry. The next thing is to make this surplus






circulate; no man must eat of it for nothing. What a prodigious






difference does a person find, when he considers two countries,






equally great, equally fertile, equally cultivated, equally






peopled, the one under the economy here represented; the other,






where every one is employed in feeding and providing for himself






only.






    A statesman, therefore, under such circumstances, should






reason thus: I have a country which maintains a million of






inhabitants, I suppose, and which is capable of maintaining as






many more; I find every one employed in providing for himself,






and considering the simplicity of their manners, a far less






number will be sufficient to do all the work: the consequence is,






that many are almost idle, while others, who have many children,






are starving. Let me call my people together, and shew them the






inconvenience of having no roads. He then proposes that every one






who chooses to apply to this work, shall be fed and taken care of






by the community, and his lands distributed to those who incline






to take them. The advantage is felt, the people are engaged to






work a little harder, so as to undertake the cultivation of the






portions of those who have abandoned them. Upon this revolution,






labour is increased, the soil continues cultivated as before, and






the additional labour of the farmers appears in a fine high road.






Is this any more than a method to engage one part of a people to






labour, in order to maintain another?






    Obser. 5. Here I ask, whether it be not better to feed a man,






in order to make him labour and be useful, than to feed him in






order to make him live and digest his victuals? This last was the






case of multitudes during the ages of ancient slavery, as well as






the consequence of ill-directed modern charity. One and the other






being equally well calculated for producing a simplicity of






manners: and Horace has painted it to the life, when he says,













             Nos numerus sumus, et fruges consumere nati.













    This I have heard humorously translated, though nastily I






confess; We add to the number of t-d mills. A very just






representation of many of the human species! to their shame be it






spoken, as it equally casts a reflection on religion and on






government.






    Consistently with these principles, we find no great or






public work carried on in countries of great liberty. Nothing of






this kind is to be seen among the Tartars or hunting Indians.






These I call free nations, but not our European republics, where






I have found just as much subordination and constraint as any






where else.






    I have on several occasions, let drop some expressions with






regard to charity, which I am sensible may be misinterpreted. It






will therefore be proper to make some apology, which nobody can






suspect of insincerity; because my reason for introducing it, is






with a view to a farther illustration of my subject.






    When I see a rich and magnificent monastery of begging






friars, adorned with profusion of sculpture, a stupendous pile of






building, stately towers, incrustations of marble, beautiful






pavements; when I compare the execution and the expence of all






these, with the faculties of a person of the largest fortune, I






find there is no proportion between what the beggars have






executed with the produce of private charities, and what any Lord






has done with his overgrown estate. Nay monasteries there are






which, had they been executed by princes, would have been cited






by historians, from generation to generation, as eternal






monuments of the greatest prodigality and dissipation. Here then






is an effect of charity, which I have heard condemned by many,






and I think without much reason. What prostitution of riches! say






they: how usefully might all this money have been employed, in






establishing manufactures, building a navy, and in many other






good purposes? Whereas I am so entirely taken up with the effects






arising from the execution of the work, that I seldom give myself






time to reflect upon the use of it. The building of this






monastery has fed the industrious poor, has encouraged the






liberal arts, has improved the taste of the inhabitants, has






opened the door to the curiosity of strangers: and when I examine






my purse, I find that instead of having contributed to the






building of it from a charitable disposition, my curiosity to see






it has obliged me to contribute my proportion of the expence. I






spend my money in that country, and so do other strangers,






without bringing any thing away for it. No balance of trade is






clearer than this. The miraculous tongue of St. Anthony of Padua,






has brought more clear money into that city than the industry of






a thousand weavers could have done: the charity given is not to






the monks, but to the poor whom they employ. If young wits,






therefore, make a jest of such a devotion; I ask, who ought to be






laughed at, those who give, or those who receive money for the






show?






    In a country where such works are usually carried on, they






cease in a great measure to be useful, whenever they are






finished; and a new one should be set on foot directly, or what






will become of those who are without employment? It must not be






concluded from this, that the usefUlness of public works is not a






principal consideration. The more a work is useful after it is






done, so much the better; because it may then have the effect of






giving bread to those who have not built it. But whether useful






or not afterwards, it must be useful while it is going on; and






many, who with pleasure will give a thousand pounds to adorn a






church, would not give a shilling to build Westminster bridge, or






the port of Rochefort; and the poor live equally by the execution






of either. Expensive public works, are therefore a mean of giving






bread to the poor, and of advancing industry, without hurting the






simplicity of manners; which is an answer to the seventh






question.






    Obser. 6. Great works found in one country and none found in






another, is no proof that the first have surpassed the second in






labour and industry: the contrast marks only the different






division of property, or taste of expence. Every undertaking






points out a particular interest. Palaces are a representation of






rich individuals; snug boxes, in the neighbourhood of cities,






represent small but easy fortunes; huts point out poverty;






aqueducts, highways, &c. testify an opulent common good: and if






these be found in a country where no vestige of private expence






appears, I then must conclude that they have been executed by






slaves, or by oppression; otherwise somebody, at least, would






have gained by the execution; and his gains would appear in one






species of expence or another.






    Obser. 7. In countries where fortunes have been unequally






divided, where there have been few rich and many poor, it is






common to find lasting monuments of labour; because great






fortunes only are capable of producing them. As a proof of this






let us compare the castles of ancient times (I mean four or five






hundred years ago) with the houses built of late. At that time






fortunes were much more unequal than at present, and accordingly






we find the habitations of the great in most countries not






numerous, but of an extraordinary bulk and solidity. Now a






building is never to be judged of by the money it cost, but by






the labour it required. From the houses in a country, I judge of






the opulence of the great, and of the proportion of fortunes






among the inhabitants. The taste in which these old castles are






built, marks the power of those who built them, and, as their






numbers are small, we may judge from the nature of man, who loves






imitation, that the only reason for it was, that there were few






in a condition to build them. Why do we find in modern times a






far less disproportion between the convenience with which every






body is lodged, than formerly; but merely because riches from the






operations of industry above-described are more equally divided.






    Obser. 8. From this we may conclude, that lasting monuments






are no adequate measure of the industry of a country. The expence






of a modern prince, in a splendid court, numerous armies,






frequent journeys, magnificent banquets, operas, masquerades,






tournaments, and shews, may give employment and bread to as many






hands, as the taste of him who built the pyramid; and the smoke






of the gun-powder at the reviews, and of the flambeaus and wax






lights at the entertainments, may be of as great use to






posterity, as the shadow of the pyramid, which is the only






visible effect producted by it; but the one remains for ever, the






other leaves no vestige behind it. The very remaining of the






work, however useless in itself, becomes advantageous, so far as






it is ornamental, and inspires sentiments of emulation to






succeeding princes, the effects of which will still be productive






of the good consequences of keeping people employed. The expence






of the other flatters the senses, and gives delight: there is no






choice here. All such useless expence gratifies vanity only;






accident alone makes one species permanent, another transitory.






    Those who have money may be engaged to part with it in favour






of the poor, but never forced to part with it to the prejudice of






their posterity. Inspire, if you can, a good and useful taste of






expence; nothing so right; but never check the dissipation of






ready money, with a view to preserve private fortunes. Leave such






precautions to the prudence of every individual. Every man, no






doubt, has as good a right to perpetuate and provide for his own






posterity, as a state has to perpetuate the welfare of the whole






community; it is the combination of every private interest which






forms the common weal. From this I conclude, that, without the






strongest reasons to the contrary, perpetual substitutions of






property should be left as free to those who possess lands, as






locking up in chests should be permitted to those who have much






money.






    Quest. 8. What are the principles which influence the






establishment of mercantile companies; and what effects do these






produce upon the interests of trade?






    There is a close connection between the principles relating






to companies and those we have examined in the twenty-third






chapter, concerning corporations. The one and the other have






excellent consequences, and both are equally liable to abuse. A






right examination of principles is the best method to advance the






first, and to prevent the latter.






    The advantages of companies are chiefly two.






    1. That by uniting the stocks of several merchants together,






an enterprise far beyond the force of any one, becomes






practicable to the community.






    2. That by uniting the interests of several merchants, who






direct their foreign commerce towards the same object, the






competition between them abroad is taken away; and whatever is






thus gained, is so much clear profit, not only to the company,






but to the society of which they are members.






    It is in consideration of the last circumstance, that






companies for foreign commerce have a claim to extensive






privileges. But no encouragement given to such associations






should be carried farther than the public good necessarily






requires it should be. The public may reward the ingenuity,






industry and inventions of particular members, and support a






private undertaking as far as is reasonable; but every






encouragement given ought to be at the expence of the whole






community, not at that of particular denominations of






inhabitants.






    The disadvantages proceeding from companies are easily to be






guessed at, from the very nature of the advantages we have been






setting forth: and the relation between the one and the other






will point out the remedies.






    First, the weight of money in the hands of companies, and the






public encouragement given them, crush the efforts of private






adventurers, while their success inspires emulation, and a desire






in every individual to carry on a trade equally profitable.






    Here a statesman ought nicely to examine the advantages which






the company reaps from the incorporation of their stock, and






those which proceed from the public encouragement given to the






undertaking; that with an impartial hand, he may make an equal






distribution of public benefits. And when he finds it impossible






to contribute to the advancement of the public good, by






communicating the privileges of companies to private adventurers,






he ought to facilitate the admittance of every person properly






qualified into such associations.






    Secondly, The second disadvantage of companies, is, a






concomitant of that benefit so sensibly felt by the state, from






the union of their interest, while they purchase in foreign






markets: the same union which, at the time of buying, secures the






company from all competitions, proves equally disadvantageous to






those who purchase from them at home. They are masters of their






price, and can regulate their profits by the height of demand;






whereas they ought to keep them constantly proportioned to the






real value of the merchandize.






    The advantage resulting from the union of many private stocks






is common to all companies; but those we have mentioned to






proceed from the union of their interest, is peculiar to those






who carry on an exclusive trade in certain distant parts of the






world. We have, in a former chapter, laid down the maxims which






influence the conduct of a statesman in regulating the prices of






merchandize, by watching over the balance of work and demand, and






by preserving the principles of competition in their full






activity. But here a case presents itself, where, upon one side






of the contract, competition can have no effect, and where its






introduction is forbidden for the sake of the public good,






because it destroys the exclusive privilege of the company to






trade in certain countries.






    What method, therefore, can be fallen upon to preserve the






advantage which the nation reaps from the company's buying in






foreign parts without being exposed to competition; and at the






same time to prevent the disadvantage to which the individuals of






the society are exposed at home, when they endeavour, in






competition with one another, to purchase from a company, who, in






virtue of the same exclusive privilege, are united in their






interest, and become masters to demand what price they think fit?






    It may be answered, that it cannot be said of companies as of






private dealers, that they profit of every little circumstance of






competition, to raise their price. Companies have a fixed






standard, and all the world buys from them at the same rate; so






that retailers, who supply the consumption, have in one respect






this notable advantage, that as all buy from them at the same






price, no one can undersell another; and the competition between






themselves secures the public from exorbitant prices.






    I agree that these advantages are felt, and that they are






real; but still they prove no more than that the establishment of






companies is not so hurtful to the interest of those who consume






their goods, as it would be could they profit to the utmost of






their exclusive privilege in selling by retail. But it does not






follow from this, that the profits upon such a trade do not rise






(in consequence of their privilege) above the standard proper for






making the whole commerce of a nation flourish. The very jealousy






and dissatisfaction, conceived by other merchants, equally






industrious and equally well deserving of the public, because of






the great advantages enjoyed by those who are incorporated, under






the protection of exclusive privileges, is a hurt to trade in






general, is contrary to that principle of impartiality which






should animate a good statesman, and should be prevented if






possible. Let us therefore go to the bottom of this affair; and,






by tracing the progress of such mercantile undertakings, as are






proper objects for the foundation of companies, and which entitle






them to demand and to obtain certain exclusive privileges, let us






endeavour to find out a method by which a statesman may establish






such societies, so as to have it in his power to lay their inland






sales under certain regulations, capable to supply the want of






competition; and to prevent the profits of exclusive trade from






rising, considerably, above the level of that which is carried on






without any such assistance from the public.






    While the interest of companies is in few hands, the union of






the members is more intimate, and their affairs are carried on






with more secrecy. This is always the case in the infancy of such






undertakings. But the want of experience frequently occasions






considerable losses; and while this continues to be the case, no






complaints are heard against such associations. Few pretend to






rival their undertaking, and it becomes at first more commonly






the object of raillery than of jealousy. During this period, the






statesman should lay the foundation of his authority; he ought to






spare no pains nor encouragement to support the undertaking; he






ought to inquire into the capacity of those at the head of it;






order their projects to be laid before him; and when he finds






them reasonable, and well planned, he ought to take unforeseen






losses upon himself: he is working for the public, not for the






company; and the more care and expence he is at in setting the






undertaking on foot, the more he has a right to direct the






prosecution of it towards the general good. This kind of






assistance given, entitles him to the inspection of their books;






and from this, more than any thing, he will come at the exact






knowledge of every circumstance relating to their trade. By this






method of proceeding, there will be no complaints on the side of






the adventurers, they will engage with chearfulness, being made






certain of the public assistance in every reasonable undertaking;






their stock becomes in a manner insured, individuals are






encouraged to give them credit, and from creditors they will






naturally become associates in the undertaking. So soon as the






project comes to such a bearing as to draw jealousy, the bottom






may be enlarged by opening the doors to new associates, instead






of permitting the original proprietors to augment, and thus the






fund of the company their stock with borrowed money; may be






increased in proportion to the employment found for it, and every






one will be satisfied.






    When things are conducted in this way, the authority of






public inspection is no curb upon the trade; the individuals who






serve the company are cut off from the possibility of defrauding;






no mysteries, no secrets, from which abuses arise, will be






encouraged; trade will become honourable and secure, not






fraudulent and precarious; because it will grow under the






inspection of its protector, who protects it for the public good






only.






    Why do companies demand exclusive privileges, and why are






they ever granted, but as a recompense to those who have been at






great expence in acquiring a knowledge which has cost nothing to






the state? And why do they exert their utmost efforts in order to






conceal the secrets of their trade, and to be the only sharers in






the profits of it, but to make the public refund tenfold the






expence of their undertaking?






    When companies are once firmly established, the next care of






a statesman is, to prevent the profits of their trade from rising






above a certain standard. We speak at present of those only, whom






by exclusive privileges, are exposed to no competition at their






sales. One very good method to keep down prices, is, to lay






companies under a necessity of increasing their stock as their






trade can bear it, by the admission of new associates; for by






increasing the company's stock, you increase, I suppose, the






quantity of goods they dispose of, and consequently diminish the






competition of those who demand of them: but as even this will






not have the effect of reducing prices to the adequate value of






the merchandize (a thing to be done by competition only), the






statesman himself may interpose an extraordinary operation. He






may support high profits to the company, upon all articles of






luxury consumed at home, and favour the keeping down of the






prices of such goods as are either for exportation or






manufacture.






    This can be done when he has companies only to deal with: in






every other case, the principles of competition between different






merchants, trading in the same goods, upon separate interests,






makes the thing impossible. But where the interests of the






sellers, which are the company, are united, and where there is no






competition, they are masters of their price, according to the






principles laid down in the seventh chapter. Now, provided the






dividend upon the whole stock be a sufficient recompense both for






the value of the fund, and the industry of those who are employed






to turn it to account, the end is accomplished. Extraordinary






profits upon any particular species of trade cast a






discouragement upon all others.






    We very frequently see that great trading companies become






the means of establishing public credit; on which occasions, it






is proper to distinguish between the trading stock of the






company, which remains in their possession, and the actions,






bonds, annuities, contracts, &c. which carry their name, and






which have nothing but the name in common. The price of the first






is constantly regulated by the profits upon the trade; the price






of the other, by the current value of money.






    Let me next observe the advantage which might result to a






nation, from a prudent interposition of the statesman, in the






regulation of a tariff of prices for such goods as are put to






sale without any competition on the side of the sellers.






    The principles we have laid down, direct us to proscribe, as






much as possible, all foreign consumption, especially that of






work: and to encourage as much as possible the exportation of it.






Now, if what the India company of England, for example, sells to






strangers, and exports for a return in money, be equal to the






money she herself has formerly exported, the balance upon the






India trade will stand even. But if the competition of the French






and Dutch be found hurtful to the English company in her outward






sales, may not the government of this nation lend a hand towards






rising the profits of the company, upon tea, china, and japan






wares, which are articles of superfluity consumed by the rich at






home, in order to enable the company to afford her silk and






cotton stuffs to strangers, at a more reasonable rate? These






operations, I say, are practicable, where a company sells without






competition, but are never to be undertaken, but when the state






of its affairs are perfectly well known; because the prices of






exportable goods might, perhaps, be kept up by abuse and






mismanagement, and not by the superior advantages which other






nations have in carrying on a like commerce. The only remedy






against abuse is reformation. But how often do we see a people






lid under contribution in order to support that abuse!






    Companies, we have said, owe their exclusive privileges to






the difficulties to which an infant commerce is exposed: these






difficulties once surmounted, and the company established upon a






solid foundation, new objects of profit present themselves daily;






so much, that the original institution is frequently eclipsed, by






the accessary interests of the society. It is therefore the






business of a statesman to take care that the exclusive






privileges granted to a society, for a certain purpose, be not






extended to other interests, nowise relative to that which set






the society on foot, and gave it a name. And when exclusive






privileges are given, a statesman should never fail to stipulate






for himself, a particular privilege of inspection into all the






affairs of the company, in order to be able to take measures






which may effectually prevent bad consequences to the general






interest of the nation, or to that of particular classes.






    Let this suffice at present, as to the privileges enjoyed by






companies in foreign trade. Let me now examine the nature of such






societies in general, in order to discover their influence on the






mercantile interests of a nation, and how they tend to bring






every branch of trade to perfection, when they are established






and carried on under the eye of a wise administration.






    Besides the advantages and disadvantages above mentioned,






there are others found to follow the establishment of trading






companies. The first proceed from union, that is, a common






interest; the last from disunion, that is, from separate






interests.






    A common interest unites, and a separate interest disunites






the members of every society; and did not the first preponderate






among mankind, there would be no society at all. Those of the






same nation may have a common interest relative to foreigners,






and a separate interest relative to one another. those of the






same profession may have a common interest relative to the object






of their industry, and a separate interest relative to the






carrying it on: the members of the same mercantile company may






have the same interest in the dividend, and a separate interest






in the administration of the fund which produces it. The children






of the same family, nay even a man and his wife, though tied by






the bonds of common interest, may be disjoined by the effects of






a separate one. Mankind are like loadstones, they draw by one






pole, and repel by another. And a statesman, in order to cement






his society, should know how to engage every one, as far as






possible, to turn his attracting pole towards the particular






centre of common good.






    From this emblematical representation of human society, I






infer, that it is dangerous to the common interest, to permit too






close an union between the members of any subaltern society. When






the members of these are bound together, as it were by every






articulation, they in some measure become independent of the






great body. when the union is less intimate, they admit of other






connections, which cement them to the general mass.






    Companies ought to be permitted, consistently with these






principles. Their mercantile interests alone ought to be united,






so far as union is required to carry on their undertaking with






reasonable profits; but beyond this, every collateral advantage






by which the associates might profit, in consequence of their






union, ought to be cut off; and the public should take care to






support the interest of private persons against them, on all






occasions, where they take advantage of their union to hurt the






right of individuals. Let me illustrate this by an example.






Several weavers, fishermen, or those of any other class of the






industrious, unite their stocks, in order to overcome those






difficulties to which single workmen are exposed, from a






multiplication of expences, which can be saved by their






association. This company makes a great demand for the materials






necessary for carrying on their business. By this demand they






attach to themselves a great many of the industrious not






incorporated, who thereby get bread and employment. So far these






find an advantage: but in proportion as the undertaking is






extended, and the company becomes able to engross the whole, or a






considerable part of such a manufacture, they destroy all






competition for it: and by forming a single interest, in the






purchase of it, as well as in the sale of their own manufactures,






they profit in the first case, by reducing the gains of those who






are not incorporated, below the proper standard; and in the






second, they raise their own profits too far above what is






necessary.






    The method, therefore, to prevent such abuses, is, for a






statesman to interpose; not by restraining the operations of the






company, but by opposing the force of principles similar to those






by which they profit, in such a manner as to render their unjust






dealings ineffectual. If the weavers oppress the spinners, for






instance, methods may be fallen upon, if not by incorporating the






last, at least by uniting their interests, so as to prevent a






hurtful competition among them. If the dealers in wool in






England, profiting of the prohibition to export this commodity,






should enter into a concert against the growers of it, in order






to have the wool at their own price; government may easily






disappoint them, by receiving in every county, at a reasonable






price, all the wool which remains unsold. This quantity






government may export, with far less hurt to England, than what






the nation suffers by the concert among the wool merchants






against the landed interest. He may likewise discourage too






extensive companies, by establishing and supporting others, which






may serve to preserve competition; and he may punish, severely,






every transgression of the laws tending to establish an arbitrary






dependence on the company. In short, while such societies are






forming, he ought to be their protector; and, when they are






formed, he ought to take those under his protection, whom they






might be apt to oppress.






    In establishing companies for manufactures, it is a good






expedient to employ none in such undertakings, but those who have






been bred to the different branches of their business. When






people of fortune, ignorant and projecting, interest themselves






in infant manufactures, under the pretext of public spirit,






though merely with a view to become suddenly rich, they are so






bent upon making vast profits, proportioned to their stock, that






their hopes are generally disappointed, and the undertaking






fails. Pains-taking people, bred to frugality, content themselves






with smaller gains; but under the public protection, these will






swell into a large sum, and the accumulation of small profits






will form a new class of opulent people, who adopt, or rather






retain the sentiments of frugality with which they were born.






    Thus, for instance, in establishing fisheries, instead of






private subscriptions from those who put in their money from






public spirit, and partly with a view to draw an interest for it;






or from those who are allured by the hopes of being great gainers






in the end, (the last I call projectors) the public should defray






the great expence: and coopers, sail-makers, rope-makers,






ship-carpenters, net-makers; in short, every one useful to the






undertaking, should be gratuitously taken in for a small share of






the profits; and by their being lodged together in a building, or






town, proper for carrying it on, every workman becomes an






undertaker to the company, for the articles of his own work. No






man concerned directly in the inter-prize, should reside






elsewhere than in the place: any one of the associates may






undertake to furnish what cannot be manufactured at home at fixed






prices. Thus the whole expence of the public in the support of






the undertaking, may circulate through the hands of those who






carry it on; and every one become a check upon another, for the






sake of the dividend upon the general profits. One great






advantage in carrying on undertakings in this manner, is, that






although those concerned draw no profit at all upon the






undertaking itself, they find their account in it, upon the






several branches of their own industry. The herring trade was at






first set on foot in Holland by a company of merchants, who






failed; and their stock of busses, stores, &c. being sold at an






under value, were bought by private people, who had been






instructed (at the expence of the company's miscarriage) in every






part of the trade, and who carried it on with success. Had the






company been set up at first in the manner here mentioned, their






trade never would have suffered any check.






    Quest. 9. What are the principles which influence the






fluctuations in the price of subsistence, in countries where






agriculture, trade, and industry are solidly established? And by






what rule can we form a judgment, when such prices are too high






for the prosperity of manufacturers, and when they are too low






for the interests of agriculture?






    The price of subsistence is fixed, as has been said, (chap.






28 of this book,) by the quantity which can be brought to market,






and the number of those who must buy it. This price may rise and






fall according to circumstances. When the quantity at any time






brought to market, exceeds the demand of the day, the sellers who






are the most pressed for money, lower the price. When the






quantity at any time brought to market, is less than the demand






of the day, the buyers who are the most pressed to have food






raise the price by their competition. In countries of






agriculture, of industry, and of free-trade with the world, such






fluctuations are confined within certain limits, namely, they






cannot rise higher than the faculties of the buyers can afford to






pay for the shortest subsistence; they cannot sink lower than






what the goods can be exported for with profit.






    The faculties of the buyers of subsistence, are very






different; because every man here may be supposed to be a buyer,






except the farmers, and such landlords whose rents are paid in






articles of subsistence. The faculties, therefore, of the lowest






and most numerous class, are these which circumscribe the rising






of the price.






    Let me call the classes who buy, by the letters of the






alphabet a, b, c, d, e, f. If there be subsistence to be sold,






amply sufficient, and no more than sufficient, for these six






classes, which I suppose to be ranged according to the ease of






their circumstances, from a, the highest, to f, the lowest; then






the price of full subsistence will be in proportion to the






faculties of f. Should the provision prove insufficient for the






ample subsistence of all the classes, the price will rise; and f






will be able to buy a part only. But should this part become less






than the shortest subsistence for f, the demand of f would be






withdrawn from the market, which then would be overstocked for






the demand of the higher classes.






    Now in countries of industry, this never can be the case;






because the class f is there the most numerous of any; and before






it can be reduced to the last stage of want, the diminution of






its consumption will far exceed all deficiencies of crops, and






will carry the supply for the higher classes far beyond the






proportion of their demand; and prices will fall: to prevent






which fall, the proprietors of the subsistence mechanically






adjust the price they sell at, to the abilities of the lowest






class to purchase the shortest subsistence; and beyond this






prices never can rise.






    Let me apply this reasoning to the situation of Scotland for






three years preceding March 1768.






    The price of oat-meal, in the southern parts of the country






was, during this period, constantly at or above one shilling per






peck of eight pounds Amsterdam weight; and no misery was






complained of by day-labourers who gain three shillings and






sixpence and four shillings per week. This I reckon the class f






in Scotland. From which I must conclude, that one shilling per






peck of oat-meal, is compatible with the faculties of the Scots






class of f. Again, four shillings per week is 10 l.8s. per annum;






and the usual computation for the food of a strong man in






oat-meal is six bolls one half per annum, (or 832 pounds






Amsterdam weight,) which, at one shilling per peck, is 5 l. 4s.






From this it appears, that in Scotland, and according to the






manner of living in this country, as long as the grain consumed






by our lowest class, does not exceed the value of one half of






their gains, no distress is found. I must further observe, that






this computation as to their gains, regards married men with






wives and children; and as it is a matter of fact, well known






here, that families do subsist on such gains, and at such prices;






the ascertaining of this circumstance is far more useful for






determining the important question concerning the proportion






between the faculties of the lowest classes, and the rate of






subsistence, than any calculation which can be made. From this I






am led to demand, if prices be higher, and wages lower in






England, than with us?






    A quarter of wheat is reckoned for the subsistence of an






inhabitant in England: and in France, where the people live in a






manner upon bread alone, three septiers, or thirteen Winchester






bushels, is a very reasonable allowance. There is also another






very good way of comparing gains in England, with the rate of






markets; namely, by observing how the sober married men among






foot soldiers are found to live.






    If a foot soldier have eight pence per diem, he is in a






higher class than a Scots labourer who gains eight pence per






diem; because he is paid for Sundays, as well as days of sickness






and interruption from labour. The gains of the soldier are four






shillings and eight pence every week in the year, the gains of






the Scots labourer are four shillings, when he meets with no






interruption.






    Now in England, the lowest class, except the foot soldier,






and the most numerous of any in the kingdom, is the country






labourer who gains at least one shilling a day, in all seasons,






of the year; as it appears from a late publication, intitled, 'A






Six Weeks Tower through the Southern Counties of England and






Wales.'






    This author informs us, that in 1767, when high prices were






so much complained of, bread was universally almost, at two-pence






per pound, beef and mutton at four-pence; and that two-pence per






diem is supposed to be equal to small beer; and in p. 179, he






observes, that one shilling per diem the year round, with small






beer, that is to say fourteen pence per diem, is excessively






cheap labour. Now allowing an English labourer one pound and an






half of bread, and three quarters of a pound of meat, with small






beer, the expence will be eight-pence a day; consequently his






food is but one penny more than one half of his wages, and day






labourers are evidently the lowest class of industrious people






all over England. What therefore are we to think of the universal






clamour raised in the nation at that time, upon account of the






distress of the industrious poor? What judgement are we to form






concerning the universal acquiescence to the truth of these






complaints by those who must have been the best informed






concerning the true state of the matter? unless we suppose it to






have been all a mere farce, or what the French call the secret of






the comedy, to wit, a thing which every one knows, although






nobody be supposed either to know it or to believe it.






    The soldiers are evidently the class f in England. But the






number of them is so small, when compared with any of the






industrious classes, especially with the day labourers, that were






it not for the frequent celibacy among them, I am persuaded high






prices would greatly distress them, before any other class of






men. The smallness of their numbers, I say, is an additional






disadvantage to them; because it is the great number of the






lowest class, which (for the reason already given) chiefly






prevents prices from rising above their abilities to purchase a






short subsistence.






    While a foot soldier, then, can subsist upon his pay, at the






rate of the English market, I never shall believe that any class






of industrious people there, can be in such want as to require an






extraordinary relief from the state; one especially which






involves the landed interest (that is the farmers) in so great a






distress, as to have the price of their grain diminished, without






augmenting the quantity of it. This is the material difference






between a reduction of prices when produced by plenty, and when






produced by importation.






    If it be said, that it is great severity to reduce people who






labour hard, to the subsistence of an idle soldier, I answer,






that people who labour hard, and those who added to their






diligence, have also a share of ingenuity in their several






professions, constantly receive wages proportionally higher. The






example of the soldier is taken in order to form an estimate only






of the price at which people may subsist; and not to determine






the rate of wages; which the rate of demand for their labour will






constantly regulate, independently of the price of subsistence;






and this leads me to another branch of this doctrine, which is,






That the rate of wages is in proportion to the value of the work






performed, relatively to the person who employs the workman, and






not in proportion to the price of subsistence.






    This I take to be an universal principle, in all countries of






industry. It is this which distinguishes the industrious free-man






from the poor slave. The industrious free-man must share in the






profits of him who employs him; the poor slave can demand of his






master no more than subsistence.






    Let therefore subsistence be ever so cheap, the free-man will






insist upon wages in proportion to the value of his work, when






brought to market. Should his employer tell him, that because






subsistence is at a low price, he must therefore work cheaper, he






will tell his employer, that since on this account he sells no






cheaper to his customers, neither will he work cheaper for him;






and his argument is good; because were subsistence to rise ever






so high, this would be no inducement to his employer to raise his






wages in proportion, as long as the rate of the market for goods






or labour, stands the same as at other times.






    When the rate of the market for goods or labour is therefore






raised upon any branch of industry; whether in consequence of a






rise in the price of subsistence, or in consequence of a higher






demand; then wages will rise, in spight of all attempts to






circumscribe them. If, on the other hand, the rate of the market






for goods or labour shall either stand the same, or even






diminish, the employer will give no augmentation of wages, let






provisions be ever so dear.






    The poor slave, again, who gets no more than his subsistence






at all times, is in the situation of the poor labouring horse,






who is fed with the same provender, let it be dear or cheap.






    What I have said, I take to be a fair and candid






representation of general principles, which no state can alter:






and when an attempt is made to counteract them, it will not






succeed. Some individuals, indeed, may be relieved by it; but by






stopping a small hole, a breach will be made in another part.






    In every industrious society, the lowest class is frequently






found reduced to the barely necessary. The competition among






themselves to obtain employment at any rate, produces this






effect; and competition must be allowed its free course.






    I must now set forth the strongest objection which can be






made against this whole doctrine; and, in my answer to it, I






shall have an opportunity of explaining my meaning better than as






yet I have done. The objection is this:






    If it be true that in an industrious nation where, upon the






average, grain is annually exported, the price of the shortest






subsistence can at no time rise above the faculties of the lowest






class of those who go to market; then we must say, that no






scarcity whatsoever can there reduce the quantity of subsistence






below what is barely necessary to feed the people.






    Were I at once frankly to avow this consequence, and say,






that in industrious nations, who on the average of years are






subsisted on their own growth, the difference of crops is not






greater than the difference between ample and bare subsistence,






many at first sight, might be startled at so bold an assertion.






    I must therefore say, that where crops are so precarious, as,






in some years, to deprive the people of the shortest subsistence,






no nation can be industrious. What trade, what industry can stand






its ground, while a part of the inhabitants are absolutely






starving?













    I have only one objection more to obviate, which is: That the






supposition I have been reasoning on, to wit that England






produces in the worst years a bare subsistence for all her






inhabitants, cannot be admitted to be true.






    The fact I apprehend to be really so: as I may, however, be






mistaken, I must next propose a proper remedy even against this






problematical want (of) subsistence.






    We cannot reasonably suppose this deficiency to exceed (on






the average of years) the greatest quantity of subsistence that






ever was imported in any one year. Now this quantity is not equal






to 200,000 quarters of all sorts of grain, as has been observed






above. Let government, therefore, be at the expence of laying up






upon the first appearance of plenty, 200,000 quarters of wheat






and rye. Let them be deposited in some of the most considerable






ports in the kingdom, and let none of this quantity ever be sold






cheaper than at the price which at present is thought so high as






to engage us to take off the duties on importation.






    Were it to be issued at a lower rate than this the whole






intention of such granaries would be defeated. Nay, were they to






contain many millions of quarters in place of 200,000, still were






they opened at a cheaper rate than at the highest price which






grain ever ought to bear, they would soon be exhausted; because






it is the high price only which circumscribes the consumption of






the lowest class to the barely necessary, even in the times of






free importation.






    I am very far from wishing to see any industrious person in






distress for want of food. The expedients I have been proposing,






namely the raising of their wages, and establishing a granary,






would, I am persuaded, prove much more certain and salutary






expedients than any other, to prevent so great a distress. But I






think, on the other hand, that the more soberly our lowest






classes are made to live at all times, the cheaper may our






manufactures be sold; and the better will foreign Markets for






them be supplied.






    Every one will acknowledge, that the cheapness of subsistence






is never attended with a proportional fall in the price of






commodities; and many know by experience, that it is more






commonly attended with the riot and idleness of those upon whom






the greatness of this nation principally depends, namely, the






lower classes of our people.






    I shall therefore conclude by observing, First, That the






best, and indeed the only way to judge of reasonable prices, is






to compare, as I have said, the gains of the lower classes with






the price of the shortest subsistence; and that as long as the






latter does not rise above the proportion of the first, nothing






is to be feared. Secondly, That while there remains some small






advantage in this proportion in favour of the lower classes, no






great harm can ensue; but as soon as all proportion is totally






lost, by the low price of provisions, industry runs a great risk






to suffer in place of gaining ground.






    Thirdly, That this proportion is to be maintained by






granaries in years of scarcity, and by bounties in years of






plenty. And, fourthly, That until experience shall evince, that






the expedients here proposed are ineffectual, all importation






should be laid aside, as a remedy violent in its nature;






destructive to agriculture, and tending to diminish the balance






of our trade, with which alone we can discharge the heavy debt we






owe to other nations.






    Bounties which promote exportation, and which raise the






prices of grain to the due proportion of the gains of the lowest






class, even in years of plenty, resemble, in a great measure, an






excise laid upon the luxury of the lower classes. The difference






consists in this; that in bounties, the public incurs an expence,






which not only remains at home, but has the effect of bringing in






a great addition of wealth from our neighbours. This first






circulates among ourselves, and at last finds its way into the






exchequer. An excise again, brings money directly thither,






without any circulation at all among ourselves, which is






undoubtedly less advantageous to a trading nation.






    Importation in England did not, while the ports were open in






1768 produce, I confess, any very hurtful consequences; because






it then happened, that no nation in Europe enjoyed so great






plenty of wheat, as to bring the price of this grain, so low as






to hurt the English farmer. But it was not so in Scotland; where






a very small importation of the poorest subsistence (oat-meal)






will at any time bring our markets so low as to throw many of our






farmers into the greatest distress.




















NOTES:













1. The cities of the Austrian Netherlands are, from these causes, at present in a state of depopulation; and the industrious classes are assembling in the villages, which are beginning to rival the populousness of the cities. In these villages, the privileges of the cities are not established. Privileges which will in all probability end in their bankruptcy as well as depopulation. The depopulation will follow from the causes already mentioned; the bankruptcy from the sums these corporations lend to the sovereign, on the credit of new impositions constantly laying upon every branch of consumption. This is so true, that the acquisition of this country (one of the most fertile and most populous in Europe) would hardly be worth the having, if the debts due to the corporations were to be fairly paid, and their ruinous privileges (as they are called) allowed to subsist without alteration. 

















An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy













Book V













Of Taxes, and of the Proper Application of their Amount













Introduction













    The subject of taxes is so closely connected with every






branch of political oeconomy, that I have not been able to avoid






anticipating a subject, which, according to my plan, is left for






the conclusion of this work.






    What has been hitherto introduced concerning taxation, in






treating of industry, trade, money, credit, and debts, relates






principally to the effects of taxes upon circulation, prices, and






several other things relating to those subjects.






    What therefore remains, not as yet touched upon, chiefly






concerns the principles which determine the nature of every tax,






relatively to the interest it is intended to affect.






    To investigate the different consequences of taxes when






imposed upon possessions, and when upon consumption, are






questions which relate directly to the principles of taxation.






But in this book I shall also have occasion to trace out, farther






than as yet I have done, certain combinations concerning the






effects which taxes have in multiplying the fund of circulation:






and as the augmentation of taxes tends greatly to increase money,






I am thence led to examine, how far the advantage gained by the






suppression of taxes may not be more than compensated to a






nation, by the inconveniences proceeding from so great a






diminution of circulation.






    Taxes have all along been supposed to enhance the price of






living; we shall therefore have an opportunity of investigating






the proper extent to be allowed to that general proposition.













Chap. I













Of the different Kinds of Taxes













    Taxes have been established in all ages of the world, under






different names of tribute, tithe, tally, impost, duty, gabel,






custom, subsidy, excise; and many others needless to






recapitulate, and foreign to my subject to examine.






    Though in every species of this voluminous class, there are






certain characteristic differences; yet one principle prevails in






all, upon which the definition may be founded.






    I understand therefore by tax, in its most general






acceptation, a certain contribution of fruits, service, or money,






imposed upon the individuals of a state, by the act or consent of






the legislature, in order to defray the expences of government.






    This definition may, I think, include, in general, all kinds






of burdens which can possibly be imposed. By fruits are






understood either those of the earth, of animals, or of man






himself. By service, whatever man can either by labour or






ingenuity produce, while he himself remains free. And under money






is comprehended the equivalent given for what may be exacted in






the other two ways.






    I have no occasion to consider the nature of such taxes as






are not in use in our days. Tributes of slaves from conquered






nations are as little known in our times, as contributions of






subsistence from the subjects of the state.






    I divide, therefore, modern taxes into three classes.






1. Those upon alienation, which I call proportional: 2. Those






upon possessions, which I call cumulative or arbitrary: and 3.






Those exacted in service, which I call personal. These terms must






now be fully explained, that I may use them hereafter without






being misunderstood.






    A proportional tax presents a simple notion.






    It is paid by the buyer, who intends to consume, at the time






of the consumption, while the balance of wealth is turning






against him; and is consolidated with the price of the commodity.






    Examples of this tax are all excises, customs, stamp-duties,






postage, coinage, and the like.






    By this definition, two requisites are necessary for fixing






the tax upon any one: first, he must be a buyer; secondly, he






must be a consumer. Let this be retained.






    A cumulative or arbitrary tax, presents various ideas at






first sight, and cannot well be defined until the nature of it






has been illustrated by examples.






    It may be known, First, By the intention of it; which is to






affect the possessor in such a manner, as to make it difficult






for him to augment his income, in proportion to the tax he pays.






    Secondly, By the object; when instead of being laid upon any






determinate piece of labour or article of consumption, it is made






to affect past and not present gains.






    Thirdly, by the circumstances under which it is levied; which






imply no transition of property from hand to hand, nor any change






in the balance of wealth between individuals.






    Examples of cumulative taxes are land-taxes, poll-taxes,






window-taxes, duties upon coaches and servants, that upon






industrie, in France, and many others.






    A personal tax is known by its affecting the person, not the






purse of those who are laid under it.






    Examples of it are the corvée, in France; the six days labour






on the high roads, and the militia service before pay was allowed






in England.(1*)






    Having thus explained what I mean by proportional,






cumulative, and personal taxes, it is proper to observe, that






however different they may prove in their effects and






consequences, they all agree in this, that they ought to impair






the fruits and not the fund; the expences of the person taxed,






not the savings; the services, not the persons of those who do






them.






    This holds true in every denomination of taxes. In former






days, when annual tributes of slaves were made, and even at






present among the Turks, where it is customary to recruit the






seraglios of great men by such contributions, I consider the






young women who are sent, as part of the fruits of the people who






send them. This is a fundamental principle in taxation; and






therefore public contributions, which necessarily imply a






diminution of any capital, cannot properly be ranged under the






head of taxes. Thus when the Dutch contributed, not many years






ago, the hundredth part of their property towards the service of






the state, I cannot properly consider this in the light of a tax:






it was indeed a most public spirited contribution, and did more






honour to that people, from the fidelity with which it was made,






than any thing of the kind ever boasted of by a modern






society.(2*)













Chap. II













Of proportional Taxes, and their proper Object













    Whatever exists for the use of man, so far as it is






considered as a fund for taxation, may be classed under the






following heads: 1. The produce or fruits of the earth; 2. the






produce of the industry of man; or 3. his personal service.






Farther, Fruits cannot be obtained without the necessary labour






of man and cattle. As this labour presupposes all the necessary






consumption of maintenance, &c. the produce of the land must be






understood, relatively to taxes, to be that part only of the






fruits which remains after deducting an equivalent for all






necessary expences in making the earth produce them. The net






produce alone of the earth is to be considered as a fund liable






to taxation; and every contribution which bears not a just






proportion to this quantity, is wrong imposed, as shall be shewn






as we go along.






    Again, as to the produce of work: this cannot be brought into






existence without some expence, viz. the maintenance of the






workman; that is to say, his food, raiment, fire, lodging, and






the expence he is at for tools, and every other necessary. This






we shall, for the future, call his physical-necessary. The value






of the work, over and above an equivalent for these articles, is






the only fund to be taxed with regard to the workman.






    As to work itself, we have seen above (Book II. chap. 26.) in






the general distribution of things which may be purchased with






money, how it was ranged under the class of things incorporeal.






For this reason, the work performed cannot come under taxation;






and therefore the person working, who by work acquires a balance






in his favour, is brought to be affected by proportional taxes






upon the articles of his consumption; and when it is found that






these articles suffer no alienation before they are consumed by






him, and consequently escape taxation, then he may either be laid






under the cumulative taxes, which will affect his wealth, or






under the personal, which are paid in work itself, and in this






respect may be considered as the fruit of the man.






    Nothing would be so easy as a general rule for imposing






proportional taxes, did the labourers of the ground actually






consume a part of the fruits of the earth, and the other






industrious classes a part of their own work, in lieu of the






whole of this physical-necessary. In this case, nothing but what






remained of fruits and work, not already consumed by the






immediate producers, would come to market for the use of those






who do not work; but who have an equivalent to give for it, out






of the produce of past industry. Were this, I say, the case, then






at the time of alienation (or, as we expressed it in the 26th






chapter of the second book, at the time when the balance of






wealth is going to turn in favour of the industrious, against the






idle consumer) a tax proportional to the value of the alienation






might, with the greatest propriety, be imposed, as we shall






presently discover.






    This, I hope, will recall to mind the principles deduced in






the chapter above cited, where we made it appear, how the






industrious classes, who furnish consumable commodities for the






price of their overplus, must constantly have the balance of






wealth turning in their favour: and when once they arrive at a






certain degree of ease, proportional to their ambition, then they






give over working, and become incorporated into the class of






those who have enriched them.






    Thus matters go on in a perpetual circle. The industrious






become easy, and the public lays the consumers under a perpetual






contribution in proportion to their expence.






    The hypothesis we have made, is not entirely agreeable to






matter of fact; because the operation of taxes is far more






complex than we have described it to be; but by simplifying it,






as I have done, it serves to give an idea of the result, or






general consequence of proportional taxes, which, when properly






imposed, do affect the idle only, but never the industrious.






    Were, I say, the operation of taxation as simple as we have






represented it, nothing would be more easy than to deduce its






principles. Nothing would come to be refunded to the labourer or






workman, at the sale of his surplus. This surplus would be equal






to the whole produce of the earth, and whole industry of the






country, deducting the physical-necessary of all the industrious;






and this physical-necessary need not then be deducted; because it






is supposed to be consumed in the very production of the surplus,






as the aqueous part of sea water is consumed before you can have






the salt.






    This illustrates what has been said, viz. that the fruits of






the earth are only to be reckoned to exist, after deducting the






necessary expence of providing them. For though in fact a farmer






possesses all his crop after harvest, yet part of it, as to him,






is virtually consumed either out of his own stock, or that of






others, who have furnished him food and necessaries all the time






it was coming forward; this part consequently, can neither belong






to the ground, or to the farmer.






    If it be urged still, that the whole must be supposed to






exist with regard to the state, I agree to the proposition; but






according to our argument, it cannot be supposed to exist in






favour of the state, to the prejudice of the farmer; because the






total of the farmer's expence must be understood to have been






taken from the surplus of other people's industry, and therefore






if the crop be supposed to exist with respect to the state,






because it is in the farmer's yard, the surplus of other people's






industry which he has consumed must not be supposed to exist in






favour of the state, at the same time. But as the farmer is






supposed to have paid the tax upon what he has borrowed and






consumed, he must draw it back from those who, in their turn, are






to consume his crop: and if he draws it back, he cannot be said






to pay it, although the state profits of it as much as if he did.






    Does it not appear from this analysis, that a state can take






gratuitously and proportionally out of the surplus only of fruits






and industry? Now what is here called surplus, relatively to the






industrious, is the necessary fund of consumption for all the






rich and idle; consequently, were the state to diminish any part






of the quantity, the idle and the rich would be deprived of a






sufficiency: but in regard that those who do not work give money,






which is the price of all things, in exchange for what they






consume, the state steps in at the time of this exchange, and






says, we ask nothing of those who have nothing but their






physical-necessary, this they have been allowed to take; we take






none of their surplus from them, this we allow them to sell to






you: but as for you, who do not work, and have in your coffers






wherewithal to purchase the labours of your industrious brethren,






this labour you shall not profit of, unless you give the state a






certain value out of your wealth, in proportion to the work and






fruit you are going to consume, although you have contributed






nothing towards the production of it.






    Hence it appears evident, that without money there could be






no tax imposed: for were the state to take their proportion of






the real surplus, and dispose of it out of the country, a part of






the inhabitants would be starved. But by an equivalent's being






found, quite different from the surplus itself, of no use for






subsistence, the whole produce of industry is left for the use of






those who have it; the state takes what part of the equivalent






they please from the idle; and nobody starves, except such as






have neither money, nor industry, nor the talent of exciting the






compassion of the charitable.






    By this simple representation of a most complicated






operation, I have been able to deduce the capital principle of






proportional taxation. If the reasoning be found solid, it may be






retained: because we shall have occasion to recur to it, at






almost every new combination.













Chap. III













How proportional Taxes are drawn back by the Industrious and how






that drawing back is the only reason why Taxes raise the Prices






of Commodities













    What perplexes our notions in the theory of proportional






taxation, is, that the industrious man, instead of bringing his






surplus only, to market, is obliged to bring the whole of his






work.






    Let me therefore represent him as being creditor upon one






part of his work, and proprietor of the other. This will divide






it, as it were, into two parts, which I shall call (A) and (B).






    (A) represents that part upon which he is creditor, and






answers to all the expence he has already been at; that is, to






his physical-necessary, as we have called it. This we have said






ought to be considered as virtually consumed by the workman, and






if any tax be raised upon it, it must be done in such a manner as






not to affect him; that is, he must draw it totally back from the






person to whom he disposes of it. (B) on the other hand,






represents that part of which he is proprietor, to wit, his






profit; and therefore may either be taxed or not, as the state






shall think fit.






    If this be taxed in the hands of the industrious man, before






it suffer an alienation, the tax will be of a cumulative nature.






If it be left free to him, and taxed to the person who buys it,






it will be of the proportional kind, as we shall see afterwards.






Again, In the first case, it will check the growing wealth of the






industrious man; in the second, it will accelerate the






dissipation of the buyer.






    Taxes, therefore, of the first kind, are proper to be imposed






in countries where the state is jealous of growing wealth, as we






have observed in the 25th chapter of the second book. If the tax,






again, be laid upon the buyer, then the balance will turn in






favour of the industrious man, in proportion to the full amount






of (B), and will produce no other effect than to accelerate the






dissipation of the buyer.






    Let us now take in a new combination.






    If, when the whole work is brought to market and sold, the






price shall not exceed the value of the industrious man's (A),






then he is of the class of those we call physical-necessarians,






who accumulate no profits. If the price of it be less than (A),






he becomes a load upon the state, a bankrupt to those who have






fed him upon credit, and will die for want, unless he be






supported by charity.






    So far with regard to the seller: next as to the buyer.






    The buyer appears at market with his money. When he comes






there he must give, first, an equivalent for the prime cost of






the merchandize: that is, he must refund every expence






necessarily incurred in producing it; that is, he must refund the






value of (A). Next, the industrious man has a claim upon him for






his profits, viz. his (B). Then comes the state, who claims a






part of his wealth, in regard that he is going to purchase what






his own industry has not produced. This is the tax; I shall call






it (C). This tax will be found of the proportional kind. It will






not affect the growing wealth of the seller, but it will






accelerate the dissipation of the buyer; and will pull down the






scale against him, in favour of the industrious. This is a proper






tax, in countries where the state observes the maxim of sharing






the wealth of those who dissipate.






    Let us now take in another combination. Let us suppose this






buyer to be an industrious person, and the thing bought to be a






necessary material for the manufacture in which he is employed.






It is not plain, that when the second industrious man comes to






market to sell his work, which I also suppose to be composed of






his (A) and his (B), that his (A) becomes a still more compounded






body? It first includes his own physical-necessary, as above:






Secondly, the (A) and (B) of the man from whom he bought the






materials: and, Thirdly, the (C) which he paid to the state for






the libertY of acquiring what he himself had not produced.






    Whoever therefore buys from the second industrious man, must,






in like manner, refund to him his full (A); he must also pay him






his (B); and then he will find the state claiming their (C), as






in the former operation.






    This being done, let us examine the interests of all parties.






The first industrious man has no reason to complain of the tax;






because he was paid his necessary expence (A), and also his (B)






for his profit; and the state realised the tax at the expence of






the second industrious man, who paid it. Now we said that the






dissipation of his wealth was accelerated in proportion to the






value of what he paid for (C); but as he is none of the idle, and






as the thing he bought was a material necessary for his






manufacture, the second buyer finds himself obliged to refund the






whole amount of the first (A), (B), and (C); because the sum of






them makes a part of the second man's (A). Now it is the






refunding of this (C) to the industrious man which is the only






circumstance, from which proceeds the rise in the price of






commodities, in consequence of proportional taxes. Moreover, the






second buyer must pay the second industrious man's (B), in favour






of the balance which is going to turn against him; and last of






all, he must pay the second (C), which is the share the state






requires of him, in order to accelerate his dissipation.






    Now let us observe, that if the commodity bought by the






second industrious man, be not necessary for the existence of his






manufacture, it cannot enter into his (A), and therefore must be






diminished upon his (B); and if his (B) cannot pay it, then he






will owe it to some body, and for the future must either abstain






from such expences, or leave off working, in favour of those who






can live without them.






    Let me illustrate all this by an example.






    A tanner sells his leather to a shoemaker; the shoemaker in






paying the tanner for his leather, pays the tanner's subsistence






and profit, and the tax upon leather.






    The man who buys the shoes for his own consumption, refunds






all this to the shoemaker, together with his subsistence, profit,






and the tax upon shoes; consequently, the price of shoes are






raised, only by refunding the taxes paid by the industrious.






    But if the shoemaker's subsistence shall happen to include






either tavern expences, or his consumption on idle days, he will






not draw these back; because other shoemakers who do not frequent






the tavern, and who are not idle, will undersell him; he must






therefore take his extraordinary expence out of his profits; and






if his profit be not sufficient, he must run in debt to the






tavern-keeper.






    The extravagance and idleness, therefore, of particular






workmen does not check industry, nor raise prices; for these will






always be in proportion to demand, and there is no reason why






demand should either rise or fall, because a particular workman






is extravagant, or consumes a commodity not necessary for his






manufacture or subsistence.






    From this example there arises a new combination: that in






proportion as the industrious do not consume of the produce of






their own industry, but come to market with the whole, and then






purchase the work of others, they are considered, as to taxes, in






the light of idle consumers, who do not work, but who purchase






with money the fruits of the industry of others. By this






operation, the taxable fund is augmented beyond the extent of the






general surplus called (B). The reason is plain. Whatever is






brought to market is supposed to be surplus, as it may there be






bought by the idle, as well as the industrious. The only






difference is, that the first do not draw back the tax, and that






the second do, as we have already shewn.






    From this reasoning we may conclude, that the way to carry






proportional taxes to their utmost extent, is to draw all






commodities to market, to engage every one to carry thither the






whole produce of his industry, and there to buy whatever he






stands in need of.






    But which way will you engage either a farmer to sell his






crop, and buy subsistence from another; or a shoemaker to sell






his own, and buy his neighbour's shoes? The thing is






impracticable; and were it attempted, it would prove an arbitrary






proceeding, and a cumulative tax laid upon their industry: a tax






which, by the nature of it, they cannot draw back, as we shall






presently see, and from this circumstance alone proceeds the






whole oppression of it.






    Let me next analize the price paid by the last buyer, whom we






have called the rich and idle consumer of the manufacture, who






can draw nothing back from any body.






    Is it not composed of the whole value of the subsistence, of






the work, of the profits, of the tax? The whole reimbursement of






all former payments and repayments comes upon him. Those who have






been at all the expence, appear in the light of his servants and






agents, who have only advanced money upon his account.






    How absurd, therefore, is it either to say, that all taxes






fall ultimately upon land; or as others, for no better reason,






pretend, that they fall upon trade. I say, that this class of






taxes which I have now been describing, and which I shall still






more fully explain in a subsequent chapter, never can fall either






upon, or affect any person but the idle; that is to say, the not






industrious consumer. If there be found a possibility for any






consumer to draw back the tax he has paid, I say he is of the






class of the industrious, in one way or other: and farther I say,






that such a tax raises the price of the commodity. But by drawing






back, I understand, that the repayment is an inseparable






consequence of his having paid the tax. I do not, for example,






say that a place-man draws his taxes by the emoluments of his






office: but I say a brewer draws back his excise by the sale of






his beer.






    Let this principle also be retained, that with respect to the






consumption of superfluities by the manufacturing classes, they






also must be considered as being of the class of the rich and






idle, as much as the first Duke in England. When therefore the






extravagance of the manufacturing classes becomes general, and






when the rate of the market can afford them great wages,






relatively to the price of necessaries, such profits consolidate






into the price of the manufacture, according to the principles






laid down in the 10th chapter of the second book. The statesman






then must endeavour to create a competition among them, by






introducing fresh and untainted hands into such branches. This






will be a sure check upon the dissipation of the industrious,






and, if rightly applied, will prevent all frauds, all pretences






for the rise of the price of labour on account of taxes: and, if






carried to its full extent, will prevent any industrious person






from enjoying either a day's idleness, or the smallest






superfluity; except in consequence of his peculiar dexterity, or






extrinsic advantages.













Chap. IV













Of cumulative Taxes













    I shall not here repeat what I have already said concerning






the characteristics of this kind of imposition; but after citing






some examples, I shall examine it more closely, as to its nature






and consequences.






    The most familiar examples of it to an Englishman, are






tithes, land-tax, window-tax, and poors-rates.






    The most familiar examples to a Frenchman, are the Taille,






Fourage, and Ustencil, (which go commonly together); also the






Capitation, the Dixieme, the Vingtieme, and the Industrie.(3*)






    The nature of all these taxes, is, to affect the possessions,






income, and profits of every individual, without putting it in






their power to draw them back in any way whatever; consequently,






such taxes tend very little towards enhancing the price of






commodities.






    Those who come under such taxes, do not always consider that






their past industry, gains, or advantages of fortune, are here






intended to suffer a diminution, in favour of the state; for






which out-going they have, perhaps, made no provision.






    When people of the lower classes, instead of being subjected






to proportional taxes, are laid under such impositions, there






results a great inconvenience. They are allowed to receive the






whole profit of their industry, which in the former chapter we






called their (B), the state however reserving to itself a claim






for a part of it: this, instead of being paid gradually, as in a






proportional tax, is collected at the end of the year, when they






have made no provision for it, and consequently, they are put to






distress.






    Besides, how hard is it to deprive them of the power of






drawing back what they pay? And how ill judged to trust money






with those who are supposed to gain only an easy






physical-necessary? An equivalent for procuring the articles of






ease and luxury, should not be left in the hands of those who are






not permitted to enjoy them.






    From this we may conclude, First, That the more such taxes






are proportional to the subject taxed; Secondly, the more evident






this proportion appears; and Thirdly, the more frequently and






regularly such taxes are levied; the more they will resemble






proportional taxes, and the less burden will be found in paying






them. Let me illustrate this by some examples.






    The stoppage upon a soldier's pay, either for the invalids,






or Chelsea, is a cumulative tax; but the method of levying it






gives it all the advantages of one of the proportional kind.






First, It bears an exact and determinate proportion to the value






of his pay. Secondly, This proportion he knows perfectly. And






Thirdly, Instead of receiving the whole into his own possession,






and paying the hospital at the end of the year, it is regularly






and gradually retained from him at every payment.






    Tithes are a cumulative tax; but they are accompanied with






all the three requisites to make them light; although in other






respects they are excessively burdensome. First, They bear an






exact proportion to the crop. Secondly, This proportion is






perfectly known. Thirdly, Nature, and not the labourer, makes the






provision. But they fall upon an improper object: they affect the






whole produce of the land, and not the surplus; which last is the






only fund that ought to be taxed, as has been said.






    The land-tax in Scotland bears, First, a very determinate






proportion to the valuation of the land; and has, Secondly, the






advantage of being well known to every contributor., so that






provision may easily be made for it. But the third requisite is






wanting: the proprietor having the public money in his hands,






often applies it to private purposes; and when the demand is made






upon him, he is put to distress.






    The taille, in many provinces of France, bears, first, a very






exact proportion to the value of the land.(4*)






    But in the second place, the proportion is entirely unknown






to the man who pays it; being nowhere to be seen but in the






offices of the intendant and his deputies.






    And in the last place, the whole payment comes at once.






    What hides, and consequently destroys this proportion with






respect to the French taille tariffée, is, that if after the






first distribution is laid on, as in Scotland, at so many






shillings in the pound of valuation, the full sum intended to be






raised do not come in; either because the intendant has given






exemptions to certain parishes, on account of the accidents of






sterility, hail, mortality among the cattle, and the like; or






because the property of a part of the parish has fallen into the






hands of people exempted from the taille; or lastly that others,






who were really bound to pay a part of it, are become insolvent.






The intendant must then make a second, and perhaps a third






general distribution of the deficiency upon all the former






contributors, in the most exact proportion indeed to the






valuation of the lands, but yet by the nature of it impossible to






be foreseen. It is for these reasons chiefly that the taille in






that kingdom is so grievous.






    These second distributions of the tax, First, destroy the






proportion between the tax and the revenue taxed. Secondly, They






make it impossible to judge of the amount of them. And lastly,






the demand comes at once, when, perhaps, the money has been






otherwise applied.






    The French tax upon industry is more grievous still; because






none of the three requisites above-mentioned are allowed to






operate.






    This tax is supposed to be proportional to the profits made






upon trade, and other branches of industry, not having the land






for their object. All merchants and tradesmen, in cities, and in






the country, pay the tax called Industrie; and the reason given






for establishing this tax, as I have said in another place, is in






order to make every individual in the state contribute to the






expence of it, in proportion to the advantages he reaps. Nothing






would be more just, could it be put in execution, without doing






greater hurt to the state, than the revenue drawn from it can do






good.






    I shall now shew how, in this tax, all the three requisites






we have mentioned are wanting.






    First, by its nature, it can bear no exact proportion to the






profits of the industrious man; since nobody but the person taxed






can so much as guess at their extent.






    Secondly, It cannot possibly be provided for, as no check can






be put upon the imposer, unless as far as general rules are laid






down for each class of the industrious; and from these again






other inconveniences flow, as shall be observed.






    Thirdly, It comes at once upon poor people, who have been






frequently forced to beg for want of employment before the






tax-gatherer could make his demand; and those who remain,






frequently become beggars before they can comply with it.






    I say, that from the general rules laid down for regulating






this tax, as to every class, a workman who has a large family to






maintain, is no less taxed than one who has no charge but






himself: and it will be allowed, I believe, that the profits of






one industrious person of the lower classes, is in no country






sufficient to pay any considerable tax, and maintain a large






family, much less a sickly one. I therefore imagine, that






cumulative taxes never should be raised upon such classes of






inhabitants as have no income but their personal industry, which






is so frequently precarious.






    Merchants also ought not to be subjected to any tax upon






their industry. They ought to be allowed to accumulate riches as






fast as they, can: because they employ them for the advancement






of industry; and every deduction from their profits is a






diminution upon this so useful a fund.






    When cumulative taxes are laid upon any of the industrious






classes, they tend to check growing wealth; and are most commonly






imposed in monarchical states, where riches are apt to excite






jealousy, as has been observed.






    But as to the class of land proprietors, that is to say, the






more wealthy inhabitants, who live upon a revenue already made,






the impropriety of cumulative taxes is much less. They are






however burdensome, and disagreeable in all cases, and ought to






be dispensed with, when the necessary supplies can be made out by






proportional taxes, without raising the prices of labour too high






for the prosperity of foreign trade.






    From the examples I have given of this branch of taxation, I






hope the nature of it may be fully understood, and that for the






future no inconvenience will arise from my employing the term of






cumulative tax.






    I shall now subjoin its definition. A cumulative tax, is the






accumulation of that return which every individual, who enjoys






any superfluity, owes daily to the state, for the advantages he






receives by living in the society. As this definition would not






have been understood at setting out, I thought it proper, first,






to explain the nature of the thing to be defined.













Chap. V













Of the Inconveniences which proceed from proportional Taxes, and






of the Methods of removing them













    A proportional tax, as I have said, is that which is levied






upon the idle consumer, at the time he buys the commodity. and






while, by consuming it, the balance of wealth is turning against






him, in favour of the seller. This tax is consolidated as it were






with the price of the commodity, and must of necessity raise the






price of it.






    I say, it is levied at the time of buying, and affects the






buyer, in consequence of his consumption; because we have seen,






that when the commodity is not consumed by the purchaser, then






upon a subsequent alienation he is refunded all he paid. I






consider him therefore, in this case, not as paying, but as






advancing the amount of the tax for another; and while any part






of the commodity remains unconsumed, there still remains the






equivalent for a proportional part of the tax in the hands of him






who advanced it.






    I shall now proceed, as in the former chapter, by giving some






examples of such impositions; and in examining them, endeavour to






shew their nature and consequences.






    The most familiar to an Englishman are, excises, customs,






malt-tax, stamp-duties, and the like.






    To a Frenchman the gabelle, the traittes, the aides, tobacco,






etc.(5*)






    In all kinds of this imposition we find the tax regularly






reimbursed from hand to hand; it adheres so closely to the






commodity, that it becomes as essentially a part of the value, as






carriage, packing, and the like incident charges, enter into the






prices of goods. It never can affect the industrious person who






does not consume; and never can be avoided by him who does. Such






taxes therefore necessarily raise the price of the commodity






taxed.






    Having already pointed out the principal advantages of






proportional taxes, which is to throw the whole of the burden






upon the rich, whom we have called the idle consumers, the better






to distinguish them from the opulent class of the industrious; I






must now enumerate the principal inconveniences complained of,






from this mode of taxation, and trace out the principles from






which they may be ascertained and removed.






    The principal inconveniences alleged against proportional






taxes may be reduced to three:






    First, That they have the effect of raising the price of






labour, and the produce of industry, and thereby prove hurtful to






the prosperity of foreign trade.






    Secondly, That they discourage consumption, by carrying the






prices of many things too high for people of a middling rank in






life.






    Thirdly, That they are both expensive in the collection, and






oppressive, from the many restrictions put upon liberty, in order






to prevent frauds.






    In analyzing every one of these inconveniences, it will be






proper to inquire, how far the conclusions against those taxes






are drawn from, and so far as matter of fact; how far from






plausible appearances only; they are real, not imaginary, to






discover the methods of removing them.






    As the first inconvenience arises from the rising of the






price of all kinds of labour, and consequently of manufactures, I






must distinguish between the consequence of raising prices at






home, and of raising them upon articles of exportation; and I






must consider the one and the other relatively to the collective






body of a state, and not to some few individuals in it.






    High prices at home are no discouragement to the industrious,






most certainly, however disagreeable they may prove to consumers;






and while they stand high, it is a proof that the demand of the






consumers does not diminish.






    High prices upon goods to be exported, are to be judged of by






the proportion they bear to those in other countries.






    Now the price of a manufacturer's wages is not regulated by






the price of his subsistence, but by the price at which his






manufacture sells in the market. Could a weaver, for example,






live upon the air, he would still sell his day's work according






to the value of the manufacture produced by it, when brought to






market. As long as he can prevent the effects of the competition






of his neighbours, he will carry the price of his work as high as






is consistent with the profits of the merchant, who buys it from






him in order to bring it to market; and this he will continue to






do, until the rate of the market be brought down.






    It is therefore the rate of the market for labour and






manufactures, and not the price of subsistence, which determines






the standard of wages. Were proportional taxes to raise the price






of subsistence, and by that circumstance to discourage






manufactures we should see the generality of workmen living with






sobriety, depriving themselves of superfluity, confining






themselves to the plain but sufficient physical-necessary,






working with all the assiduity a man can support, and still not






be able to supply the market at the ordinary rates.






    When in any country the work of manufacturers, who live






luxuriously, and who can afford to be idle some days of the week,






finds a ready market; this circumstance alone proves beyond all






dispute, that subsistence in that country is not too dear, at






least in proportion to the market prices of goods at home; and if






taxes on consumption have, in fact raised the price of






necessaries, beyond the former standard, this rise, cannot, in






fact, discourage industry: it may discourage idleness; and






idleness will not be totally rooted out, until people be forced,






in one way or other, to give up both superfluity and days of






recreation.






    People are very apt to draw conclusions from what they think






ought to be, according to the particular combinations they form






to themselves; and for this reason it is generally thought,






because taxes are higher in England than in some other countries,






that foreign trade should therefore be hurt by them. But the






sloth and idleness of man, and the want of ambition in the lower






classes to improve their circumstances, tends more, I suspect, to






lessen the productions of industry, and thus to raise their






price, than any tax upon subsistence which has been hitherto






imposed in this kingdom.






    The whole of this doctrine is proved by experience, and is






confirmed by our natural feelings. Many have been amazed to see






how well the manufacturing classes live in years of scarcity,






which frequently have the effect of doubling the price of the






most necessary articles of subsistence. Are they not found, in






bad years, more assiduous in their labour? Do they then frequent






ale-houses, as in the years of plenty? Are they found idle one






half of the week? Why should a tax laid on by the hand of nature






prove such a spur to industry; and another, similar to it in its






effect, laid on by the hand of man, produce such hurtful






consequences? Were a course of bad years, I dare not say an






increase of taxes, to continue long enough to bring manufacturers






to a habit of sobriety and application, a return of plenty, and






low prices, would throw into their coffers, what many of them






dissipate in riot and prodigality.






    Even this conclusion will be too general, if every






circumstance be taken in. Manufacturers there are, who work hard,






and live soberly six days of the week, and who at the end find






little superfluity, notwithstanding the high price of labour.






Alas! they have many mouths to feed, and two hands only to supply






the necessaries. This is the fatal competition so much insisted






on in the first book, and by which a door is opened to great






distress. Either the unmarried gain what the married should do,






and become extravagant, or the married gain no more than the






unmarried can do, and become miserable.






    The average between the two ought to determine the rate of






wages in every modern society.






    The remedies for this unequal competition, flowing from the






happy liberty we enjoy, have been considered in another place.






    The inconvenience here under examination will not be removed






by an abolition of taxes; nor will it increase by the






augmentation of them, as long as manufacturers, upon an average,






enjoy superfluity and idle days.






    Under these circumstances I conclude, that if foreign trade






suffer by the high prices of commodities in our markets, the vice






does not proceed from our taxes, but from our domestic luxury,






which swells demand at home. Were we less luxurious, and more






frugal in our management in general, all classes of the






industrious, from the retailer down to the lowest manufacturer,






would be satisfied with more moderate profits. Let not,






therefore, a statesman regulate his conduct upon suppositions,






nor conclude any thing from theory, nor from arguments * priori,






drawn from the supposed effects of taxes; but let him have






recourse to information and experience concerning the real state






of the matter.






    Let him inquire what are the prices abroad; what are the






prices at home; how those who work in exportable commodities






live; what superfluities they enjoy. and what days of idleness






they indulge in.






    If he find that goods are not exported, because of high






prices, while manufacturers are enjoying superfluity, and






indulging themselves in idleness, let him multiply hands, and he






will reduce them all to their physical-necessary; and by thus






augmenting the supply, he will also reduce the prices in his






markets at home.






    If he want to reduce prices still lower, in favour of






exportation, but find that he has occasion for the amount of






certain taxes, which enhance the value of this physical-necessary






to which he has reduced his industrious classes, then let him






grant a bounty upon the quantity exported, more than equivalent






to compensate the rise of prices occasioned by the taxes paid by






those who provide it; and let the people at home continue to pay






dearer than strangers, in favour of the state. If by lowering






prices you wish to promote exportation only, there will be no






occasion to lower them universally, any more than there is






occasion to put a large plaister over the whole body, to cure a






small wound on a particular part of it.






    I have said, that while the rate of the market remains the






same, so will the prices of every part of labour and industry,






which enters into the composition of the thing brought to market.






This is consistent with reason, and experience proves the truth






of it; because we do not see wages fluctuate with the price of






living. If they do not fluctuate in that proportion, how can we






conclude that a rise in the price of subsistence, occasioned by






taxes, should raise wages more than when the price is raised by a






natural scarcity. It may be answered, that the imposition of a






tax gives a general alarm; the effect it must have upon prices is






immediately felt; and manufacturers then insist upon an






augmentation of their wages: whereas, when nature either produces






the same, or even a greater effect, people submit to what they






think comes from the hand of God, and content themselves with the






hopes of better times. I shall allow to this argument all its






force.






    But I must observe, that when manufacturers can thus






capitulate with their employers, and can insist upon an






augmentation of their wages, the demand of the market must be






greater than the supply from their work. This is the circumstance






which raises the price of labour. Let the demand of the market






fall, the prices of labour will fall, in spite of all the reasons






which ought naturally to make them rise. The workmen will then






enter into a hurtful competition, and starve one another, as has






been often observed. Let the demand of the market rise,






manufacturers may raise their wages in proportion to the rise of






the market; they may, in the cheapest years, enjoy the highest






wages; drink one half of the week, and laugh at their employer,






when he expects they should work for less, in order to swell his






profits in the rising market.






    I have endeavoured to throw this question into different






shapes, the better to apply different principles to it; and upon






the whole, I must determine that proportional taxes will,






    First, Undoubtedly raise the price of every commodity upon






which they are properly and immediately imposed; and if they be






laid upon bread, and other articles of nourishment, they will






directly raise the price of these articles in proportion; but the






price of labour will be raised consequently only, and according






to circumstances.






    That if taxes be laid upon the day's labour of a man, they






will raise the price of that day's labour. What I mean by this,






is, that if every one who employs a man for a day, were obliged






to pay a penny to the state, for a permission to employ him, the






employer would charge a penny more at least upon the day's work






performed by the labourer. Were a tax equivalent to it laid on






the labourer by the year, it would be of a cumulative and






arbitrary nature, and would not raise the price of his wages in






proportion; but were it laid upon the workman at a penny a day,






and levied daily, in this case, he might raise his wages in






proportion. But this is not the practice any where.






    Secondly, The price of subsistence, whether it be influenced






or not by the imposition of taxes, does not determine the price






of labour. This is regulated by the demand for the work, and the






competition among the workmen to be employed in producing it.






    Thirdly, If wages rise beyond the physical-necessary of the






workman, they may be brought down by multiplying hands, but never






by lowering the price of necessaries; because every man will make






a profit of the low price, but will regulate his gain by the rate






of demand for his labour.






    Fourthly, If, therefore, the price of his physical-necessary






be raised upon him by the effect of taxes, he must work the






harder to make it up.






    Fifthly, If hands increase, after he is reduced to his






physical-necessary, the whole class of the manufacturers will be






forced to starve.






    Sixthly, The increase of hands means no more than the






augmentation of the quantity of work produced. If, therefore, the






same hands work more than formerly, it is the same thing as if






their numbers were increased.






    From these positions it seems to result, that when ever it is






found that manufacturers enjoy wages more than in proportion to






their physical-necessary through the year, reckoned upon the






general average of married men and batchelors, the method for






reducing them to the proper standard, is either to multiply






hands, if you want to reduce prices in your own market, or to






augment the price of their physical-necessary, if you would have






them remain the same. When the hands employed are really






diligent, and prices still too high, then it may be expedient to






increase their numbers, provided they enjoy considerable profits.






This will cut off consolidated profits, and lower the price of






commodities; because it will augment the supply.






    When the hands employed are not diligent, the best expedient






is to raise the price of their subsistence, by taxing it. By this






you never will raise their wages, until the market can afford to






give a better price for their work. If, when they are brought to






be fully employed, you would have the price of labour to sink






universally, you must take off some of the impositions which






affect subsistence, and at the same time gradually throw in fresh






hands, in order to promote competition, which alone will force






them to lower their prices in proportion. The whole delicacy of






this operation is to prevent competition among the industrious






from taking place after they are reduced to moderate profits; and






to promote competition among them, or to raise the price of their






subsistence, until they be brought to the proper standard. Having






insisted so fully upon these principles in the xviiith chapter of






the second book, I here refer to it.






    I have said, that the price of work is not regulated by the






price of subsistence, but by the price of the market for the






work. Now I say, that the price of the market may in a great






measure be influenced by the price of subsistence. This is a new






combination.






    The first proposition is undeniable. The price of the market






at all times regulates the price of work; because it regularly






makes it fluctuate, in proportion to its own fluctuations. The






price, again, of subsistence influences it only; because two






circumstances may destroy its effect. A high demand for work will






raise the price of wages in years of plenty; a low demand will






sink the price of wages in years of scarcity. When therefore it






is said, that the price of subsistence influences the rate of






markets, we only mean, that the average price of subsistence,






when good and bad years are taken together, have a certain






influence in regulating prices. But this average price of






subsistence cannot every where regulate the value of work, as the






average price of a ship's cargo can regulate the price of every






part of it; because the variations in the price of subsistence






have not efficacy sufficient to overbalance the variations in the






state of demand.






    Could a plan be concerted, either to preserve the price of






grain at one uniform standard, or within the limits of 15 or






perhaps 20 per cent at all times; and were this to be executed by






the assistance of a tax at one time, and a bounty as it were at






another; it would certainly have an admirable effect in every






industrious nation. It would in a manner take away the difference






between good and bad years. The industrious finding themselves






subsisted at all times nearly at the same expence, would not feel






those alternate motives to be idle and extravagant at one time,






and diligent and sober at another.






    I have enlarged so much upon the nature of this first






inconvenience proceeding from proportional taxes, that I have






left myself very little to say as to the second, which is,






    Secondly, That they discourage consumption, by raising prices






too high for people of a middling rank in life.






    In answer to this, I must observe, that all the amount of






proportional taxes is refunded to the industrious consumer, so






far as they are raised on articles necessary for his subsistence;






and when he is either idle, or consumes a superfluity, he is






classed along with the idle and rich. Now if the rate of market






prices be high, relatively to the income of certain individuals,






it can only be because the supply of the things they want to






consume is not above the proportion of the demand of those who






are richer.






    If, therefore, the rate of the market afford such profits to






manufacturers as to render them idle and luxurious, how can the






augmentation of these profits, by the abolition of taxes, and






consequent diminution of the price of subsistence, ever diminish






the competition of the rich, unless the supply be augmented?






    But if the high prices of our own markets cut off the demand






of strangers, then every principle laid down in the 1oth and 18th






chapters of the second book, must be applied to bring them down:






and as far as taxes, which are imposed either to supply the






exigencies of the state, or to cut off consolidated profits,






enjoyed by manufacturers in consequence of our own extravagance,






have contributed either to raise them, or to support them when






raised, above the foreign standard, a full equivalent, in the way






of bounty, must be given for them, in order to bring the






exportation price of goods below the level of foreign






competition.






    I come now to the last inconvenience alleged against






proportional taxes, to wit, the expence of collecting them, and






the oppression which is a consequence of the many restrictions






laid upon liberty, in order to prevent frauds.






    As to the expence of collection, it is entirely in proportion






to the disposition of the people to defraud the public.






    In France, the collecting of the branches of cumulative






taxes, such as the general receipts, comprehending the taille,






poll-tax, &c. costs the state no less than 10 per cent or two






sols in the livre, which is superadded to those impositions, in






order to defray that expence. Whereas in England the expence of






collecting the excise administered by commissioners, who act for






the public, not by farmers who act for themselves, does not cost






above 5 l. 12s. 6d. in the 100 l.






    This matter of fact is sufficient to prove, that excises,






when under a proper administration, are not so very expensive in






the collection as is generally imagined; and they would still be






attended with less expence, were some proper alterations made in






the present method of imposing them. This will appear as we go






along.






    The oppression of levying excises does not, in any






proportion, so much affect those who really pay them, as those






who advance them only for the consumers.






    This distinction which we have already made, will appear well






founded, upon examining the complaints which are commonly made






against the collectors of this duty.






    We have seen how in the taxes upon salt and tobacco in






France, there are no duties collected upon the people; the






farmers of the salt have all the salt marshes and salt pits






assigned to them by the King; no person, not privileged, is






allowed to make salt for the consumption of those provinces which






are subjected to the Gabelle.






    In like manner the distribution and sale of tobacco is






exclusively vested in the hands of the farmers: they buy it






either from Great Britain, or from the Dutch at second hand; they






manufacture it themselves, and sell it over all France, at the






price set upon it by the King; and we saw, that during the last






war, they paid thirty millions down, for a permission to raise






the price of it 10 per cent during ten years. This price fixed






upon the sale of tobacco, answers exactly to what we know under






the name of assize, which ought constantly to attend all






excises:(6*) for want of observing exactly this regulation, the






publicans and victuallers in England raised the price of their






strong beer one half-penny per quart, in consequence of an






additional duty of three shillings per barrel imposed anno 1761,






which is at the rate only of one farthing per quart.(7*)






    When the sale of an exciseable commodity is vested in a






company who manufacture it, by exclusive privilege, the whole






oppression of collection is avoided; because the company itself






then pays the duty, and they draw their reimbursement from






proportional profits on the sale of the goods.






    This is the greatest advantage of the farm above the public






management of a tax.






    When excises are levied upon those who manufacture the






commodity excised, the oppression of the laws falls upon the






manufacturers, although they advance the tax only, and draw it






back from the consumers upon the sale of the commodity.






    Were people to reflect a little, they would soon discover how






greatly it is for the advantage of every consumer in the kingdom,






that no fraud in the collections should pass unobserved; because






all the profits arising from frauds belong to the manufacturer,






who in reality is the tax-gatherer, as much as the farmers in






France are tax-gatherers, when they sell their salt and tobacco.






But as the farmers appear in the light of King's officers when






they prosecute offenders, and our collectors seem to bear hard on






those with whom we live, people foolishly imagine, that were






brewers, for example, more gently dealt with, beer would come the






cheaper to themselves. This is a mere delusion; because no brewer






whatever will sell his beer cheaper than either an assize, or the






ordinary rate obliges him to do, let his profit, from frauds, be






ever so great, and his address in committing them ever so






successful; and the less productive the tax turns out to be in






the end, the more the other impositions upon the people must be






augmented, in order to make up the deficiency.






    If we compare therefore the oppression of excise-laws felt by






those who advance these impositions only, with the ease which the






consumers find who really pay them, we may judge of the






advantages which the proportional taxes have over the cumulative.






    The excise, as paid by the brewer, is really of the






cumulative kind. The exciseman demands money of him, at a time






when no alienation takes place, and perhaps when he is not






prepared to make the advance for his customers, who must refund






it to him with profit: besides the hopes of being able to defraud






are disappointed, and it is always disagreeable to be






disappointed in what we either wish or hope for.






    Were all mankind honest, the inconveniences of levying such






taxes would be less; but as this is not the case, methods must be






fallen upon to disappoint the intention of committing fraud. The






only way to accomplish this, is, to render if difficult and






dangerous: but while every individual has a liberty to






manufacture an exciseable commodity in whatever place he thinks






fit to enter, (that is to declare to be set apart) for that






purpose; when every one has a liberty to sell liquors, which,






upon retail only, are subjected to excise (as is the case in






France) must not collectors be multiplied in proportion to the






occupation which such policy implies? And will not these






collectors oppose frauds to frauds, in order to profit by them,






at the expence of the merchant or manufacturer? This will sow






discord and hatred between two classes of the same society, and






thereby the state is hurt. All discord hurts a state, as it does






a private family.






    It is out of my way to lay down plans for preventing such






inconveniences. It would require an intimate knowledge of every






circumstance relating to the country for which the remedy is






intended.






    I shall therefore endeavour only to throw out some useful






hints, by mentioning the impositions where the inconveniences in






levying are the least; and by comparing these with other






impositions, where the oppression in levying appears to be






greater, the contrast of circumstances will suggest the






principles upon which a plan may be formed.






    There are many more frauds and difficulties in collecting






excises in the country than in cities, from the number of






manufacturers employed in them. It is just so with the aides in






France, from the number of retailers. There are very few frauds






and little difficulty in gathering the malt-tax; because the






object is unwieldy, and the places of manufacture are fewer.






    The frauds upon tobacco and salt in France, do not proceed






from those who manufacture them, but from those who introduce






foreign goods to supply the place of those manufactured by the






company. This shews that excises should be made as general as






possible over a country; because local exemptions introduce, as






it were, a foreign country into the center of a state.






    Stamp-duties are seldom defrauded by forging the stamp; but






in France, where they extend to almost every deed of alienation,






the public is defrauded by private bargains.






    Customs are defrauded by the liberty given to trade in every






port; and from the want of convenient public magazines, to serve






as a proper repository for all goods brought by sea.






    It may further be said, in general, that frauds are most






frequent upon the new establishment of taxes; that those who






complain most of the oppression of them, are precisely those who






have the least reason for it; and that the cause of their






complaint proceeds rather from the inconvenience in paying their






taxes when they are not prepared, and the disappointment in






defrauding, than from any real oppression arising from the laws






of excise: the hardships of these laws are owing to the necessity






of general rules for preventing frauds; and such rules would be






unnecessary, could the liberty of committing frauds be






circumscribed.






    One very good method of raising proportional taxes, without






great expence or oppression, when the situation of a country will






admit of it, is to levy no such duties, but at the gates of towns






and villages, which in this light appear to be political






inclosures. At these gates every produce of the lands, and every






manufacture not made in the town, might pay a tax upon coming in;






every manufacture made in the town, might pay a tax on going out:






all fruits consumed in the country might be free; all






manufactures made and consumed in the towns might be free also.






If we consider the quantity of exchange between the inhabitants






of towns and those of the country, and between town and town;






this regulation, I believe, will be found sufficient to raise






more money by proportional taxes than what is raised in any






country in Europe.






    A second method of diminishing the expence, and also the






burden of proportional taxes, is to exact nothing of the






manufacturers of exciseable goods, but to prohibit the delivery






of them to any one who does not present a permit from the excise






office, signifying that the tax has been paid. This is the method






observed in the Austrian low countries, where excises are carried






to a very great height. There the transporters or carriers of






exciseable goods, are formed into a corporation, and none else






dare to transport them.






    Whoever has seen the execution of these regulations will not






be very fond of them; but the inconveniences which occur proceed






from the political situation of all these towns, the public debts






of which are so enormous, that to pay the interest of them






excises have been carried so high as to banish manufacturers into






the country, where few excises are levied. It is from the country






and many considerable villages, which have not the privilege of






running in debt, that the manufactures of that country are






carried on. No industrious man can afford to live in the towns of






the Austrian Netherlands, except he who supplies their






consumption; and in no place, I know of, is work so dear as






there.






    Were great excises levied there upon the furnishers of the






exciseable goods, as is the case in Great Britain, and were as






little restraint laid upon their frauds, those duties would not






produce what they do; and the oppression would be intolerable;






whereas by the policy established, nothing but the high price of






goods is complained of. A third method of avoiding both expence






and oppression in levying proportional taxes, would be to confine






the fabrication of all articles charged with them to certain






places properly enclosed. Were those undertakings few and large,






were spacious magazines of all sorts prepared, at the public






expence, in all sea-port towns, and surrounded with walls, an






entire liberty might be allowed within the inclosures, and no






questions would be asked, but on going in and coming out. Under






such regulations a state would reap great benefit. First, There






would be considerable savings in collecting. Secondly, There






would be great savings on the number of hands employed in






manufacturing: forty men, in a large brew-house, make more beer






than an hundred disposed as they are in country villages. This






resembles the introduction of machines into manufactures.






    The objection from the infringement of liberty is more a






pretext, in order to facilitate fraud, than any thing else. Are






not those who manufacture exciseable commodities, the servants of






the state? Are they not even the collectors of the public






revenue? With what face then can they pretend to be indulged in






the means of defrauding their customers of those taxes which they






wish to put into their own pockets, by withholding them from the






public. Has liberty any other meaning, but an entire permission






to do whatever is not forbid by general and wholesome laws,






calculated for the universal good of the society; and shall this






class of men, who are enriching themselves as much by the profits






they have in advancing the taxes, as by their industry, be






considered in as favourable a light as another who is paying a






cumulative tax out of his income, one farthing of which he never






can draw back?






    If any one should misinterpret the doctrine of this chapter,






I must put them in mind of my original plan, which was to keep






constantly in view those virtuous statesmen who think of nothing






but the good of their subjects. Taxes and impositions in their






hands, are the wealth of the father of the family; who therewith






feeds, clothes, provides for, and defends every one within his






house. The increase of taxes on this supposition is national






oeconomy, as shall be afterwards shewn; frauds are the thefts of






servants impairing the public good, and particularly the means of






self-defence against the incroachments of ambitious neighbours.






    As it is the duty of every statesman to make his people happy






and flourishing, perhaps the speculations of one whose only






interest in throwing them upon paper is to fill up his leisure






agreeably, may some time or other tend to promote so glorious a






purpose.













Chap. VI













Cumulative and proportional Taxes compared with one another, and






farther examined













    After examining separately the nature and effects of






cumulative and proportional taxes, it remains, for the more full






understanding of this subject, to compare them together; the






better to find out wherein they really differ, and how far the






difference is apparent only.






    It has been observed, that as the payment of taxes is made in






money, this payment can diminish no part of the produce of either






land, or industry; the whole amount of these remains entire to






the subjects of the state.






    Taxes then are paid either out of the money which circulates






in the purchase of produce and manufactures; or out of the income






arising from solid property: from which we have concluded that






those of the proportional kind must constantly be confined within






a certain proportion to alienation. We have also observed, that






the imposition of taxes augments the mass of circulation, and






makes it requisite for a statesman to contrive some method for






increasing money in proportion to their increase. I hope these






propositions have acquired an additional confirmation, from what






has been already said in the preceding chapters.






    We have also seen how the amount of proportional taxes is






ultimately taken from the superfluity of the rich, whom we have






called the idle consumers: and how they are advanced by one set






of the industrious, and refunded by another, until at last they






fall upon those who cannot draw them back from any body. These






last have been said to pay the taxes, the others to advance them






only.






    Were we therefore to suppose all desire of defrauding out of






the way, we should find the whole burden of proportional taxes






confined to the inconvenience of advancing their amount by the






industrious, and to the payment of them by the rich, which






proportionally diminishes their income. Where credit therefore is






well established, where payments are regularly made by buyers to






sellers, and where people proportion their expence to their free






income, the weight of proportional taxes will be very small. I






appeal to experience for the truth of this.






    Let us next examine the nature of cumulative taxes, as we






have called them, in order to distinguish them from the others.






    In these, alienation is not necessary at the time they are






paid; from which it follows, that, in many cases, they cannot be






drawn back. When a man pays his land-tax out of his rent, what






remains to him will not buy more of any thing than if he had paid






nothing. Nay, were the state to indulge him and take his tax in






corn, the corn which remains to him would not bear an advanced






price, unless the state should export the quantity he had given;






and then indeed, by diminishing the supply, it might raise the






price of grain in general; but every one having grain to sell






would profit of the rise upon the price, as well as the landlord,






whose share does not commonly amount to one third of the crop.






    But were a cumulative tax so levied as to prevent the






proprietor from spending what the state intends to make him pay






out of his income, he who pays it would thereby acquire one great






alleviation of his burden.






    I have said that when a brewer pays the excise, the tax, as






to him, is of the cumulative nature. It is so in a certain






degree, no doubt, as may be seen without farther explanation; but






it still so far retains its own nature as to be easily drawn back






from the consumer. But how can a soldier draw back the tax he






pays to Chelsea?






    From this material distinction between the two impositions, I






conclude, that no objection can lie against proportional taxes,






so far as they affect the industrious; because they draw them






completely back: and that great objections lie against cumulative






taxes, when they affect the industrious, because they cannot draw






them back at all; and consequently, they may affect the






physical-necessary of the contributor, in case no profit should






remain to him upon his labour. On the other hand, I think little






objection can be made to cumulative taxes, when they are imposed






upon possessions, which produce a visible annual revenue, clear






to the proprietor. This is the nature of the dixiemes and






vingtiemes in France; where the whole amount of the person's






income is taken upon proper proof, and taxed in proportion to it,






without any subsidiary or second levy's taking place, to make up






a determinate sum.






    Cumulative taxes would also be far less burdensome to the






lower class, could they be levied, so as, first, to preserve the






proportion of them to the actual profits on industry: secondly,






to make that proportion sensible to the people: and in the last






place, to retain the tax, instead of allowing them first to






receive it, and afterwards obliging them to refund it.






    In proportion as these three requisites do not take place,






such taxes become grievous to all who have no fixed income.






    To put a tax upon a man's dwelling house, in proportion to






its windows, or hearths, when the house produces no fixed income






to him, and when he has none independent of it, may take away a






part of his physical-necessary. To put a tax upon his head, is






more grievous than to put a tax upon his hands, in proportion to






what they daily gain.






    If cumulative and proportional taxes be compared, with






respect to the influence which they severally have upon our






opinions as to taxes in general, we find that both of them






deceive the contributors, but in different ways.






    In the cumulative taxes, the person who pays does not always






perceive the reason of his paying. He imagines that he is taxed






merely because it is known that he is able to pay a certain sum.






    In the proportional, the deceit is of another nature. When a






person buys a consumable commodity, which has paid an excise, he






does not perceive that the price he pays for it comprehends a tax






upon his past gains, in favour of the public; but he concludes






the whole to be necessary, in order to procure what he has an






inclination to consume. An example will make this plain.






    Suppose a tax laid upon wheel carriages, and that every






person in the state were liable to pay a certain sum in






proportion to the number of carriages he has for his convenience.






The tax-gatherer comes at the end of the year and demands the






sum. The person complains that he is not at liberty to have a






coach or a chaise without paying duty for it; and that while he






has occasion for one carriage only, and has but one pair of






horses, he is obliged to pay for several sets of wheels.






    Now suppose this cumulative tax were turned into a






proportional one, and that wheels were to pay a stamp-duty, or






the like, in the hands of the wheelwright. The price of them






would immediately rise. but this rise would soon become familiar






to the man who has the carriage; and he would then be no more






hurt by this additional expence, than if it had proceeded from






some new and expensive fashion of wheels; in short, wheels would






generally begin to bear an advanced price, and very soon nobody






would enquire how it came about, nor once complain of the tax.






    To set this in another light, the difference between the two






impositions resembles that between long and short accounts, which






to poor people is very great. When the expence of living is






insensibly and universally augmented, by the effect of






proportional taxes, then the industrious man, who enjoys neither






superfluity or idleness, may and can augment the price of his






work in proportion. This augmentation forms then a part of what






has been called his (A), which he draws fully back when he comes






to market. But if the same, or even a less sum be raised upon him






by a cumulative tax, it comes upon him at the end of the year, or






at the end of the quarter, and let him be ever so provident, he






cannot draw it back, or raise the price of his work, because of






the unequal competition of other people of his own class, who






from a variety of circumstances, cannot all be so equally loaded






by the cumulative as by the proportional taxes. Besides, they may






not be so provident as himself and may work for subsistence,






without making any allowance for what they are to pay the state






at the end of the year. Thus a double inconvenience ensues. The






industrious poor are oppressed by the tax-gatherers, and the tax






is ill levied. In the other case, the first never see a






tax-gatherer, and the money is paid. Besides these advantages in






favour of proportional taxes, there is still another, that if






this tax be improperly laid on, the defect will manifest itself






by checking consumption only; whereas in the other case, it will






be known by the distress also of the individuals.






    If the liberty not to consume be taken away, as in the






gabelle in some provinces in France, then the imposition changes






its nature and becomes a cumulative tax, as may be easily






perceived.(8*)






    It has been said, that so far as the three inconveniences of






the cumulative taxes can be prevented, they cease to be






oppressive. From which we see the reason why excises are so






easily paid when those who manufacture the commodities charged






with them, are contented to compound for them. This changes the






tax into one of the cumulative kind; but gives it every requisite






to make it easy. Let me take an example.






    A brewer who pays excise for all he brews, is exposed to the






daily visit of the excise-man, to whom he pays the duty. Here the






brewer's imposition participates of several of the inconveniences






attending cumulative taxes. But let me suppose that after a






certain time he finds that 100 l. is the annual amount of his






excise. If he make a composition for it at this rate, he comes






under a regular cumulative composition, with every advantage. He






thinks no more of frauds; he no more grudges what he pays; and






becomes in a manner collector of that imperceptible duty advanced






by him, and paid by all his customers.






    The easy method of transforming those taxes into one another,






shews their resemblance sufficiently, and the differences which






we have pointed out, shew the principles which regulate the






proper manner of imposing them.













Chap. VII













Consequences of Taxes when the Amount of them is properly applied













    We have now seen the objects affected by taxes, and the






inconveniences which result to those who are obliged to pay them.






    It comes next to be examined, whether taxes of all kinds be






not a great load upon a people, a grievous infringement of their






liberty, the means of bringing many honest and industrious people






to great distress, and a great discouragement to marriage. I






answer without hesitation, that taxes may be, and most commonly






are accompanied with all these and many more inconveniences; but






I must add, that they proceed from the abuse, and not from the






nature of taxes.






    In my inquiries, I have constantly in my eye, how man may be






governed, and never how he is governed. How a righteous and






intelligent statesman may restrain the liberty of individuals, in






order to promote the common good; never how an ignorant and






unrighteous statesman may destroy public liberty, for the sake of






individuals.






    Raising money by taxes must always be burdensome, less or






more, to those who pay it; and the advantages resulting from






taxes can proceed only from the right application of the money






when it is raised.






    When individuals only draw a profit from the inconvenience of






taxes, the public loses, no doubt; because taxes are paid for the






advantage of the public, not for that of private people. If the






money raised be more beneficially employed by the state, than it






would have been by those who have contributed it, then I say the






public has gained, in consequence of the burden laid upon






individuals; consequently, the statesman has done his duty, both






in imposing the taxes, and in rightly expending them.






    Taxes, in this last view, may be considered as a saving out






of every private fortune, in order to procure a public fund to be






expended for the public benefit.






    I have frequently recourse to the familiar examples of






private oeconomy, in order to make applications from it to the






political; which, however different it may appear, will be found






easily deducible from the same principles.






    Let me suppose two persons, (A) and (B), living in the same






neighbourhood, of the same rank and fortune, enjoying great






superfluity, but spending yearly the whole of their income in






different ways.






    Let the income of both be supposed to be 2100 l. sterling;






and let the branches of their expence be ranged under six






different heads. Let (A) be supposed to spend upon the first 100






l. on the second 200 l. on the third 300 l. on the fourth 400 l.






on the fifth 500 l. on the sixth 600 l. in all 2100 l.






    Let us suppose (A) to enjoy in every one an ample






sufficiency.






    (B), on the other hand, spends upon his first article 1600 l.






and upon each of the other five, no more than 100 l. Here the






first article of (B's) expence is sixteen times greater than any






of the rest; and by the supposition, 100 l. is supposed to denote






an ample sufficiency upon each article.






    I come to (A), and I say to him, you disapprove of the






extravagance of your neighbour (B) upon his first article of






expence, where he spends sixteen parts of his income, and where






you spend but one; and yet you must allow that upon every other






article of his expence, he is a better oeconomist than you. Would






it not be for your interest to bring the other articles of your






expence down to his standard, without increasing any thing upon






your first article, which is already within the compass of what






may be called sufficient.






    To what purpose, says (A), would you advise me to so strict






an oeconomy? And what should I do with so great a saving on my






annual income? Be in no pain about that. I shall lay it out for






you in discharging your debts; in providing for your children,






and giving them a good education; in improving your estate;






repairing your house; making up your inclosures; all shall be






usefully spent; and out of 600 l. a year, you shall have every






thing necessary for your family.






    Here is the representation of a scheme between a good






statesman and a people whose interest he consults.






    After the imposition of taxes, the individuals of a state,






who have already a determinate income, begin to pay greatly more






than they used to do for every thing they consume. A great part






of this additional price goes to the public, and is thereby laid






out for national purposes. The whole of such expences is thrown






into circulation, as much as if the rich proprietors had laid it






out themselves upon articles entirely adapted to their own taste.






    Is it not evident, that in this way of appropriating the






income of a country, it must produce a more extensive






encouragement to industry of all kinds, than if the proprietors






only had spent it? They never would have thought of becoming






merchants, or of setting up manufactures for the supply of






foreign markets: their whole expence would have been calculated






to supply their own wants real or imaginary; and it would have






been indifferent to them whether these were supplied by natives






or by strangers.






    Let us apply this doctrine to common experience. Let us






compare the nature of circulation in a trading town, with that of






a country place, where many gentlemen of large fortunes reside.






How extensive the objects of the first! how contracted those of






the latter!






    Let us compare again the exigencies of government, with those






of a trading city, what a variety of new wants here occur to be






supplied, which the city never could have occasion for?






    I have shewn how the great amount of taxes comes to be taken






from the income of those individuals whose fortune is already






made, or whose daily profits are considerable: I have suggested






how circumscribed the expence of this class must be, when






considered with respect to the employment it procures to the body






of a people. Does not the experience of former ages show how apt






private opulence is to sink into treasures, when a taste for






industry does not animate the lower classes to create new objects






of desire in the wealthy? Wherein is a state benefited by the






luxurious gratifications of the rich, unless it be by the






employment they procure for those who provide the objects of






luxury? Those very gratifications are, in one sense, taxes upon






the rich in favour of the industrious: they increase expence, and






throw money into circulation. In Spain and Portugal, where






industry is not introduced among the lower classes, the strangers






are they who in effect levy such taxes upon them. Were the taxes






they pay, properly applied for the encouragement of the arts,






instead of being appropriated to private purposes, and to the






enriching of private men, whose taste for expence is always






circumscribed to the objects of their own wants, how soon should






we see them vying with us in every market of Europe, and






supplying themselves as far as their country is calculated for






it.






    The reciprocal wants of industrious nations, resemble the






reciprocal wants of tradesmen; all may be employed in supplying






one another, as well as themselves.






    When a due proportion of the amount of taxes is properly laid






out in premiums, for the encouragement of the industrious, the






prices of labour upon articles of exportation, may be brought so






low, that all nations who do not follow the like policy, must






languish and decay. Luxury at home will then cease to hurt the






foreign trade of the nation. In her treaties of commerce, she may






throw open her ports to many articles of foreign consumption,






without incurring any inconvenience from such allowances; while






on the other hand, she will reap the greatest advantages from a






reciprocal permission.






    The example by which I have illustrated the nature of public






contributions, must not be understood to tally with respect to






proportion. It would be both ridiculous and impossible to reduce






all the expences of rich men to the barely sufficient. All I






meant was, to shew how taxes, when properly applied, may be






considered as public oeconomy; and how the levying of them has no






direct tendency to hurt a nation in point of ease and prosperity.













Chap. VIII













Of the Extent of Taxation













    One good way to discover the nature of taxes, is, to examine






how far it may be possible to carry them. This is my intention in






this chapter.






    I have said that the object of taxes was income, and not






stock. I have shewn how those of the proportional kind affect the






income of stock already made, and enhance the expence of persons






who enjoy large profits upon their daily industry. I have pointed






out the impropriety of imposing cumulative taxes, upon such as






draw nothing more from their industry than an easy subsistence;






and I have given a general preference to those of the






proportional kind; because they constantly imply both alienation






and consumption: alienation in those who advance the taxes,






consumption in those who pay them.






    Could, therefore, taxes be levied upon every alienation,






where consumption is implied, and that in proportion to the whole






superfluity of those who are to consume, proportional taxes would






be carried to their utmost extent.






    I shall now analize this subject still farther, in order to






discover how far this extent may reach; and by this inquiry, the






principles of taxation will be the better understood.






    The object of alienation comprehends all that is in commerce






among men, moveable, and immoveable.






    What is moveable is generally consumable, what is immoveable,






is generally not so.






    As consumption is a requisite, together with alienation, in






order to form a proper object for proportional taxes, we see how






contrary to principles it would be, to tax the alienation of






lands, houses, etc. in the same proportion as consumable






commodities. These are funds, not income; and the money with






which they are purchased, must be considered in the light of a






fund, while it is in the hands of the buyer. When once it comes






into the hands of the seller of the immoveable subject, it






frequently, indeed, partakes of the nature of income; that is to






say, it is spent in the consumption of fruits, and of the labour






of man; and then it will be properly affected by proportional






taxes. This may suffice to recal to mind the principles we laid






down in the 26th chapter of the second book, concerning the






effects of the vibration of the balance of wealth between the






members of a modern state.






    The next thing we are to consider is the state of






circulation. As to this, we have frequently observed, how it must






be in proportion to alienation.






    This proportion is not determined by the value, or






denominations of the money circulating; but by this value






combined with the frequency of transitions from hand to hand; as






the force of a cannon ball is estimated by the weight of the






ball, and the swiftness of the motion at the time it strikes.






    Let us now lay aside the consideration of immoveable property






altogether; and examine the nature of consumption, alienation,






and sale, with respect to other things.






    Consumption comprehends every thing produced by the earth, or






by man; alienation is confined to that part of consumption which






is exchanged between men; and sale to that part of alienation






which is exchanged for an equivalent in money.






    Whatever part is consumed without alienation, ought, I think,






to be out of the reach of proportional taxes, unless, by some






circumstance or other, it can be made to fall under the eye of






the public, in a manner resembling its coming to market. Thus a






tax upon malt may with propriety be levied at the malt-house, as






if it were sold to the maltster, although it be made for the






consumption of the grower of the barley. In like manner a tax






upon corn for bread may be levied either at the mill where it is






ground, or at the oven where it is baked.(9*)






    The worst kind of proportional taxes are those which are






levied upon private manufacturing, and upon unmanufactured






consumption, where no alienation takes place. An example of the






first we have in the excise upon malt, cyder, candles, etc. made






in private houses for private use: the last is known in Holland,






where a man cannot kill his own pig, or his own calf, without






paying a tax. Were taxes of this nature extended to the making of






bread, cooking of victuals, &c. I apprehend they would become of






a nature more burdensome than any hitherto invented, unless






public cooks, &c. were established, as public ovens are in many






parts of France: in such cases, taxes might be levied upon every






part of consumption.






    Investigations of this nature are so disagreeable, that it is






with reluctance I mention them; but when in fact, such taxes are






found established in different countries, it is highly proper






that the nature of them should be inquired into.






    Taxes in Holland are so multiplied, as to descend to this






sort, in many places, as we have seen by the example just given;






but even these, however oppressive they may appear to those who






are not accustomed to them, are still less so than many of the






cumulative kind we have mentioned, particularly the tax upon






industry and the capitation in France. They approach nearer to






proportional taxes and derive every alleviation of their burden






from this circumstance. He who pays such taxes, sees that he can






avoid them, by retrenching his consumption; and when they fall






upon the necessaries of life, he may draw them back, provided he






be an industrious man, and that every one who enters into






competition with him for employment, be equally subjected to the






same burden. But they are more burdensome than those where sale






takes place; because, when a poor man, who wishes to consume, has






no money, he considers himself in the same light as if the thing






were not to be sold; but when he has what he has acquired by his






own labour, and cannot consume it for want of money to pay for a






permission, as it were, he must either starve for hunger in the






midst of plenty, or be reduced, perhaps, to beggary, for having






preserved his life by defrauding the tax.






    What has been said, is, I think, sufficient to shew the






hardships which occur, when taxes are imposed upon bare






consumption, where no alienation takes place: they must, in every






respect, be ranged under those of the proportional kind, although






some principal requisites be wanting to engage any one to approve






of their institution.






    It appears still more difficult to establish a proportional






tax upon barter, or the exchange of commodities one for another,






unless sale be understood. This would be the case were a private






person, not subject to the excise upon beer made in his own






house, to pay in that commodity. He would not there escape the






imputation of fraud; and might, with propriety, be considered as






a retailer. I do not, however, doubt but examples of taxes upon






barter might be found; some even occur to myself; but they are






too trifling to mention.(10*)






    The last and principal requisite, to render proportional






taxes easy and light, is sale. There the burden must be






proportional to the buyer's purse; and if it prevent the






consumption of the thing taxed, the defect will manifest itself.






    Of these taxes we may say, that they are in proportion to






circulation; and accordingly, we see how difficult it was to






raise them, as long as circulation remained confined to the small






quantity of coin in the country. As money increased, both by the






increase of trade and alienations, they became more productive;






and were the nature of them rightly understood, and were they






properly imposed, they would soon be more generally adopted.






    In treating of public credit, I have said that it is the duty






of a statesman to augment the quantity of money, in proportion as






he intends to multiply taxes on his people. I shall now, before I






conclude this chapter, explain the meaning of what was there






thrown out relatively to another subject.






    The money of a country, we have said, bears no determinate






proportion to circulation; it is the money circulating,






multiplied by the number of transitions from hand to hand. Again,






we have said that the prices of all things are determined by






demand and competition. The meaning of this, as it concerns the






present question, is, that in proportion to the competition of






those who appear with money, in order to acquire what comes to






market, a larger or a smaller sum is brought into circulation.






    Now, according to the principles laid down in the first






chapter of this book, we saw how the full value of the






industrious seller's expence and profit, were made up to him in






the sale of his work; and if he had advanced any tax upon any






part of his work or consumption, that even this was refunded to






him by the buyer, who, if he consumed in the light of an idle






man, paid for the whole.






    Farther, when a proportional tax is imposed, we said it was,






in a manner, as if the state interposed at the time of






alienation, and exacted of the purchaser a certain value in






money, in proportion to the commodity, as the price of the






permission to acquire what his own industry had not produced.






From this I draw the following consequence, that in proportion to






the tax, an additional sum of money is drawn into circulation,






which would otherwise have remained in the pocket of the






purchaser; consequently, on imposing proportional taxes, they






cannot, at first, exceed that proportion of money which is found






in the pockets of the consumers, over and above what they used to






pay for what they consumed.






    The truth of this proposition is established upon many facts.






First, in countries where people keep their money locked up,






proportional taxes are very well paid. Hence the great amount of






the alcavala and cientos in Spain, which amount together to 14






per cent upon every consecutive alienation of the commodities






which they affect, chiefly indeed for the consumption of the






rich.






    Secondly, When excises were augmented in England, in the






reign of king William, Davenant tells us, that the goods excised






fell in their price.






    Thirdly, When a war has lasted any time in France, taxes






cease to be so productive.






    Are not all these, and many other appearances, resolved upon






the same principle, viz. that taxes must come out of that money






which exceeds what was necessary for carrying on alienation






before they were imposed?






    In Spain such taxes draw money from the chests of the






hoarders, and increase circulation for a while.






    In England, during King William's wars, the quantity of money






being very small, and trade being very low, the tax upon malt






could come out of no other fund than the price usually given for






barley.






    In France people are better acquainted with taxes, and the






great bulk of excises are administered by the farmers, who never






lower their price; so that the diminution of the mass of coin






must diminish consumption.






    But when methods can be fallen upon to increase money






according to the uses found for it, taxes will continue to






produce, consumption will not diminish, and circulation will keep






pace with them.






    Could we suppose, that before the imposition of taxes, every






person in a state had laid it down as a rule, to spend the whole






of his income, but none of his treasure, in the consumption of






what is brought to market, it is plain, that in a luxuriouS






nation, taxes might be carried so high as to draw the last






farthing of the treasure into circulation, even though it were






supposed to exceed the value which demand had fixed for all that






was formerly brought to market. But without a luxurious turn this






would not be the case. There are countries abounding with coin,






which it is impossible to come at by proportional taxes. The






reason is plain: the value which demand fixes upon the total of






the articles of consumption exposed to sale in the country, bears






but a trifling proportion to the coin which remains locked up.






This was the case in ancient Greece. In this case, proportional






taxes never can exhaust the treasure; because were they to be






made high upon articles of the first necessity, all the poor






would starve; if upon articles of superfluity, demand would stop.






    Proportional taxes, therefore, can be raised in proportion






only to the desire of spending money; and as this desire depends






upon the spirit of the people, so must the extent of taxes.






    Let me now trace a little the progress of money brought into






circulation by proportional taxes in a luxurious nation. I shall






call the value, fixed by demand, for all that comes to market






(Y). The sum levied in consequence of the alienation of it, or in






other words, the sum of the proportional taxes (X). And the whole






money of the country (Z). This premised, it will follow, from






what has been said, that as soon as all the money of the country






is brought into circulation, then (Z) will be exactly equal to






the sum of (Y) and (X).






    Let us next suppose the whole alienation to be made at once.






Will not (Z) then immediately appear divided into (Y) and (X)?






What then will become of those two sums which we suppose to enter






into circulation at the same time? I answer, that (Y) will go






entirely free to the industrious seller: that it is, or should






be, nearly equal to the former value of what came to market






before taxes were imposed: and that (X) is an additional sum






drawn from the idle consumers, who live upon an income already






made. But suppose (X) to be augmented, until it exceeds the






quantity of money formerly superfluous for carrying on






alienation: then I say, that either taxes will become






proportionally less productive, or consumers must melt down the






capital of their funds into paper money, to the amount of the






deficiency of (X); and this will supply circulation with the






additional sum required in consequence of the imposition of






taxes.






    Now, I think, it is a lucky circumstance, that the additional






sum of taxes should be paid by those very people who are the best






able to borrow it upon their funds.






    Let us proceed to examine the progress of (Y) and (X) as they






continue in circulation. (Y) is no sooner come into the hands of






the industrious seller, but he has occasion to go to market: that






moment I consider him as one of the rich; and the money which, at






the time he sold, had acquired the denomination of (Y), now






resumes that of (Z). When he comes to buy a commodity with what






was formerly his (Y), there is immediately a part of it converted






into a new (X), and the remainder keeps the denomination of (Y)






in the hands of him from whom he buys. By this progress it is






plain, that after a certain number of alienations, or transitions






from hand to hand, the whole quantity (Y) will be converted into






(X).






    Experience shews this to be the fact; because the amount of






taxes in a short time, far exceeds the value of all the money of






a country.






    Let us next follow the progress of (X).






    Upon the first alienation of any part of what comes to market






for the consumption of the proprietors of (Z), a proportional






part of (Z) is transformed into (X), and is carried into the






public coffers. Were it there to be locked up, and not thrown






back into circulation, it is plain, that in a short time the






whole of (Z) would be converted into (X), and would be shut up in






the exchequer.






    When the amount of taxes, therefore, instead of being shut up






in the exchequer is sent out of the country, as in time of war,






must not this produce a similar effect? Has not the exportation






of this amount the same effect as locking it up, since the one






and the other equally take it out of circulation? Does it not






then follow, that if more money be not obtained, either by






borrowing it back from strangers, or by melting down more solid






property, that selling must stop, and (Y) disappear as well as






(X)? The rich, therefore, must give over buying, and the






proprietors of all that comes to market must deal by barter with






one another.






    How naturally do all these consequences follow one upon the






other! and how exactly do they correspond to the principles which






run through that part of the last book where we treated of banks






and public credit!






    Taxes are not raised, in our days to remain in treasures, but






to answer the exigencies of the state. The moment, therefore,






that the money arising from them comes out of the public coffers,






it loses the character of (X) and resumes that of (Z), in the






same manner as (Y) was transformed into (Z), by being brought to






market in order to buy a commodity. This new (Z), as we may call






it, no sooner returns into circulation, than it becomes again






converted into (Y) and (X), with this difference, however, that






what came from the exchequer, so far as it is converted into (X),






returns directly into it again.






    Hence it follows, that states commonly pay their servants the






full of their salaries, and make them refund a part in






consequence of cumulative taxes, instead of proportionally






diminishing what is due to them. And when the salaries themselves






are intended to be 1aid under poundage, which in fact is an






actual diminution of them, they choose that the tax should appear






to be a deduction out of what is supposed due; because it seems






less arbitrary to impose a tax, than to diminish a salary,






without assigning any reason for it; but indeed, besides this






reason, it commonly happens, that the particular appropriations






and administration of the revenue render this method easier.






    With respect to proportional taxes they affect the expences






of the state in the same manner as those of individuals; with






this difference, as we have said, that the part (X) returns into






the exchequer; but the part (Y) is fairly spent by the state, as






by the idle consumer.






    From what has been said, we may gather the principles which






lead to the most extensive establishment of proportional taxes,






viz. either to draw by particular regulations, the whole real and






gross produce of land and work to market; or at least to bring it






under the eye of the state, in consequence of some modification






or manufacture performed upon it, as was observed with respect to






malt-houses, mills, and public ovens. When, by such contrivances,






the whole gross produce falls under taxation, the proportional






taxes must be gently laid on, and gradually raised until they






begin to interrupt consumption; then they must be diminished for






a while, until dissipation increase; a case which will probably






happen, as it commonly keeps pace with industry.






    If we suppose the rich to set out on a plan of living upon






their capitals, instead of living upon their incomes, as we have






hitherto supposed them to do, then indeed taxes may augment to a






degree not to be estimated. This combination has already found a






place in the 26th chapter of the second book, where we examined






it with regard to the progress of industry. In that place it was






said, that in proportion to credit and industry, it might be






possible, in the compass of a year, to produce commodities to the






value of the whole property of the most extended kingdom. Were






this the case, to what a height might not taxes be carried?






    (Y) then would represent the whole value of the country, and






consequently (X) would swell in proportion, according to the






competition among the inhabitants, to purchase every particular






article. Subsistence and necessaries might be taxed low in






proportion to the abilities of those of the lower classes;






articles of luxury might be taxed in a higher proportion, in






order to draw the more into the exchequer.






    Were taxes thus carried to their utmost extent, still every






person in the state must be left at liberty to save, or to spend






the whole, or any part of his stock, or income; which is not the






case when cumulative taxes are imposed. Proportional taxes,






though carried to their utmost extent, will not deprive an






industrious man of his physical-necessary, nor of the reward of






his ingenuity, nor of that rank in wealth, to which his birth or






expence entitles him.(11*)






    When taxes have the effect of interrupting this harmony of






expence, of restraining the liberty of squandering, or of saving,






or of oppressing one set of men more than another, in all such






cases, they are improperly imposed; and instead of being too






high, as it is commonly supposed, I think it is a demonstration






that they are really lower than they need to be. The classes of






men in a modern state, resemble the horses in a team. When every






horse draws fairly and equally, the whole force is exerted; but






if any one happen to be strained by an over-charge thrown upon






him, the force of the team is greatly diminished.






    When proportional taxes are carried to their full extent, I






then presume every one will be obliged to pay as much as






possible; I do not mean that every one will be forced to pay to






the extent of his abilities, but I say, that the generality will;






and therefore, were cumulative, or personal taxes, to be






superadded on those who already pay all they can, they would, by






affecting them unequally, deprive many of their






physical-necessary, or small profits; and consequently destroy






the proper balance of their competition. The setting of the lower






classes free from cumulative taxes, will have the effect only of






putting the growing wealth of the penurious and saving part of






the industrious inhabitants out of the reach of taxation. This






ought in good policy to be done, as has been shewn in another






place. But, farther, we have observed, that taxes can be






increased in proportion only to the spirit of dissipation in the






people. To force money, therefore, out of the hands of those who






do not incline to spend it, is forcing the spirit of the people;






and if it be not tyranny, it is at least great severity. Besides,






we shall presently shew, how impossible it is these savings






should escape being taxed whenever they begin to produce an






income; and allowing that they may be greatly accumulated, and






thrown into trade, yet still they must in one way or other appear






in alienation, and become subject to the proportional taxes. The






only part, therefore, of the savings not affected by taxes, will






be confined to that which is locked up. This in a prodigal nation






should never be touched. The inconveniences resulting to the






state from so small an inequality of taxation, is too trifling to






be attended to, and too difficult to be prevented.






    I come next to examine the extent of cumulative taxes.






    If we suppose the proportional taxes to be carried to their






full extent, there will be little place found for the cumulative,






as has been said. The only objects left for them are the savings






locked up, and the pure profits upon trade.






    But let us suppose proportional taxes out of the question, as






they must be when contrary to the spirit of a particular nation;






and then inquire into the principles which regulate the






imposition of cumulative taxes, in order to discover to what






extent they may be carried, and what consequences may follow when






they are brought to a height.






    This branch has two objects; first, income, which is






determinate; secondly, profits from industry, which are and must






be very uncertain.






    Income, I divide into two sorts; that which proceeds from






every branch of solid property, capable of producing it: Land,






houses, even cattle, furniture, &c. all may, in some respects,






produce an income, more or less permanent according to






circumstances. This sort of income is established by lease. The






second sort is the interest of money, constituted by the contract






of loan.






    In imposing cumulative taxes upon income, it is very proper






to attend to the nature of every species of it, with respect to






its stability. Landed property is fixed, and cannot escape






taxation, were the tax to be carried even to the extent of the






full income, as has been observed. Were the same proportion to be






laid on houses, they would soon fall to ruin, because the nominal






proprietor would not keep them up. Like circumstances must be






attended to, in taxing every other article of revenue.






    The method of ascertaining the value of this kind of






property, is to oblige all leases to be recorded, under a






sufficient penalty. This is the method in France, for the sake of






the controle, which is exacted upon recording them; and this, no






doubt, facilitates the arising of the twentieth penny, which






operates upon all such income.






    The value once ascertained, the whole income is at the mercy






of the state, in proportion to the impossibility of avoiding the






tax, by any change on the nature of the fund. It is from this






circumstance that I have called all such taxes arbitrary






impositions. And I call them also cumulative; because the reason






given for imposing them, is, that it is just every one should pay






a general tax, for the support of the state, in proportion to his






abilities.






    As these taxes cannot be carried beyond the value of the






income which the proprietor cannot withdraw from under the






burden, we see the impossibility of establishing them upon that






income which proceeds from money. If a tax of so much per cent be






imposed upon money lent at interest, the lender may immediately






call in his capital from his debtor, and send it away beyond the






reach of the tax. If the calling it in be prohibited, then all






credit will be destroyed for the future, and no more money will






be lent. If the statesman should be disposed to profit of the






advantage found in securing money upon land-property; and if,






trusting to the desire monied-people have of settling their






capitals in that way, he should take one or more per cent. upon






capitals so secured; it will still have the effect of hurting the






credit of landed men, who have frequently no good security but






their land to give.






    It was formerly the practice to allow the landlords a






retention of a part of the interest, in consideration of the tax






they paid upon that part of their land, which was pledged for the






security of the money borrowed; but when credit is once






established, this regulation has no other effect, than to oblige






landlords to borrow so much dearer than other people, who have no






retention to claim. Where indeed credit is precarious, such a






regulation may be considered as a premium for good security.






    In general, I believe, we may safely determine, that all






attempts to lay a tax upon the income of so fluctuating a






property as money, where the capital is demandable, will prove






unsuccessful.






    The case is different, when the capital is not demandable, as






has been observed in the end of the 8th chapter upon public






credit; where we were suggesting a reason for taxing the interest






of national debts, when grown up to the full amount of all the






income of a country. But a material distinction was there made,






between those debts which were supposed to be consolidated into a






permanent property, and the new contracts which were to be






considered as debts constituted upon that property.






    We see, therefore, the extent of cumulative taxes upon






possessions which produce an income. Let us next examine how they






may be made to affect other articles.






    We have observed how improper, and how contrary to principles






it is, to impose proportional taxes upon those branches of sale,






which do not change the balance of wealth between the contracting






parties. Yet cumulative taxes may then take place; because there






is no reason to make them general, or proportional.






    When lands, for example, carry titles along with them, as is






the case in many countries; and when, as with us in Scotland,






they carry a right to vote for a member of parliament, a very






heavy tax might be imposed upon the alienation of them. The same






may be said of every other estate which requires a feudal






investiture to complete the right. Thus the Lods et Vente in






France, which is a proportion of the price of such lands due to






the superior or lord-paramount of the fee, amounting in many






cases to the sixth part of the price, is a hint for a cumulative






tax to be raised upon the alienation of this kind of property.






    Were cumulative taxes properly laid upon personal service, a






regularity in levying them at short intervals, and according to






some determinate proportion, would do a great deal towards






communicating to them all the advantages of those of the






proportional kind.






    Thus a tax laid upon those who work by the day, may be levied






in such a manner as to be tolerably easy. A penny a day (or more






if necessary) paid by every industrious man, regularly, once a






week, would soon enable him to raise his price in that






proportion. But then deductions must be allowed for all






accidental impediments; and were a plan to be concerted, many






other considerations would enter into it, which it would be






superfluous here to mention, and which, perhaps, may occur in






another place.






    The two articles which, in analizing the extent of






proportional taxes, we observed had escaped that imposition, to






wit, money locked up, and the pure profits on trade constantly






accumulated into the stock, are equally ill adapted to bear a






cumulative tax. I can see no way of taxing money locked up, any






more than money lent, without opening a door to the greatest






oppression. And as to the pure profits on trade, although they






appear to be income, I rather consider them as stock, which,






according to principles, ought not to be taxed. My reason for not






considering them as income, is because we have supposed them to






be accumulated by the merchant into his trading stock. They






resemble the annual shoots of a tree, which augment the mass of






it, but are very different from the seed or fruit which is






annually produced, and is annually separated from it. If they be






spent by the merchants, then they are undoubtedly income, and






will be affected by proportional taxes; but as they may also not






be spent, and become stock, the cumulative tax will affect them






in both cases.













Chap. X













Are Taxes a Spur to Industry, as some pretend?













    It is not easy to find out, a priori, how taxes should prove






a spur to industry. What makes several people adopt this opinion






is rather from their feelings, in consequence of many






circumstances arising from experience, than from what reason, or






the nature of the thing, has pointed out. But as nothing can be






produced without an adequate and natural cause, let us examine






this political problem, by an application of the principles we






have laid down in the former chapters. If these be just, we shall






discover by them, how it happens that in countries where taxes






are high, where living is dear, and where every circumstance






seems to render the means of subsistence difficult to obtain,






people live in the greatest plenty, are best and most easily






subsisted, and that industry there makes the greatest progress.






    For the solution of this question, let us call to mind the






principles which influence the multiplication of mankind, and the






increase of labour and industry, laid down in the first book. We






there explained how the wants of mankind promote their






multiplication.






    Money, the instrument of alienation, was represented as the






primum mobile in this operation; a desire in the rich of






acquiring every thing with money, that is demand, was shewn to be






the spur to industry in the poor. It was said, that if riches did






not inspire a taste for luxury, that is for the consumption of






the labour of man, these riches would not circulate; and that






they would then be adored rather as a god, than made subservient






to the uses of men.






    Connect herewith that the imposition of taxes is a method of






bringing money into circulation; that those of the proportional






kind have the effect of drawing from the rich an additional price






upon every thing they buy, which goes for the use of the state,






and which otherwise would not have entered into circulation at






that time.






    From these principles, I conclude, that taxes promote






industry; not in consequence of their being raised upon






individuals, but in consequence of their being expended by the






state; that is, by increasing demand and circulation.






    From the principles above laid down, I cannot discover the






shadow of a reason, to conclude that taking arbitrarily away from






some individuals, a part of their gains by cumulative taxes, or






proportionally from others, by augmenting the price of what they






buy and consume, must in any respect imply an incitement in the






consumers to demand more; and without this it never can excite






the industrious man to augment the supply.






    I readily allow that every one who has been obliged to pay a






tax, may have a desire to indemnify himself of the expence he has






been put to, by augmenting his industry; but if, on the other






hand, taxes have put every one to a considerable additional






expence, in proportion to his income, it would be absurd to






allege this diminution of his fortune, as the cause of a desire






to augment his consumption; and unless the rich do augment their






consumption, the poor cannot augment their industry.






    Examine, on the other hand, the use made by the state of the






money raised, and you will easily perceive the justness, I think,






of the above mentioned principles. This money belongs to the






public, and is admastered by private people. Public expence is






defrayed with a full hand; they who bestow the money, bestow it






for the public, not for themselves; and they who work for the






public, find, or ought to find, the greatest encouragement to be






diligent.






    Every application of public money implies a want in the






state; and every want supplied, implies an encouragement given to






industry. In proportion, therefore, as taxes draw money into






circulation, which otherwise would not have entered into it at






that time, they encourage industry; not by taking the money from






individuals, but by throwing it into the hands of the state,






which spends it; and which thereby throws it directly into the






hands of the industrious, or of the luxurious who employ them.






    It is no objection to this representation of the matter, that






the persons from whom the money is taken, would have spent it as






well as the state. The answer is, that it might be so, or not:






whereas when the state gets it, it will be spent undoubtedly.






Besides, had it been spent by individuals, it would have been






laid out for the supply of private wants, which are not near so






extensive as those of the public: and farther, when money is so






taken from rich individuals, it obliges them to find out a way of






procuring more, out of their solid property; and when this






facility is n1ot procured for them by their statesman, we see how






taxes become both oppressive and ill paid. On the contrary, when






it is provided, either by the returns of foreign trade, which






greatly augment the coin of a country; or by banks, which melt






down property into paper circulation; we see taxes augmenting






constantly, without creating any impediment to consumption, or






discouragement to industry. All these consequences hang in a






chain, and hence may be gathered the solidity of the principles






upon which they depend.






    After this solution of the question proposed, let those who






are versed in history lay circumstances together and examine






whether facts do not prove the truth of what I have been saying.













Chap. XI













Considerations upon Land-Taxes, with some Observations upon those






of England and France













    Of all the kinds of cumulative taxes, that which is properly






imposed upon lands seems to be the best: that is, to imply the






fewest inconveniences to the persons paying, and to the state in






raising it. That it is an unequal imposition is plain and






certain: this character is unavoidably attached to every species






of cumulative taxes, in one way or other. It has also the effect






of casting a general discredit upon the purchase and improvement






of land; because the proprietors are naturally exposed to






augmentations, which may, almost with the same ease, be carried






to the total amount of the income, as to any proportional part of






it. This has been mentioned in a former chapter, where the






interest of a nation's debts was supposed to increase so as to






equal the value of all the land-rents, and the whole revenue of






individuals.






    Land-taxes are imposed in various forms in different






countries, and all are supposed to bear a determinate proportion






to the rent. This, however, is never, nor indeed can it ever be






the case. The value of land is varying perpetually, from the






industry of the inhabitants. Besides this inequality, there are






other inconveniences proceeding from the unequal distribution of






property. In Scotland, for instance, land is divided into large






portions; very few small lots are to be found. The class of






farmers, for the most part, labour the lands of others, who have






large possessions. This is less the case, I believe, in England,






and still less in France and in Germany. A land-tax, therefore,






being supposed universal, would, in Scotland, do little harm: in






England, it would fall heavier upon the small proprietors;






because the sum exacted would bear a greater proportion to the






supposed superfluity of the proprietor. In France, it would still






be worse; for there the exemptions of the numerous class of






nobles, and many other circumstances mentioned above, would






entirely destroy even the shadow of proportion. It is out of my






way to enter into any long detail upon this head, with respect to






different countries.






    I shall therefore confine myself to a very few observations






upon the method of laying this tax in England; and upon a project






which has been long in agitation in France, to raise their






land-tax by way of tithe upon the fruits.






    This scheme was first proposed to the late King of France by






the Marechal de Vauban, in 1699, and the proposal was renewed






some years ago in a performance called the Reformateur. But as it






would prove hurtful and burdensome to France, in a great degree,






from a circumstance which has not been attended to by these






authors, the examination of this system of taxation will serve as






a good illustration of this part of our subject.






    The land-tax in England has, I think, two remarkable defects.






First, The sums imposed at certain rates, upon every district of






the kingdom, whether cities, towns, universities, or open






country, even upon the King's palaces, inns of court, &c. are not






distributed according to any rule of proportion upon the property






of individuals; but this operation is left to assessors.






    Secondly, All personal estates, except property in the public






funds, and stock upon land, supposed necessary for agriculture,






are charged in the same proportion as land-rents.













Chap. XII













Miscellaneous Questions relating to Taxes













    Quest. 3. What is meant by income, relatively to individuals,






or to a state, and what is the nature of the expence which must






diminish it, when it is considered as the object of taxation?






    The great intricacy of this question proceeds from hence,






that what is really an expence to one is the income of another:






so that without applying our reasoning to every particular fact,






no general explanation can be rendered intelligible. My reason






for proposing it in this place is, that in commenting upon some






passages of Davenant, in his discourses upon the revenues of






England, I may have an opportunity of illustrating some things






which have been already examined.






    Davenant was an admirable writer; he had a remarkable genius






for political theory, and his sentiments upon many things are






very generally adopted. My intention here is not to refute his






opinions, but to avail myself of his combinations, in order to






explain my own ideas.






    In his first discourse upon revenues, we find the following






passage.






    'The number of the people leads us to know what the yearly






income may be from land, and what from mines, houses, and






homesteads, rivers, lakes, meers, ponds, and what from trade,






labour, industry, arts and sciences: for where a nation contains






so many acres of arable land, so many of pasture and meadow, such






a quantity of wood and coppices, forests, parks and commons,






heaths, moors, mountains, roads, ways, and barren and waste land;






and where the different value of this is computed, by proper






mediums, it is rational to conclude, that such a part of the






people's expence is maintained from land, &c. and such a part






from mines, houses, &c. and that such a part is maintained from






trade, labour, &c. and the poor exceeding so much the rich in






numbers, the common people are the proper medium by which we may






judge of this expence.'






    'There is a certain sum requisite to every one for food,






raiment, and other necessaries; as for example, between 7 and 8






l. per annum; but some expending less, and some more, it may not






be improper to compute, that the mass of mankind, in England,






expend, one with another, near 8 l. per annum: from whence it may






be concluded, that an annual income of so many millions is






needful for the nourishment of such and such a number of people.'






    The reasoning here takes a wrong turn. It is of no






consequence to compute the value of things consumed without






alienation. It is of no use to know that the value of the






physical-necessary of an Englishman is 8 l. a year; because if






this sum be supposed to be an exact quantity of income, not one






farthing of tax can come out of it. So that imposing, for






example, 5 per cent upon this article would be raising only the






physical-necessary to 8 l. 8s. which 8s. must be paid, not by the






physical-necessarian, but by somebody having superfluity who






employs him: and if there were not superfluity enough in England






to answer to 8s. a head, such a tax could not be levied.






    He afterwards supposes that the income of this class may






amount to about twenty millions a year, which at 8 l. each,






answers two millions and a half of people. He states the income






of lands at fourteen millions, and the income of trade at ten






millions, in all at forty-four millions a year: and hence he






concludes, that taxes ought to be imposed in some proportion to






this total.






    Now if he suppose the first article of twenty millions,






arising from the income of those who are employed in arts and






manufactures, according to the former calculation of 8 l. a head,






to be as ready a fund for taxation as the land-rents, we must






examine, by the principles we have deduced, whether there be any






ground for such a supposition.






    Let me suppose one of this great class to work a whole day






for his victuals only. Here is an alienation of work for food. It






is impossible, however, to raise a tax in money upon this






alienation; because it may easily be supposed that neither party






has a farthing. The only method therefore, for imposing a tax in






such a case, would be, either to oblige the workman to set apart






a portion of his day's work for one who would pay the public for






the value of it; or to oblige the person who gives him his food,






to pay the public for the privilege of employing him in his






service. The one and the other are examples of proportional






taxes. But this method of taxation is absolutely unknown. In this






example there is an alienation, which, I have said, constantly






implies a superfluity of one kind or other. The labour of the






person working is, here, superfluous to himself; therefore a part






of it may be applied towards the public. But the bread he






receives is in no part superfluous, and therefore cannot be laid






under taxation as to him. But then the bread given for the labour






is superfluous to the person who gives it; and as this implies






that he has a superfluity of bread, the state may demand a share






of this superfluity.






    By this exposition of the matter it appears, that in order to






raise a tax, in whatever way it be done, some kind of superfluity






must be supposed. It also points out how it should be laid on:






for if by mistaking the proper object, a part of the bread should






be taken from the workman, instead of being taken from the man






who employs him, the tax would affect the physical-necessary of






the labourer, instead of affecting the superfluity of the






employer.






    Let us next suppose a workman able to do no more than what is






requisite to dig the ground for roots to eat, instead of digging






it to procure bread from a man who has bread to spare; still






there will be no alienation; consequently, no possibility of






establishing a tax: for if you either take a part of his labour,






or of his food, you deprive him equally of his






physical-necessary. Yet the work of this man, and his food, may






be valued at so much money; and thus may enter, in one sense,






into Davenant's general article of income or expence; but it does






not follow that any tax can be raised upon such an income.






    To estimate, therefore, the total value of what is the object






of taxation, we must go another way to work. The first article






must be the annual income of all funds. By funds, here, I






understand the capital wealth already made, in opposition to the






produce of industry, which may be considered as the materials of






which such funds are composed. The fund therefore is the






accumulation of savings, which, not having been spent by the






industrious, form a capital of a nature to produce an income,






either from land, or from any other valuable thing. Thus






land-rents, annuities, interest of money, emoluments of offices,






salaries, even wages of servants, in short, every fixed income, I






range in this first article, which I call annual income, produced






from a capital already formed, either real or supposed.






    This may be laid under taxation by a pound-rate or otherwise,






and forms that kind of tax which I call cumulative and arbitrary;






because a man who has any sort of visible revenue, comes under






this general rate, let him have ever so many necessary deductions






out of it, ever so many debts and incumbrances. From such






circumstances, cumulative taxes frequently turn out extremely






burdensome.






    The second object of taxation is upon alienations made for






money. Whenever we come to dispose of money in the purchase of






any thing, the state has an opportunity of exacting a part of it






as a tax; but while it remains hid, it can neither be come at, or






laid under contribution, without extortion or violence.






    All branches of expence may be laid under taxation by






excises, which I call proportional taxes; because a man is never






subjected to them, but in proportion to his expence; and his






expence ought naturally to proceed from his income.






    As for trade, I do not clearly see how the profits of it can






be regularly taxed. In France, indeed, they are taxed under the






first head, and are considered as an income. Such an imposition






is not well judged; because there the materials for making the






fund are taxed as if they were the income of a fund already made.






The savings only out of the profits upon trade, placed so as to






produce a permanent revenue are, what can properly be considered






as a fund: the income therefore of these savings and not the






savings themselves, should come under this branch of taxation.






    Customs are improperly called taxes upon trade. When ill






imposed they may stop trade, or render it less profitable by






diminishing the demand for the goods so taxed; but they can take






nothing from the profits already made.






    In a trading nation, the great branches of commerce produce a






certain determinate profit, subject, I allow, to augmentations






and diminutions, from accidents and circumstances impossible to






be foreseen: and the customs imposed upon exportation and






importation differ from excises more in the method of levying






them than in any thing else.






    Davenant, in my opinion, would have given a better idea of






the sum which taxes might have produced in England, had he






examined the amount of all the branches of revenue, and of all






the species of sale, than in the manner he has done. These two






points known, it would be expedient next to inquire, in what






manner the several articles could be made subject either to






cumulative, or proportional taxes.






    I must now take notice of another passage of Davenant, where






he explains himself upon the question before us: it is in his






fifth discourse upon revenues, where he says,






    'By annual income, we mean the whole that arises in any






country from land and its product, from foreign trade, and






domestic business, as arts, manufactures, &c. and by annual






expence we understand what is of necessity consumed to clothe and






feed the people, or what is necessary for their defence in time






of war, or for their ornament in time of peace: and where the






annual income exceeds the expence there is superlucration






arising, which may be called wealth or national stock. The






revenue of a government is part of this annual income, as






likewise a part of its expence, and where it bears too large a






proportion with the whole, as in France, the common people must






be miserable and burdened with heavy taxes.'






    I must comment a little upon this passage.






    I have no objection to this exposition of the matter; the






ideas are intelligible and clear: but I object against the






application of his doctrine to taxes; because it would lead to






error. Here are my reasons:






    First, Income is called the whole of the earth's productions:






this I may admit to be just, except when we consider income as an






object of taxation. But if we retain the same definition to






express the income of one, for example, who labours the soil for






his own subsistence, as well as of another who labours it as a






trade, the difference in paying their taxes out of it will be






very great. He who draws nothing from the ground but his






physical-necessary, can be laid under no taxation; because he has






no superfluity. And if he be obliged either to give a part of his






crop in tax, or to sell any part of it for money to be paid to






the public, this diminishes his physical-necessary, and forces






him to starve: whereas the other, who exercises agriculture as a






trade, may be obliged to pay a part of his surplus by way of tax






or rent; and still his physical necessary may remain untouched.






    It is for this reason, that in treating of these matters, I






am always at the greatest pains to point out, that nothing can be






the object of taxation, except what is over and above the






physical-necessary of every one.






    In all countries where a land-tax, steuer, taille, or by






whatever name it goes, is established, care must be taken to






prevent the husbandmen from confining their labour to such a






small spot of ground as is barely sufficient to produce their own






physical-necessary, unless when they have a trade to assist them






in paying what the public demands of them.






    From this circumstance, and this only, it happens, that the






land-tax in England is so little burdensome, comparatively to






what it is in many nations of Europe. Lands in England are let in






large portions: nobody will let a farm so small as to be






proportioned to the supplying of the mere physical wants of the






farmer. But in other countries, where the oeconomy is different;






where inheritances in land are constantly divided, as moveables,






among all the children; the lots become so small, that the






proprietor can draw no more from them than his own subsistence;






and then when a land-tax is imposed, this poor little portion






being valued in proportion to what it can produce, as well as the






greatest estate in land, the husbandman is starved, although the






tax demanded of him be laid on in the exact proportion to the






produce of his land, while he that has a surplus is quite easy.






    I would therefore recommend, in countries where this minute






subdivision of lands has taken place, that for the future no lot






under a certain extent or value should be suffered to be divided






among the children, but ordered to be sold, and the price divided






among them; and that the same regulation should be observed upon






the death of such proprietors whose lands are not sufficient to






produce three times the physical-necessary of the labourers. This






would engage a people to exercise agriculture as a trade, and to






give over that trifling husbandry which produces no surplus, and






which involves so many poor people in the oppression of






land-taxes. This regulation never can be recommended in a plan to






be executed all at once: it must be done by degrees, and in






proportion to the progress of industry. The principle is so






evident, that I never found any one who did not immediately agree






to the justness of my observation; although in imposing






land-taxes I have nowhere found it properly attended to.






    Here then is the use of theory; it directs us in practice to






avoid difficulties, which might otherwise be judged






unsurmountable.






    Secondly, I farther observe, that it is a more hurtful error






still to mistake the produce of industry for the taxable income






arising from it, than to mistake the gross produce of land for






the rent: because the profits upon industry bear frequently a






smaller proportion to its produce, than the rents of lands do to






their full fruits.






    The best method of raising money upon the lower classes of






the industrious is rightly to lay their consumption under






proportional taxes, which they may easily draw back; because they






will raise the price of their work proportionally.






    From this we may conclude, contrary to the common opinion,






that the test of well imposed taxes is to raise prices in






proportion. When they are rightly imposed, every one who sells a






commodity which has paid a tax, will draw it back, whether he be






industrious or not. If he consume it, he cannot draw it back, but






by raising the price of his work; which again he cannot do,






unless the tax be made so general as to affect all his






competitors; and unless the consumption he had made be






unavoidable to every one of them.






    When we reflect upon the large quantities of exciseable goods






which are consumed as superfluities, we must conclude that the






rise of prices, daily complained of, proceeds more from our






manners than from the taxes we pay.






    Thirdly, the expence of a people is not merely what is






sufficient to subsist them; but what they consume, either in






fruits or manufactures. Had indeed Davenant computed the value of






this necessary quantity, and deducted it from the income,






according to his acceptation of income, the remainder would have






been a tolerably good representation of what I mean by income, or






taxable fund; because whatever a people consume beyond the






necessary, I consider as a superfluity which may be laid under






taxation.






    Fourthly, I must also differ from him in his idea concerning






superlucration, wealth, or national stock.






    According to him, this is the quantity of income remaining






after the following deductions: First, What is necessary to






clothe and feed the people. Secondly, What is necessary for their






defence in time of war, and ornament in time of peace. But






according to my notions, I must also deduct all which is consumed






in superfluities; for what is consumed, whether necessarily or






superfluously, never can make an article of superlucration,






wealth, or national stock.






    The superlucration then of a nation consists in the






augmentations made upon her stock of every kind, capable of






producing a proportional income: it is the converting into






something durable the well employed time of the inhabitants. In






this sense the new pavement of London, the roads, buildings,






ships, etc. in England, are all articles of superlucration, as






well as the improvement of the lands, and consolidation of the






balance of her trade, which has created that part of the public






funds belonging to natives.






    Every one who has written concerning taxes has endeavoured to






contract the object of them as much as possible: more, I imagine






with a view to ease the public than the people. I have followed






another course. I have been for multiplying the objects of






taxation as much as possible, and for making them more in






proportion to expence than to property or income. But that I may






conform myself in some measure to the ideas of those who have






examined the same subject, I shall propose a tax, which would






fill up the place of every other; and could it be levied, would






be the best perhaps ever thought of.






    It is a tax, at so much per cent upon the sale of every






commodity.













NOTES:













1. The corvée in France is the personal service of all the






labouring classes, for carrying on public works. Were they paid






for in money, it is computed they would amount to no more than






1,200,000 livres a year. This tax was omitted in the account of






the French revenue.













2. The gentlemen of the Monthly Review for August 1767, p. 120,






have proposed an objection to the doctrine here laid down; I






shall therefore insert the passage, and endeavour a






reconciliation of opinions, which is a more laudable attempt,






than the most successful refutation.






    'In the discussion of so difficult and complex a subject as






this of taxes (say these gentlemen) great care should be taken






that the foundation be laid upon solid principles; and that






nothing be admitted upon the authority of the inquirers, because






the smallest error in first principles must lead to great






mistakes and confusion in the subsequent parts of the inquiry.






When our author says that taxes ought to impair the fruits and






not the fund; and represents this as a fundamental principle of






taxation - we should have wished to have seen the reason upon






which this principle is founded; as in our apprehension it wants






much of the clearness of an intuitive truth - And we own it






appears to us that every man whose goods are embarked in the






political vessel, risks the whole; and in equity, as in all other






cases of insurance, ought to pay, in the language of commercial






policies, as interest may appear: which will be in proportion to






the whole risk, and not in proportion to the profits, or fruits.






Those whose funds are the production of artificial society, or






protected by the laws of entail, even against the effect of their






own folly and extravagance, ought, in our opinion, to pay for






their extraordinary care and security, these being benefits which






the laborious man has no share in, and which he lies under no






obligation to support with the fruits of his industry. For this






purpose what our author calls cumulative taxes may with great






justice and propriety be applied.--'






    On these judicious remarks I must observe, that nothing is






more requisite, in the perusal of this work, than a strict






attention to the manner of establishing every principle. This was






my particular care in the composition of it, and every oversight






in this respect will be the object of a judicious criticism.






    I must now examine whether, in this place, I have failed in






exactness, as it is here insinuated; or whether my critics have






misunderstood the meaning of my words. As for the authority of my






opinion, I perfectly agree with them that it should go for






nothing.






    I have said that it is a fundamental principle in taxation






that the fruits not the funds are to be impaired by the tax. In






this I speak strictly in terms of my definition of a tax,






inserted in this very Review, p. 119. A tax it is there said is a






certain contribution of fruits service or money imposed on the






individuals of a state, &c.






    By the words fruits and service, the fund bearing the fruit,






and the person serving, are evidently supposed to be exempted;






and in the paragraph following, the money exacted is said to






comprehend the equivalent given for what may be exacted in the






other two ways. So according to this express definition all






impositions on funds must be classed under a different head from






taxes; and these I have called contributions.






    My reason for excluding in my definition of a tax, all






contributions from funds, such as that made by the Dutch, is that






they cannot, by their nature, be annual and perpetual, as taxes,






which affect growing fruits only, may easily be. Were such






contributions out of property, to be annually levied, over and






above the full extent of the value of the fruits or income; the






contributors would be reduced to beggary; and the taxable fund






itself would in time, become the property of the state. Is it






possible that the authors of the Monthly Review should wish, in






any case, to see taxes carried beyond the extent of any person's






income or profits on his trade and industry? Surely, not: and






therefore I must suppose that they have not rightly understood my






meaning; though I cannot discover where any ambiguity lies.






    When a man pays insurance, as interest may appear, upon a






cargo which runs a risk of being totally lost, this case seems to






be parallel to that of a person who runs the risk of losing his






whole landed estate by a foreign invasion. In this case, indeed,






as in the former, he would no doubt willingly give to the






conqueror one half of his lands to secure the other; but such a






case conveys, I think, no idea of a tax; nor does property, in






any country I know, stand on so precarious a footing as to make






it reasonable.






    Thus far I have said in explanation of my meaning, and in






justification of the principle, or rather of the definition by






which it is implied, that taxes should impair the fruits only,






and not the fund.






    I now willingly agree with the gentlemen of the Review, that






entailed property may very reasonably be taxed higher than any






other, on account of the additional security. But still this






augmentation must fall within the income of the entailed lands;






because, should it exceed it, it would destroy the entail itself,






which makes the fund unalienable. As to funds, which these






gentlemen call the production of Artificial Society, I can say






nothing; I do not understand this term, and I even take it to be






an error of the press.






    Upon the whole, I confess that my anxiety concerning the






opinion of the public, in relation to my inquiries into the






principles of taxation, was, lest they should be found to extend






too far: It gives me a particular satisfaction to find that, by






some, they are not thought to extend far enough.













3. The Taille is properly a land-tax, to which men called noble






are not subjected. The reason of which is, that it was originally






imposed in lieu of such personal military services as were






peculiar to the lower classes.






    The Fourage and Ustencil are laid upon all those who pay the






taille, and are in proportion to it. The first is appropriated






for the subsistence of the cavalry, when they are in quarters;






the last for kettles and small utensils for the infantry.






    The Capitation is the poll-tax. The Dixiemes and Vingtiemes






have been already explained, and tithes are well known to every






one.






    The Industrie is that imposition arbitrarily laid on by the






Intendants of provinces, upon all classes of industrious people,






in proportion to their supposed profits in every branch of






business.













4. This sort of taille is called tariffée; because it is imposed






according to a valuation of the land. It is a late improvement;






but still is exposed to numberless inconveniences, which are






mentioned in the text.













5. The gabelle is a branch of the general farms, and consists of






an excise upon salt. The manufacture of the commodity is in the






hands of the farmers; and they, for a liberty to sell salt at a






certain price, far above the expence of the manufacture, pay to






the King an annual revenue of 28 millions of livres.






    This I call a proportional tax, relatively to consumers;






although in reality no tax-gatherers be employed for the






collection of it, contrary to what is the case of all excises;






which are seldom farmed by government to the manufacturers of the






commodity taxed.






    The traittes, or, as they are otherwise called, the five






great farms, were established by Colbert, when he took away a






multitude of customs paid upon the transportation of goods from






one province to another. They, the traittes foraines at least,






resemble very much our customs, or the duties of tunnage and






poundage, and are let to the farmers general for the sum of 12






millions.






    The tobacco is of the same nature with the salt tax. The






farmers general have the exclusive privilege of selling it at a






price fixed by the King.






    For the farm of the tobacco are paid 15 millions.






    The aides resemble our excises more than those we have






mentioned. They consist in duties upon liquors, either brought






into towns, or sold by retail in public houses; and upon all






articles of food sold in corporations, except grain of every






kind, which is free. They comprehend also a multitude of other






duties superfluous to enumerate.






    They are collected by tax-gatherers at the gates of every






town, who also have access to all public houses, where retail is






laid under additional rates. The aides are farmed at 38,600,000






livres. These were the rates in the farms let in 1755. They have






been since augmented in 1762, as has been observed.













6. When excises are imposed upon any commodity, it is contrary to






all principles in fixing the assize, not to superadd the whole






duty imposed to the former selling price. This however is






sometimes omitted, with an intention to make part of the duty






fall upon the manufacturer, to the ease of the subject. The






consequences are,






    First, The manufacturers blow up the spirit of the people






against the tax, who never would think of making an outcry, were






they not excited to it by the interested motives of the






manufacturers. Were high profits allowed to manufacturers on






imposing the tax, they would be quiet: and if the profits were






afterwards found to be too high, it would then be a popular






measure to reduce the selling price, and also a means of setting






people on the side of government, against the manufacturers, who






are their real tax-gatherers.






    Secondly, It is impossible to compass the end proposed. A






proportional tax, rightly imposed, must be drawn back; and all






attempts to prevent it, occasion only a multiplication of frauds,






and a bad manufacture.






    In fixing assizes upon the manufacturing of goods, which in






different years vary in their price, regard should be had to such






variations; otherwise the manufacturer will be distressed, and






the public will be ill served: in either of which cases, the






people will be animated against such duties.






    The only expedient to share the profits of the manufacturers






of exciseable commodities, is to lay them under some cumulative






tax which they cannot draw back, such as making them pay for a






licence.













7. It must, however, be observed, that the price of beer was not






raised, either by the brewers, or by the victuallers, on account






of the additional malt-duty, 1760.













8. The gabelle, or salt-tax in France, is not levied in every






province; because of certain privileges of exemption, which some






have all along enjoyed.






    This opens a door to the greatest abuse, by smuggling salt






from places where it is free, into places where the tax is






imposed, at many 100 per cent above the value; and obliges the






King to use great severity upon those who are loaded with this






duty.






    The consumption of every family is fixed to a certain






quantity; and if it be found that they have not bought, from the






King's granaries, to the full extent of what is reckoned






necessary for them, it is supposed that the deficiency has been






made up from contraband salt, and the deficiency is exacted.













9. Examples of these kinds of taxes were familiar in former






times. Vassals were obliged to grind in their lord's mill, bake






in his oven, press their wine in the public press of the






territory, etc.






    This was found very useful, in ages when alienation and sale






were little known; but now they are considered as oppressive, and






so I think they are, when compared with proportional taxes, which






take place upon the sale only of the commodity: but still they






are far preferable to many taxes of the cumulative kind.













10. Two gentlemen in France exchange casks of their wine, they






are both obliged to pay a tax upon removing the wine from their






cellar. This duty is called Remuage.













11. A man's rank, in a modern society, seems to be determined






more according to his birth, or to his expence, than according to






his stock,or income.















Book IV













Of Credit and Debts













Part I













Of the Interest of Money













Introduction













    I come now to inquire into the principles of credit; a






subject already introduced in the the 27th chapter of the second






book, where I examined nature of circulation, and pointed out the






principles, which direct a statesman when and how to retard or






accelerate its activity, according as the political interests of






his people may require.






    In that chapter the object was, when and how either to extend






or restrain the use of credit, according to political






circumstances. The inquiry now comes to be, what this credit is;






upon what it is founded; what the various species of it are; what






are the methods of establishing and extending it, while it is in






its infancy and vigour; how to sustain it when it is






overstretched; and last of all, how to let it fall as gently as






possible, when by no human prudence it can be longer supported.






    Many political writers in treating of credit, represent it as






being of a very mysterious nature; owing its establishment to a






confidence not easily accounted for, and disappearing from the






slightest unfavourable circumstances.






    That credit, in its fancy, is of a very delicate nature, I






willingly allow. as also that we have many examples which confirm






the sentiments, of those who believe it to contain, in itself,






something very mysterious: but this proves no more, than that, in






such cases, credit (as I consider it, and as it will appear






really to be) has not been properly established. The cause of






confidence has had nothing in it but opinion, and when this is






the case, credit is but a shadow; and like a thin vapour, it may






be dissipated by the smallest breath of wind.






    They all agree that credit is no more than confidence, but






they do not examine how this confidence is to be established on a






solid foundation.






    The operations of credit are incompatible with the involved






contracts of the law, and with the spirit of intricate






land-securities. The policy of such contracts was analogous to






the manners of the times which gave them birth. Trade is a late






refinement, in most nations of Europe, and industry is still a






later: the beginnings of both are slow, imperceptible, and






obscure. The instruments by which they are promoted, are the






lower classes of a people; the interest of the individuals who






compose them, may appear to some, to be below the attention of a






statesman; and yet it is by the accumulation of their industry






only, that this huge fabric is erected.






    To establish that credit, which is necessary for carrying on






so great a work, a statesman must lend his hand. He must give a






validity to mercantile obligations, which have no name in his






law-books: he must support the weak against the strong: he must






reform the unwieldy procedure of courts of justice: he must






facilitate the sale of property: he must establish the






credibility of merchants' books regularly kept: he must






discourage frauds, and support fair dealing.






    When such a plan is once established, confidence will find a






basis in the property of every individual who profits by it. When






it is not established, credit will appear like a meteor:






intelligent and crafty men will avail themselves of it, and






thereby dazzle the eyes of the public, with gilded schemes of






opulence and prosperity: mankind will fly to industry, confidence






will be established; but as there will be no method of






determining the bounds of this confidence, the promoters of the






scheme will profit of the delusion: confidence will vanish; and






the whole will appear to have been a mystery, a dream. Is not






this a representation of many projects set on foot since the






beginning of this century? What were the South Sea's and






Missisippi's, but an abuse of confidence? Had ever the cause of






confidence been examined into, would ever such extravagant ideas






have arrived at the height they did?






    Credit therefore must have a real, not an imaginary object to






support it; and although I allow that in all operations of






mercantile credit, there must be something left to chance and






accident; yet this chance must bear a due proportion to the






extraordinary profits reasonably to be expected from the






undertaking.






    From this it appears, what an useful speculation it is to






inquire properly into the nature of credit; to deduce with






accuracy the principles upon which it is founded; to banish






mystery from plain reason; to shew how every the most surprizing






effect of credit, whether tending to the advantage, or to the






hurt of society, may easily be accounted for; and, which is the






most useful of all, to point out how such effects may be






foreseen, so as either to be improved or prevented.






    In going through so extensive a subject, as a deduction of






the principles of credit, method is very necessary; and when a






detail is long, subdivisions are very convenient. I have, upon






this account, divided this book into four parts.






    The first shall be set apart for deducing the principles






which regulate the rate of interest; because this is the basis of






the whole.






    The second, for the principles of banking; under which I






shall have an opportunity to unfold the whole doctrine of






domestic circulation.






    The third, for those of exchange. which is equally well






calculated for carrying on foreign circulation; and as to what






regards debts, and the borrowing of money, with all the






consequences which they draw along with them, these important






objects will furnish ample matter for






    The fourth and last part, which shall treat of the principles






of public credit.






    These things premised, I proceed to the definition of credit.




















Chap. I













What Credit is, and on what founded













    Credit is the reasonable expectation; entertained by him who






fulfils his side of any contract, that the other contracting






party will reciprocally make good his engagements.






    To illustrate this, we may say with the lawyers, that as all






contracts may be reduced under one of the following heads, Do ut






des, do ut facias; facio ut des, facio ut facias: so he who






actually gives or performs his part, is the creditor, or the






person who gives credit; and he who promises only to give or to






perform, is the debtor, or the person who receives it.






    Credit, therefore, is no more than a well established






confidence between men, in what relates to the fulfilling of






their engagements. This confidence must be supported by laws, and






established by manners. By laws, the execution of formal






contracts may be enforced: manners, alone, can introduce that






entire confidence which is requisite to form the spirit of a






trading nation.






    Credit, in its fancy, must be supported by statutes, and






enforced by penalties; but when it is once well established,






every recourse had to law, is found to wound the delicacy of its






constitution. For this reason we see, that in certain






nations,(1*) the legislator wisely excludes the ordinary courts






of justice from extending their rigid jurisdiction over






mercantile engagements: they leave to the prudence and good faith






of men versed in commerce, to solve the difficulties which result






from such transactions; because they are to be interpreted more






according to the constant fluctuation of manners, than to the






more permanent institutions of positive law.






    The more the jurisdiction of the statesman is limited; or, in






other words, the less the power of any sovereign is restrained,






by the laws and constitution of the state he governs, the more it






behoves him to avoid every step of administration which can make






his authority be felt in cases where credit is concerned. If he






should happen, for example, to be a debtor himself, he must take






good care never to appear in any other light to his creditor. The






moment he puts on the sovereign, the same moment all confidence






is lost. For these reasons, we have hitherto had few examples (I






might perhaps have said none at all) where credit has been found






permanently solid, under a pure monarchy.






    But we must observe, at the same time, that the stability of






credit is not incompatible with this form of government. At






certain times, we have seen credit make a surprising progress in






France; and it has never suffered any check in that state, but






from acts of power, which I think have proceeded more from






inadvertency, and want of knowledge, than from a formed design of






defrauding creditors. These may be looked on as blunders in






administration; because they have constantly disappointed the






purpose for which they were intended. Let me prove this by some






examples.






    The arret of 21 May 1720, (of which we shall give an account






hereafter), destroyed in one day the whole fabric of credit,






which had been erected in France during the course of three






years; and which in so short a time had mounted to a height






hardly credible. I say, that in one day this inadvertent step






(for no real injury was intended) destroyed the credit of






2,697,048,000 livres of bank notes, (above 120 millions sterling)






and of 624,000 actions of the East India company, which (reckoned






at 5000 livres apiece, the price at which the company had last






sold them) amount to 3,120,000,000 livres, or above 140 millions






sterling. Thus at one blow, and in one day, 260 millions sterling






of paper currency, payable to bearers, were struck out of the






circulation of France; by an useless and inadvertent act of






power, which ruined the nation, and withered the hand which






struck it: an event too little understood, and too little






remembered in that kingdom.






    This plainly appears from their late conduct; for in the end






of 1759, at a time when the credit of France was in so






flourishing a situation as to have enabled her to borrow, that






very year, near 200 millions of livres; and when there was a






prospect of being able to borrow, in the year following, a far






greater sum, the shutting up what they called their caisse






d'amortissement, for the sake of withholding 32 millions of






livres interest due to the creditors, struck all credit with






foreigners dead in one instant.






    These examples shew what fatal consequences follow a






misjudged exercise of power in matters of credit.






    On the other hand, the rapid progress of credit in France






before the Missisippi, and the stability of it from 1726 to the






year 1759, abundantly proves, that no two things are more






compatible than monarchy and confidence. All that is wanting is






the establishment of one maxim in government; to wit, that the






King's power is never to extend so far, as to alter the smallest






article of such contracts as have been made with those who have






lent money for the service of the state.






    Maxims in government bind the monarch and the legislature, as






laws bind subjects and subordinate magistrates: the one and the






other ought to be held inviolable, so far as they regard credit;






or confidence will be precarious.






    What has supported the credit of Great Britain, but the maxim






constantly adhered to, that the public faith pledged to her






creditors is to be inviolable?






    Does any one doubt, but the legislature of this nation may






spunge out the public debts, with as much ease as a King of






France? But in the one kingdom, the whole nation must be






consulted as to the propriety of such a step; in the other, it






may be done at the instigation of a single person, ignorant of






the consequences: but I hope to make it appear, before the






conclusion of this book, that it is impossible to form a






supposition, by which a state can be benefitted by deliberately






departing, for one moment, from the faith of her engagements. A






national bankruptcy may no doubt happen, and become irreparable;






but this must be when the state is emerging from a signal






calamity, after having been involved in ruin and confusion.






    Confidence, then, is the soul and essence of credit; and in






every modification of it, we shall constantly find it built on






this basis: but this confidence must have for its object a






willingness and a capacity in the debtor to fulfil his






obligations.













Chap. II













Of the Nature of Obligations to be performed, in consequence of






Credit given; and of what is meant by the terms regorging and






stagnating of money













    We have already said, that all obligations contracted with a






view to be performed in future time, consist in doing or giving






something in consideration of something done or given.






    When actions only are stipulated in contracts, credit (in a






strict acceptation of the term) is little concerned; because no






adequate security can be given for performing an action: such






contracts stand wholly upon the willingness and capacity of






acting, which depend more upon the person than upon the faculties






of the debtor. To supply this defect, we see penalties usually






stipulated in such cases; which reduce those contracts to an






alternative obligation of either doing or giving.






    We shall therefore throw out the consideration of the first






altogether, as being foreign to our purpose; and adhere to the






later, which is the true object of credit. Again:






    In all obligations to give any particular thing, there is






constantly implied an alternative also; to wit, either the thing






stipulated, or the value (id quod interest, according to the






lawyers): this must be relative to money; which is the common






price of all things in commerce among men.






    Thus we have brought credit to the object under which we are






to consider it, viz. the obligation to pay money, either for






value received, or for some consideration relative to the






parties, which may be the just ground of a contract.






    Credit and debts are therefore inseparable, because they






necessarily imply each other; and very properly come to be






examined together in this book.






    When money is to be paid at a distant period of time, the






obligation may either be, for one precise sum; or for that sum






with interest, during the interval between contracting and






fulfilling the obligation.






    The lending of money without interest, was very common before






the introduction of trade and industry. Money then was considered






as a barren stock, incapable of producing fruit; and whenever the






quantity of it, in any country, exceeded the uses of circulation,






the remainder was locked up in treasures: in which case, the






exacting of interest for it appeared unreasonable.






    Things are now changed: no money is ever locked up; and when






borrowed, the regular payment of interest for it, is as essential






to the obtaining of credit, as the confidence of being repaid the






capital. These periodical payments are a constant corroboration






of this confidence; so that it may be said with truth, that he






who can give good security, to pay to perpetuity, a regular






interest for money, will obtain credit for any sum, although it






should appear evident, that he never can be in a capacity to






refund the capital.






    The reason of this may be gathered from the principles






already deduced, and from the plan of our modern oeconomy.






    We have said in the second book, that the current money of a






country is always in proportion to the trade, industry,






consumption, and alienation, which regularly take place in it;






and when it happens that the money already in the country is not






sufficient for carrying on these purposes, a part of the solid






property, equal to the deficiency, may be melted down (as we have






called it) and made to circulate in paper: that as soon again as






this paper augments beyond this proportion, a part of what was






before in circulation, must return upon the debtor in the paper,






and be realized anew.






    Let us now consider what is understood by realized. By this






term is meant, that the regorging paper, or that quantity of






currency which a nation possesses over and above what is






necessary for its circulation, must be turned into some shape






whereby it may produce an income; for it is now a maxim, that no






money is to be suffered to remain useless to the proprietor of






it.(2*)






    When this regorging or stagnating paper then comes upon the






debtor in it, if he should pay the value of it in hard specie,






how would the condition of the creditor be improved?






    We suppose the credit of the paper equal to the credit of the






coin within the country. We also suppose that the paper has so






stagnated in the hands of the bearer, that he can neither lend






it, or purchase with it any species of solid property, within the






country, capable to produce an income: for if any way of






disposing it usefully can be found, this circumstance will prove






that circulation is not overstocked at that time; consequently,






the money does not regorge. But let us suppose that it does






regorge: then he must either oblige the debtor in the paper to






pay in coin, that he may lock it up in his coffer (as was the






case of old); or he must send his coin to other countries, where






circulation is not fully stocked, and where an income may be






bought with it. This constantly happens when circulation is






either overstocked, or when the quantity of circulation begins to






diminish in a country.






    Let me next suppose, that in a country overstocked with






money, a sudden demand for it, far beyond the ordinary rate of






circulation, shall occur: suppose a war to break out, which






absorbs, in a short time, more money than, perhaps, all the coin






and all the paper can supply. The state upon this occasion






imposes a tax, which, let me suppose, may produce a sum equal to






the interest of the money required. Is it not very certain, that






such persons who found a difficulty in placing their regorging






capitals, will be better pleased to purchase a part of this






annual interest, than to lend it to any person who might pay it






back in a short time; by which repayment the lender would again






be thrown into the same inconvenience as before, of finding a






proper out-let for it? This is a way of realizing superfluous






money, more effectual than turning it into gold or silver.






    When I speak, therefore, of realizing paper money, I






understand either the converting of it into gold and silver,






which is the money of the world; or the placing of it in such a






way as to produce a perpetual fund of annual interest.






    Were public borrowing, therefore, to work the effect of






bringing the money in circulation below the proportion required






for carrying on alienation, trade, etc. then an obligation to






repay the capital would be necessary, and complaints would be






heard against the state for not paying off their debts; because






thereby the progress of industry would be prevented. But when the






operations of credit are allowed to introduce a method of






creating money anew, in proportion as trade and industry shall






demand it, then the state has no occasion to pay back the






capitals; because the public creditors enjoy far better






conditions in their annual income, than if their capitals were






refunded.






    Let me illustrate this by an example.






    We must take it for granted, that in every nation in Europe,






there is a sum in circulation, nearly equal to the alienation,






trade, etc. which goes on actually at the time. We must also take






it for granted, that the amount of all debts whatsoever, public






and private, paying interest to the class of creditors, is every






where a very great sum: now let us suppose, that the class of






debtors should be enabled (no matter by what means) to pay off






what they owe, in coin newly acquired; would not, by the






supposition, a sum of the old currency nearly equal to this coin






newly acquired, immediately fall into stagnation, and would it






not be impossible to draw any income from this stagnated coin?






This was exactly the case of old. The coin far exceeded the uses






of circulation, and stagnated in treasures. Wars brought it out;






because then circulation augmented; peace again cutting off these






extraordinary demands, the coin stagnated again, and returned to






the treasures.






    What is the case at present?






    Money and coin are never found to surpass the uses of






circulation in commercial countries. When war comes, which






demands an extraordinary supply, recourse is had to borrowing






upon interest; not to treasures: and the desire of purchasing






this interest, which we call an annuity, draws treasures even






from the enemies of those nations who have the best credit.






Again, at the end of a war, in place of an empty treasury, as was






the case of old, we find a huge sum of public debts. As oeconomy






filled the treasury then, so oeconomy must pay off the debts now.






    From what has been said, it plainly appears, that interest is






now become so absolutely essential to credit, that it may be






considered as the principal requisite and basis on which the






whole fabric stands: we shall therefore begin by examining the






origin and nature of interest, and also the principles which






influence the rate, and regulate the fluctuations of it.













Chap. III













Of the Interest of Money













    I shall leave it to divines and causists to determine how far






the exacting of interest for money is lawful, according to the






principles of our religion.






    It was forbidden to the Jews, by the laws of Moses, to lend






at interest to their brethren, but it was permitted to lend to






strangers. Deut. chap. xxiii, ver. 19, 20. This is one of the






wisest political institutions to be met with in so remote






antiquity, as we shall hereafter explain.






    In the primitive ages of christianity, the lending of money






at interest was certainly reputed to be unlawful on most






occasions. That spirit of charity to all who were in want, was so






worked in with the doctrine of our religion, that a borrower was






constantly considered to be in that situation. Trade was little






known; trading men were generally ill looked upon; and those who






debated so far from the spirit of the times, as to think of






accumulating wealth by the use of their money, commonly






degenerated into usurers.






    In the middle centuries, when a mistaken zeal animated






christianity with a most ungodly thirst for the blood of






infidels, the Jews were, in every nation in Europe, almost the






only money-lenders. This circumstance still more engaged the






church to dart her thunder against this practice; and the loan






upon interest never took root among christians, until a spirit of






trade and industry sprung up in Italy in the time of the






Lombards, and from thence spread itself, through the channel of






the Hans-towns, over several nations.






    Then the church began to open her eyes and saw the expediency






of introducing many modifications, in order to limit the general






anathema which she had denounced against the whole class of






money-lenders. At one time it was declared lawful to lend at






interest, when the capital shared any risque in the hands of the






borrower; at another, it was found allowable, when the capital






was not demandable from the debtor, while he paid the interest;






again, it was permitted, when the debtor was declared by sentence






of a judge, to be in mora in acquitting his obligation: at last,






it was permitted on bills of exchange. In short, in most Roman






catholic countries, interest is now permitted in every interest






for case almost, except in obligations including a stipulation of






sums demandable at any time after the term of payment; and it is






as yet no where considered to be so essential to loan, as to be






due on all debts whatsoever; not even upon obligations payable on






demand.






    Expediency and the good of society (politically speaking) are






the only rule for judging, when the loan upon interest should be






permitted, when forbidden. While people borrowed in order only to






procure a circulating equivalent for providing their necessaries,






until they could have time to dispose of their effects; and while






there was seldom any certain profit to be made by the use of the






money borrowed, as now, by turning it into trade, it was very






natural to consider the lender in an unfavourable light; because






it was supposed that his money, had it not been lent, must have






remained locked up in his coffers. But at present, when we see so






many people employed in providing stores of necessaries for






others, which, without money, cannot be done; were the loan upon






interest forbidden, it would have the effect of locking up the






very instrument (money) which is necessary for supplying the






wants of the society. The loan, therefore, upon interest, as






society now stands composed, is established, not in favour of the






lenders, but of the whole community; and taking the matter in






this light, no one, I suppose, will pretend that what is






beneficial to a whole society should be forbidden, because of its






being proportionably advantageous to some particular members of






it.






    If it be then allowed, that the loan upon interest is a good






political institution, relatively to the present situation of






European societies, the next question is, to determine a proper






standard for it, so as to avoid the oppression of usurers, on one






hand, and on the other, to allow such a reasonable profit to the






lender, as may engage him to throw his money into circulation for






the common advantage.






    This question leads us directly to the examination of the






principles which regulate the rate of interest; and if we can






discover a certain rule, arising from the nature of things, and






from the principles of commerce, which may direct a statesman how






to establish a proper regulation in this matter, we may conclude






with certainty concerning the exact limits, between unlawful and






pinching usury, exacted by a vicious set of men, who profit of






the distress of individuals; and that reasonable equivalent which






men have a right to expect for the use of their money, lent for






carrying on the circulation of trade, and the employment of the






lower classes of a people who must subsist by their industry or






labour.













Chap. IV













Of the Principles which regulate the Rate of Interest













    We must now recal to mind the principles of demand and






competition, so fully deduced in the second book, in order to






answer the following question, viz.






    What is the principle which regulates, at all times, the just






and adequate rate of interest for money, in any particular state?






    I answer, That at all times, there is in every state a






certain number of persons who have occasion to borrow money, and






a certain number of persons who desire to lend: there is also a






certain sum of money demanded by the borrowers, and a certain sum






offered to be lent. The borrowers desire to fix the interest as






low as they can; the lenders seek, from a like principle of






self-interest, to carry the rate of it as high as they can.






    From this combination of interests arises a double






competition, which fluctuates between the two parties. If more be






demanded to be borrowed, than there is found to be lent, the






competition will take place among the borrowers. Such among them






as have the most pressing occasion for money, will offer the






highest interest, and will be preferred. If, on the contrary, the






money to be lent exceed the demand of the borrowers, the






competition will be upon the other side. Such of the lenders, as






have the most pressing occasion to draw an interest for their






money, will offer it at the lowest interest, and this offer will






be accepted.






    I need not launch out into a repetition of what has been said






concerning the influence of double competition, in fixing the






price of commodities; as I suppose these principles to be now






well understood, and well retained, by those who read this






chapter; I shall therefore confine myself here to what is






peculiar to the demand for money.






    The price of commodities is extremely fluctuating: they are






every one calculated for particular uses; money serves every






purpose. Commodities, though of the same kind, differ in






goodness: money is all, or ought to be all of the same value,






relatively to its denominations. Hence the price of money (which






is what we express by the term interest) is susceptible of a far






greater stability and uniformity, than the price of any other






thing.






    We have shewn in the 28th chapter of the second book, in






examining the principles which regulate the price of subsistence,






that the only thing which can fix a standard for it, is frequent






and familiar alienation. The same holds true of money. Were we to






suppose a state, where borrowing and lending are not common, and






where the laws fix no determinate interest for money, it would






hardly be possible to ascertain the rate of it at any time. This






was the case of old.






    Before the reign of Henry VIII of England, in 1545, there was






no statute regulating the rate of interest, in that kingdom. The






reason is very plain. In those days there was little circulation,






and the borrowing of money upon interest was considered as a






mortal sin. The consequence of this was, that usurers, having






nothing but conscience to restrain them, carried the price of






their money to a level with the pressing occasion of






spendthrifts, while others, from friendship, lent for no interest






at all. Henry fixed the rate of interest at 10 per cent and his






contemporary, Francis I of France, in 1522, (who was the first






who borrowed money in a regular manner upon the townhouse of






Paris) fixed the interest at the 12th penny, that is, at 8 1/3






per cent.






    In those days, it was impossible for a statesman to determine






any just rate for interest; and accordingly we find history






filled with the extortion of usurers, on one hand, and the






violence and injustice of princes and ministers towards those who






had lent them money, on the other: was it then any wonder, that






lending at interest was universally cried out against? It really






produced very little good, and was the cause of manifold






calamities to a state. When the Prince borrowed, it was in the






most urgent distress: those who had money, foresaw the danger of






being plundered if they refused to lend it to him, and of being






defrauded as soon as the public distress was over: for this






reason they exacted the most exorbitant interest: the consequence






was, that the people were loaded with the most grievous taxes,






and the tax-gatherers were the Prince's creditors, to whom such






taxes were assigned.






    In our days, trade, industry, and a call for money, enable






the borrower to enrich himself, to supply the wants of the state,






and to pay his interest regularly.






    If we compare the two situations, we shall find every






disadvantage attending the former, and every advantage connected






with the latter.






    Without good faith their can be no credit; without credit






there can be no borrowing of money, no trade, no industry, no






circulation, no bread for the lower classes, no luxury, not even






the conveniences of life, for the rich. Under these






circumstances, there can be no rule for the rate of interest;






because borrowing cannot be frequent and familiar.






    In proportion, therefore, as borrowing becomes frequent and






familiar, the rule for fixing the rate of a legal interest






becomes more practicable to a statesman. Let me make a step






farther.






    We have said, that it is the fluctuation of the double






competition between borrowers and lenders, which occasions the






rise and fall of the rate of interest; I must now point out the






principles which occasion this fluctuation.






    Were the interests of trade and industry so exactly






established, as to produce the same profit on every branch of






them, the money borrowed for carrying them on, would naturally be






taken at the same rate; but this is not the case: some branches






afford more, some less profit. In proportion, therefore, to the






advantages to be reaped from borrowed money, the borrowers may






offer more or less for the use of it.






    Besides the class of men who borrow in order to profit by the






loan, there is another class, who borrow in order to dissipate.






The first class never can offer an interest which exceeds the






proportion of their gains: the second class, finding nothing but






want of credit to limit their expence, become a prey to usurers.






Were it not then upon account of these last, there would be no






occasion for a statute to regulate the rate of interest. The






profits on trade would strike an average among the industrious






classes; and this average would fall and rise, in proportion to






the flourishing or decay of commerce.






    Let us next examine the principles which prevent the monied






men from committing extortions, and which oblige them to lend






their money for that rate of interest which is in proportion to






the profits upon trade and industry.






    In every country there is found a sum of money (that is, of






circulating value, no matter whether coin or paper) proportioned






to the trade and industry of it. How this sum is determined, and






how it is made to augment and diminish in proportion to industry,






we have already explained in the 26th chapter of the second book:






we are now to examine some of the consequences which result from






the accidental stagnation of any part of it to the prejudice of






alienation; and we must shew how the loan upon interest is the






means of throwing it again into circulation.






    There are in every state some who spend more, and some who






spend less than their income. What is not spent must stagnate; or






must be lent to those who spend more than the produce of their






own funds. Were the first class found so to preponderate, as to






require more money to borrow than all that is to be lent, the






consequence would be, to prevent the borrowing of merchants; to






raise interest so high as to extinguish trade; and to destroy






industry; and these resources coming to fail, foreign commodities






would be brought in, while exportation would be stopped, money






would disappear, and all would fall into decay.






    This, I believe, is a case which seldom happens; because the






rise of interest (as states are now formed) has so much the






effect of depreciating the value of every species of solid






property, that spendthrifts are quickly stripped of it, by the






growing accumulation of that canker worm, interest; their ruin






terrifies many from following so hurtful an example, and their






property falling into the hands of the other class, who spend






less than their income; these new possessors introduce, by their






example, a more frugal set of manners. This may be the case in






countries where trade and industry have been introduced; and






where the operations of credit have been able to draw into






circulation a large quantity of solid property, according to the






principles deduced in the chapter above referred to. But in






nations of idleness, who circulate their coin only, and who are






deprived of the resource of credit; high interest prevents them






from emerging out of their sloth, and the little trade they have,






continues to produce great profits, which are incompatible with






foreign commerce: this may, indeed, make the coin they have to






circulate for home-consumption, but it can bring no augmentation






of wealth from abroad.






    On the other hand, when trade and industry flourish, and when






a monied interest is formed, in consequence of the melting down






of solid property, and still more in consequence of a State's






contracting great debts; were the money-lenders to attempt to






raise the rate of interest to the standard of the spendthrift,






the demands of trade, etc, would soon be cut off: the stagnation






would then swell so fast in their hands, that it would in a






manner choak them, and in a little time interest would fall to






nothing. Whereas by contenting themselves with the standard of






trade, the largest supplies (provided for the borrowers) easily






find a vent, without raising the rate of interest so high as to






be hurtful to any interest within the state.






    Add to this, that the advantage of realizing, into lands, so






unstable a property as money, must naturally throw the






proprietors of the money into a competition for the lands which






dissipation brings to market; thus, by rising the value of lands,






the monied men, with their own hands, defeat the consequences of






the dissipation of spendthrifts, and hurt their own interest, to






wit, the rise of the price of money. From a combination of these






circumstances, lenders become obliged to part with their money at






that rate of interest which is the most consistent with that good






of commerce.






    We have hitherto preserved our combinations as simple as






possible. We have suggested no extrinsic obstacle to borrowing






and lending. If money be to be lent, and if people be found who






incline to borrow, we have taken it for granted, that circulation






will go on; and that the stagnations in the hands of the lenders,






will find a ready vent by the dissipation of the other class: we






must now make still a step farther.






    The spendthrifts must have credit; that is, they must have it






in their power to repay with interest what they have borrowed:






any impediment to credit, will have the effect either of






diminishing the demand for money, and consequently of lowering






the rate of interest, or of introducing unlawful usury. If we






suppose the rate of interest well determined, and usury prevented






by a regular execution of good laws, it is very certain, that a






statesman by hurting the credit of extravagant people, will keep






the rate of interest within due bounds.






    If, therefore, the laws of any country, in our days, appear






defective, as to the regulation of securities for money lent upon






the mortgage of solid property, while the rate of interest stands






higher than is consistent with the good of trade, and with public






credit; we should be slow in finding fault with such a defect.






The motives of statesmen lie very deep; and it is not always






proper to explain them. An example of such defects are entails






upon lands, and the want of proper registers for mortgages.






    Did the dissipation of landed men tend to promote foreign






trade, such clogs would be pernicious: but if the tendency of






dissipation be to promote domestic luxury only, and thereby to






raise the price of labour and industry, the case is widely






different. This observation is merely incidental: our object at






present extends no farther than to shew, that the dissipation of






landed men, and the credit they have to borrow money, influence,






not a little, the rate of interest in every modern state.






    These are the general principles which, arising from things






themselves, without the interposition of a statesman, tend to






regulate the rate of interest in commercial nations.













Chap. V













Of the Regulation of Interest by Statute













    From the principles deduced the preceding chapter, we have






seen how, without the aid of any law, the interest of money, in a






trading nation, becomes determined, from natural causes, and from






the irresistible effects of competition.






    But as there is no country in the world so entirely given to






commerce, as not to contain great numbers of people, who are






totally unacquainted with it, some regulation with respect to the






rate of interest becomes necessary in order to restrain, on one






hand, the frenzy of those, who, listening to nothing but the






violence of their passions, are willing to procure money at any






rate for the gratification of them, let the political






consequences of their dissipation prove ever so hurtful to the






state; and on the other, to protect those who, from necessity,






may be obliged to submit to the heavy oppression of their






usurious creditors.






    Laws restraining usury, are directly calculated for the sake






of those two classes, not engaged in commerce, and indirectly






calculated for commerce itself; which otherwise might receive a






wound through their sides.






    In entering upon the subject mentioned in the title of this






chapter, I think we may agree in this, that hitherto all






regulations made concerning interest, have been calculated either






for bringing it down, or for preventing its rise. The distress






which may come upon a state, by its falling too low, is a






phaenomenon which has not yet manifested itself in any modern






state, by any symptom I can at present recollect.






    Now if it be true, as I think it has been proved, that the






operations of demand and competition work irresistible effects in






determining the rate of interest in commercial states; the






statesman who is about to make a regulation, must keep these






principles constantly in his eye.






    If we examine the writings of those who have treated of this






subject with intelligence (among whom, I think, Sir Josiah Child






has a right to stand in the foremost rank), we shall find very






little attention bestowed upon that most necessary and ruling






principle, competition.






    He lays it down as an axiom, that low interest is the soul of






trade, in which he is certainly right; but he seems to think,






that it is in the power of a legislature, by statute, to bring






interest down to that level which is most advantageous to trade;






and in this I differ from him. I must do him the justice to say,






that he no where directly affirms this proposition; but by






suggesting none of the inconveniences which may follow upon an






arbitrary reduction of interest by statute, he leaves his reader






at liberty to suppose, that the lowering of it is solely in the






hands of a statesman.






    It is very plain, from the history he has given us of the






successive rates of interest in England, from 10 to 6 per cent






that without the interposition of statutes, such diminutions






would not, in that period, have taken place, from the principle






of competition: but I am not so clear that, at this time, when






trade is so well understood, and credit so generally established






in many nations of Europe, that a like administration would work






effects equally advantageous.






    It is with great diffidence I presume to differ from Child






upon this subject; and I find a sensible satisfaction in






perceiving that upon the whole, my principles bring me so very






near to his sentiments on this matter.






    The strong arguments in favour of Child's opinion, are






grounded upon facts. He says, that when interest was brought down






by statute, 1625, from 10 to 8 per cent instead of producing any






bad effect, it had that of bringing it still lower immediately






afterwards; and the same thing happened, anno 1650, when it was






reduced a second time by statute, from 8 to 6 per cent, at which






rate it stood at the time he wrote. These facts I give credit to,






and shall now account for them, from the consequences of sudden






revolutions.






    When a law is made for the reduction of interest, all debtors






immediately profit by it. Upon this, the creditors must either






submit, or call in their capitals. If they submit, land






immediately rises in its value. If they call in their capitals,






they must have an outlet for lending them again, beyond the






limits of the jurisdiction of the legislature. Now this outlet






was not then to be found; because credit was no where well






established, except in Holland, where interest was still lower.






    They were, therefore, obliged to submit, and thus interest






was violently brought down by statute; and a great advantage






resulted from it to the commercial interests of England.






    The subsequent fall of interest, in the natural way, is thus






easily accounted for.






    The consequence of lowering the interest, was, that the price






of land rose several years in purchase: the landed men, who had






long groaned under the heavy interest of 10 per cent finding






their lands rise from 12 years' purchase to 15, upon reducing the






interest to 8 per cent sold off part of their lands, and cleared






themselves. The natural consequence of this was, to make money






regorge in the hands of the monied men; to diminish the number of






borrowers; and consequently, to bring the rate of interest still






lower.






    One sudden revolution produces another. When interest is






brought down by statute, the price of land must rise by a jerk;






and landed men will suddenly profit of the change in their






favour. When it falls gently, by a natural revolution in the






state of demand, the effects are more insensible; the sharper






sighted only profit of it; others, from expectation of a still






greater rise in the price of their lands, neglect to sell in the






proper point of time; and may perhaps be disappointed from a new






fluctuation in favour of money. This is at present actually the






case in Great Britain, since the peace of 1762. I write in 1764.






    These facts speak strongly in favour of Child's opinion,






namely, that it is expedient to have recourse directly to the






statute, whenever there is a prospect of advancing the interests






of trade by a reduction of interest.






    It is impossible to reply to matters of fact: all, therefore,






I have to allege in favour of my own opinion, is, that it is more






consistent with the very principles in which both Child and I






agree; it implies no sudden revolution, and will, in a short






time, operate the same effect.






    The method of proceeding, according to my principles, is






shortly this:






    Since it is agreed on all hands, that low interest is the






soul of trade, and the firmest basis of public credit; that it






rises in proportion to the demand of borrowers, and sinks in






proportion as money is made to regorge in the hands of the monied






interest;






    The statesman should set out by such steps of administration






as will discourage borrowing in those who employ their money in






prodigality and dissipation, as far as may be consistent with the






interest of the lower classes employed in supplying home






consumption, according to the principles laid down in the second






book. He should abstain from borrowing himself, and even from






creating new outlets for money, except from the most cogent






motives. By this he will, in a short time, gently reduce the rate






of interest. Then by statute he may bring it down a little, but






not so very low as the foregoing operations may have reduced it;






contenting himself with having farther restricted the extent of






the ordinary fluctuations.






    As for example: let us suppose interest limited by law to 5






per cent. and that by good management the state may be enabled to






borrow easily at 3 per cent. I believe there would result a






notable advantage, in reducing the legal rate to 4 per cent and






were it brought down to 3 per cent there might follow a very






great inconvenience to landed men, in case a war should suddenly






occasion a revolution in favour of money.






    The difference then between Child and me, is, that I am more






scrupulous than he, in introducing restraint into political






oeconomy; and my only reason against applying the statute, as he






proposes, is for fear of the immediate bad effects which might






follow (in many ways impossible to be foreseen) upon a sudden and






violent revolution, in a point so excessively delicate as public






credit.






    In his days, credit was not so well established, nor was it






stretched as at present: it was more accustomed to violent






shocks, and could bear a rougher treatment. But in order to come






the better to a thorough knowledge of this matter, let us examine






what might be the consequence, if Great Britain should, at this






time, bring down, by statute, the rate of interest below the






level of the stocks, which I take to be the best rule for






determining the present value of money; and this is also the best






method of examining the expediency of Child's method of reducing






interest, under the present state of all our political






circumstances.













Chap. VI













What would be the Consequence of reducing, by a British Statue,






the legal Interest of Money below the present level of the






Stocks?













    When Great Britain borrows money upon the public faith, the






rate of interest is always stipulated, and these stipulations






must be religiously fulfilled, or credit will be at an end.






    The regulations then proposed to be made, must refer to






contracts of loan entered into by private parties only.






    The current value of money, I think, is best to be determined






by the price of stocks. If a 4 per cent sells at par, money may






be said to be then at 4 per cent. If the same stock fall to 89,






then the value of money rises to near 4 1/2: if the same stock






rise to 114, then the value of money falls to about 3 1/2; and so






in proportion.






    According, therefore, as stock is found to rise, the price of






money falls, and vice versa.






    Suppose, then, the price of money to be at 4 per cent and






that government should pass a law, forbidding any man to lend at






above 3 per cent what would be the consequence? This is exactly






the expedient proposed by Child: money then was at 6 per cent and






he proposes, by a law, to bring it, all at once, to 4 per cent






without alleging that money was then commonly got by private






convention at so low a rate.






    Would not the consequence be, that the creditors of private






people would demand their money, in order to get 4 per cent in






buying stock, and would not this additional demand for stocks






make them rise? I answer in the affirmative, unless money could






be employed abroad, so as to produce at least 4 per cent to the






lenders, free of all charge of commission, etc. If it could not,






I have little doubt, but that money would soon fall to the legal






interest of 3 per cent land would rise to 40 years purchase; and






landed men would profit of the rise, as Child says was the case






in his time. The whole inconvenience would be limited to the






immediate effects of the sudden revolution; which would occasion






so great a demand upon the landed interest for the capitals due






by them as to reduce them to an utter incapacity of answering it.






This might be, in some measure, prevented, by a clause in the






act, allowing a certain time for the liquidation of their debts.






But who will pretend to foretell the immediate consequences of so






great a stagnation of credit, and borrowing on land security? The






purses of all monied people, would, for some time at least, be






fast shut against their demand. What a shock again, would this be






to all inland trade, what a discouragement to all the






manufacturing interest, what distress upon all creditors for






accounts furnished, and upon those who supply daily wants! I






think, that although in a year or two, the first effects might






come to disappear, and a notable advantage result, in the main,






to the commercial interest of Great Britain, yet the distress in






the interval might prove so hurtful, as to render it quite






intolerable. The common people who live by the luxury of the






rich, in the city of London, and who are constantly actuated by






the immediate feelings of present inconveniences, might lose all






patience; and being blown into a ferment, by the address of the






monied interest (whose condition would be made to suffer by the






scheme) might throw the state into confusion, and even impress






the nation with a belief, that high interest for money, instead






of being hurtful, was essential to their prosperity.






    I have said above, that if we suppose that the money drawn






from debtors, could not be placed abroad, free of all deductions,






at a rate equal to the then value of money (supposed for the sake






of an example, to be at 4 per cent), then money would fall to 3






per cent and the stocks would rise in proportion.






    But let us suppose (what perhaps is the matter of fact) that






the extensive operations of trade and credit, do actually fix an






average for the price of stocks, from the value of money in other






nations in Europe. Would not then the consequence of bringing






down the rate of legal interest, below this level, be, to send






out of the kingdom all the money now circulating on private






security, real and personal? Would not this destroy all private






credit at one blow? Would it not have the effect of preventing,






among individuals, the loan upon interest altogether? What would






become of the bank of England, and all other banks, whose paper






in circulation is all in the hands of private people? Is not






every man who has a bank note, a creditor on the bank? And would






not the same interest which moved other creditors to exact their






debts, under such circumstances, also move many holders of bank






notes to demand payment of them? Would not a run of this nature,






for a few weeks only, throw the whole nation into the most






dreadful distress? May we not even suppose, that upon such an






occasion, the monied interest (from a certainty of disappointing






the intention of government in making the law) might form a






concert among themselves to lock up their money, even although it






should remain dead in their hands for a few months? What would






then become of the improvement of land? Is there an industrious






farmer any where to be met with, who does not borrow money, which






he can so profitably turn to account upon his farm, even though






he receive it at the highest legal interest? These and many more






inconveniences might manifest themselves, were government to






force down the value of money, beyond the ordinary operations of






demand and competition: and to what purpose have recourse to






authority, when it is most certain, that without any such






expedient the same end may be compassed?






    If it be true, as I believe it is, that the funds, or public






debts of a state where credit is well established, are commonly






negotiated abroad; there must, from such negotiations result an






average for the value of money, by the operations of credit over






the commercial world: and if it be true, that no law can be






framed so as to restrain mercantile people, and those who trade






in money, from turning it to the best account; then all that






should be proposed by government, is, to preserve the value of it






at home, within this standard. For which purpose, nothing more is






necessary than to prevent the competition of the dissipating






class of inhabitants, from disturbing the rate which commerce may






establish from time to time. This is accomplished by the methods






above hinted at, and which in the next chapter shall be more






largely insisted on. If, by prudent management, the conventional






rate of interest, can thus be brought below the legal, then there






may be no harm in diminishing the latter by statue, not however






quite so low as the conventional standard; but so as to leave a






reasonable latitude for gentle fluctuations above it. From what I






have said, I still think I had reason to object to Child's plan






for forcing down the interest of money by statute: and had he






lived to the present time, I am persuaded he would have come into






this opinion.













Chap. VII













Methods of bringing down the Rate of Interest, in Consequence of






the Principles of Demand and Competition













    I hope the arguments used in the foregoing chapter will not






be construed as an apology for the high interest of money.






    I entirely agree with Sir Josiah Child, that low interest is






the soul of trade; the most active principle for promoting






industry, and the improvement of land; and a requisite, without






which it is hardly possible that foreign commerce can long be






supported.






    This proposition I take to be at this time universally






admitted to be true; and did there remain, concerning it, the






least doubt in the mind of any one, the writings of many, much






better qualified than I can pretend to be, and among the rest






those of the author just now cited, are sufficiently capable to






remove it. I shall not therefore trouble my reader with a chapter






upon this head, but only observe, that the terms high and low are






constantly relative. Here the relation must be understood to






regard other states, because when we speak of a rate of interest,






we are supposed to mean something general in the country we are






speaking of: accordingly, if we could suppose that, within the






same state, the rate of interest should be lower in one city than






any where else, this circumstance would give an advantage to such






a city in all its mercantile operations.






    I must farther observe, for the sake of connecting this part






of our subject with our general plan, that the low interest for






money is most essential to such states as carry on the most






extensive foreign commerce.






    In the infancy of industry, and before trade comes to be






established, it is very natural that the coin of the country






should be found in a great measure locked up in treasures: high






interest tends to bring it forth, and in this respect works a






good effect.






    In proportion as alienation augments, money may be






multiplied, by the melting down of solid property, as has been






explained; and then the business of a statesman will be to






contrive expedients for bringing the rate of it as low as






possible, in order to support foreign trade, and to rival all






neighbouring nations, where interest is higher. When foreign






trade again comes to decline, from the multiplication of abuses






introduced by luxury, low interest still continues to be useful,






for supporting public credit, so necessary for defending a nation






against her enemies.






    If money consisted merely in the precious metals, which are






not to be found in every country, but must be purchased with the






produce of industry, and brought from far; and if no other






expedient could be fallen upon to supply their place for the uses






of circulation; then the possessors of these metals would in a






manner be masters to establish for the use of them what rate of






interest they thought fit.






    But if this be not the case, and if money can be made of






paper, to the value of all the solid property of a nation, (as






far as occasion is found for it, by the owners of that property,)






the use of the metals will be in a manner reduced to that of






serving as a standard, for ascertaining the value of the






denominations of money of accompt; perhaps for facilitating the






circulation of small sums, and for paying a balance of trade to






other nations.






    When this comes to be the case, a statesman has it in his






power to increase or diminish the extent of credit and paper






money in circulation, by various expedients, which greatly






influence the rate of interest.






    The progress of credit has been very rapid since the






beginning of this century. This has been almost entirely owing to






the mechanical contrivances of trading men. Lawgivers have






hitherto had but imperfect notions concerning the nature of it;






and there still remains, in the womb of nature, some mighty






genius, born to govern a commercial nation, who alone will be






able to set it on its true principles. Let us in the mean time






speculate concerning them.






    We have said, and every one feels, that interest falls in






proportion to the redundancy of money to be lent.






    Now what is this money but property, of one kind or other,






thrown into circulation? I speak of trading nations, who are not






confined to the quantity of their specie alone.






    When a man of property wants money, may he not go to a bank,






which lends upon mortgage, and by pledging his security, receive






money, which is in the same instant created for his use? Do not






those notes circulate as long as they are found necessary for






carrying on the affairs of the nation? that is to say, the






accompts of debtors and creditors of all denominations; and as






soon as the quantity of them exceeds this proportion, they






stagnate, and return on the debtors in them, (the bank,) who is






enabled to realize them, because the original security is still






in their hands, which was at first pledged when the notes were






issued. This realization is commonly made in the metals; because






they are the money of the world: they are real and true riches,






as much as land; and they have this advantage over land, that






they are transportable everywhere.






    Now, does it not appear evident, that what we have been






describing is a round-about operation, which it is possible to






shorten?






    I beg of my reader, to attend to one thing; namely, that I am






not here treating of, or proposing a plan, but labouring to






deduce principles in an intricate subject.






    I say, when landed men go to such a bank, and receive paper






for a land security, that this operation may be shortened.






    Do not the notes he gets stand (though this be not expressed)






upon the security of his land? Now, can any man assign any other






reason but custom, why his own notes, caring expressly in their






bosom the same security, might not be issued, without his being






obliged to interpose the bank between the public and himself: And






for what does he pay this interest? Not because he has






gratuitously received any value from the bank, since in his






obligation he has given a full equivalent for the notes; but the






obligation he has given carries interest, and the notes carry






none. Why? Because the one circulates like money, the other does






not. For this advantage, therefore, of circulation, not for any






additional value, does the landed man pay interest to the bank.






    Had landed men, and not merchants, invented this method of






turning their property into circulation, and had they been all






assembled in one body, with a legislative authority, I imagine






they would have had wit enough to find out that a land bank was a






thing practicable in its nature.






    Suppose they should agree that all their lands should be let






by the acre, and that land property should be esteemed at a






certain number of years purchase, in proportion to the rate of






interest at the time, where would be the great difficulty in






paying in lands?






    This is merely a hint, to which a thousand objections may be






made, as matters stand: all I say, is, that there is nothing here






against principles; and though inconveniences might result to the






landed interest, in every way such a plan could be laid down; yet






still these inconveniences would hardly counterbalance that of






landed men's being obliged to pay interest for every penny they






borrow.






    It is demanded, what advantage would result to the nation






from such a regulation?






    I answer, that by it all the borrowings of landed men would






be struck out of the competition at the money-market. The monied






interest alone would borrow among themselves for the purposes of






trade, (for monied men do not borrow to squander,) and landed men






would consequently pay with their own paper, in every case, where






now they borrow in order to pay. Thus interest would be regulated






by the demands of trade, and the rate of it would not be






disturbed by the competition of spendthrifts.






    Who can say how far the consequences of such a scheme might






reach? Might not landed men begin in time to issue notes by way






of loan, at a very inconsiderable interest? But I am not disposed






to carry my speculations farther: perhaps what has been said may






appear sufficiently aerial.






    If a statesman shall find every modification of this idea






impracticable; either from his own want of power, or of skill,






or, which is more probable, from the opposition of the monied






interest; he must take other measures for striking out, as much






as possible, the competition of spendthrifts in the money-market.






Entails, and lame securities, are good expedients; though they






are productive of many inconveniences. His own frugal oeconomy in






state affairs will go much farther than any such trifling






expedients.






    Did a nation enjoying peace, although indebted perhaps 140






millions sterling, begin by paying off but 2 per cent of their






capital yearly, besides the current interest; while no






neighbouring state was borrowing any; what would interest fall to






in a short time! It may be answered, that the consequence would






be, to enrich other nations; because the money regorging at home,






would be sent abroad. To which I reply, by asking how any state






can be enriched by their borrowing? And in what does such lending






to foreigners differ from the nation's paying off their foreign






creditors? Will not the return of interest from abroad






compensate, pro tanto, the sums sent out for the like purpose?






    But if it be said, that the consequence will be to enable






other nations to bring down their own rate of interest; I allow






it to be so; and so much the better, as long as it remains






proportionally lower with us; which it must do, as long as we can






lend abroad. We have said, and I believe with truth, that as






credit is now extended, a general average is struck every where






upon the value of money well secured, consequently, the lower






that interest is reduced abroad, the lower still will it remain






at home, as long as merchants and exchangers do subsist.






    From this circumstance of the average on the rate of






interest, the Dutch must, I think, have lost the great advantage






they formerly enjoyed, from the low rate of it in Holland,






relatively to other nations.






    In Child's time, the Dutch were familiarly buying up sugars






in London, above the price paid by English sugar-bakers; and,






notwithstanding the additional freight and charges, they grew






rich by their trade, while the others were hardly making any






profit. This he accounts for from the low rate of their interest.






He supposes both Dutch and English to have carried on this trade






with borrowed money; for which the first paid 3 per cent and the






other 6 per cent.






    But at present, were it possible to get 6 per cent for money






in London, what Dutchman would lend his father a shilling at 3






per cent? The English stocks are as currently bought and sold,






nay, all the stockjobbing tricks are practised with the same






subtlety at Amsterdam as in Change-Alley: from which I conclude,






that a great part of the advantage of low interest is now lost to






that nation; and I conclude farther, that it is the common






interest of all trading nations to bring interest as low as






possible every where.






    Another cause of high interest proceeds from certain clogs






laid upon circulation, which flow merely from custom and






prejudice. Of this nature is the obligation laid upon debtors to






pay in the metals, nothing but coin being a legal tender.






    The only reason for such a regulation was the precariousness






of credit in former times. Were all the circulating paper in a






nation secured by law, either upon the lands or revenue of the






country appropriated for that purpose, there could be no






injustice or inconvenience in making paper (so secured) a legal






tender in all payments. Again, how extraordinary must it appear






to any reasonable man, that the same paper which passes on one






side of a river, running through the same country, should not






pass on its opposite bank?






    The reason of this is indeed very plain: the subaltern






jurisdictions on each side are different; and the debtors in the






paper are different: but if the paper of both stood upon a






security equally good, what is to hinder both to be received as a






legal tender in all payments over the kingdom? Should not little






private objects of profit among bankers (who are the servants of






the state, and who are so well paid for their service) be






over-ruled, when the consequences of their disputes are found to






be so hurtful? But of this more, when we come to speak of banks.






    The only occasion where a large quantity of coin is necessary






in the liquidation of paper, is for payment of the balance of






trade with foreign nations. Of this also we shall treat more at






large, when we come to the doctrine of exchange. But surely






nothing can be so ill judged, as to create an imaginary balance






within the same state; or rather, to permit money-jobbers to






create it; at the expence of raising interest, and hurting trade,






in the very places where it stands most in need of encouragement.






    From these principles, and others which naturally flow from






them, may a statesman steer a very certain course, towards






bringing the rate of interest as low as the prosperity of trade






requires, or the principles of double competition between






borrowers and lenders will permit.













Chap. VIII













Is the Rate of Interest the certain measure of the State of






Commerce?













    Some political writers are fond of every expedient to reduce






within a narrow compass many questions, which being involved in






combinations, cannot be reduced to one principle. This throws






them into what I call systems; of which we have an example in the






question now before us.






    There is nothing more difficult than to determine how far






commerce runs favourably, and how far unfavourably for a nation.






This would not be the case, were the rate of interest the certain






measure of it. I have found it however advanced, that nothing






more is necessary to be known, in order to estimate the relative






profits upon the foreign trade of two nations, than to compare






the common rate of interest in both, and to decide the preference






in favour of that nation where it is found to be lowest.






    We may say concerning this proposition, as concerning the






course of exchange; that the lowness of interest and of the price






of exchange are both exceedingly favourable to trade; but they






are no adequate measure of the profits arising from it.






    The best argument in favour of this opinion with regard to






interest is, that the nation which sells the cheapest at foreign






markets is constantly preferred; and, consequently, where the use






of money is the lowest, the merchant can sell the cheapest.






    I answer, that this consequence would be just, were all trade






carried on with borrowed money, were the difference of the price






of the materials or first matter, the ease of procuring them, the






promptitude of payments, the industry of the manufacturer, and






his dexterity, all reckoned for nothing. But such advantages are






frequently found in these articles, as to be more than sufficient






to counterbalance the additional interest which may be paid for






the money employed in trade. This is so true, that we see the






dexterity alone of the workman (living in an expensive capital,






where the charge of living may be double of what it is in the






country) enabling him to undersell his competitors every where:






the same may be true with regard to the other articles. Farther,






how absurd is it to say, that all trade is carried on with






borrowed money? A very inconsiderable part of trade is carried on






with borrowed money, in any country in Europe; and that part,






which is carried on with borrowed money, is not so much clogged






by the high rate of interest, as by want of punctuality in






payments. A merchant who can turn his money in three months,






borrows as cheaply at 6 per cent as another who turns his in six






months, when he borrows at 3 per cent.






    The object of trade is produce and manufacture. These are






prepared for the market by farmers and tradesmen. Let us compare






the value of them, when sold at market to the merchant, with the






interest of the money borrowed by the farmers and tradesmen, in






order to carry on their industry, and we shall find that the






interest paid by them, bears hardly any proportion at all, to the






value of what they produce. Example. A sheep borrows no money in






order to produce wool; spinners and weavers borrow no money in






order to enable them to spin and to weave. Thus the whole






manufacture comes to market without any charge for interest.






    Do we not see every day, that ingenious workmen, who obtain






credit for very small sums, are soon enabled, by the means of






their own industry, to produce a surprising value in






manufactures, and not only to subsist, but to increase in riches?






The interest they pay for the money borrowed is inconsiderable,






when compared with the value, created (as it were) by the proper






employment of their time and talents.






    If it be said, that this is a vague assertion, supported by






no proof; I answer, that the value of a man's work may be






estimated by the proportion between the manufacture when brought






to market, and the first matter. Nothing but the first matter,






and the instruments of manufacture, can be considered as the






objects of borrowed money; unless we go so far as to estimate the






nourishment, and every expence of the manufacturer, and suppose






that these are also supplied from borrowed money. To affirm this,






would be turning arguments into cavil.






    The object, therefore, of borrowed money for carrying on






trade, is more relative to the merchant than to the manufacturer.






Borrowing is necessary for collecting all this product and






manufacture into the hands of merchants. This, no doubt, is very






commonly the operation of credit: interest of money, here, comes






in, to indemnify the giver of credit, for the use of his money:






but this interest is due from the time only, when the borrower






pays those from whom he collects, to the time he receives payment






from those to whom he sells. This interval it is of the highest






importance to the merchant to shorten. In proportion as it is






long, and in proportion to the rate of interest, he must raise






his profits; and in proportion as payments are quick and regular,






and interest low, he may diminish them. Whether merchants do






regulate their profits, in all commercial nations, according to






the exact proportion of the respective rates of interest, and






promptitude of payments among them; or whether these are






determined by the circumstances of demand and competition in the






several foreign markets where the trade is carried on, I leave to






merchants to determine. All I shall remark is, that a well






founded credit, and prompt payments, will do more service to






trade, than any advantage trading men can reap from the different






rate of interest in different countries.






    It must not be concluded from this, that low interest is not






a very great advantage to trade; all I contend for, is, that it






is not the measure of it.






    Another circumstance which puts nations, in our days, much






more on a level than they were in former times, I have already






hinted at. It is that general average which the great loads of






national debts, and the extension of credit, through the several






nations of Europe, who pay annually large sums of interest to






their creditors, has established. Let me suppose the Dutch, for






example, to have fixed, by placard, the rate of their interest at






3 per cent. I say, that as soon as the general average of






interest comes to stand above this rate, from the price of public






funds in England and France, we may safely conclude, that their






trade can no longer be carried on with any very considerable sum






of money borrowed at 3 per cent. The consequence then must be, to






send the money which regorges in the hands of the frugal Dutch,






into other countries, where it can produce a better return,






exclusive of all expences of remitting and drawing. What the






consequences of this lending to foreigners may be to Holland,






shall be afterwards examined.






    To conclude; I reckon it will be found, that what had led






some to believe that low interest is the measure of commerce, has






been owing to this; that in some of the most commercial countries






and cities interest has been found to be lower than in great






kingdoms: but this, I imagine, is entirely owing to the frugality






of their manners, which cuts off the borrowing of the rich for






the sake of dissipation. When this is accomplished, trade alone






will absorb the stagnations of the frugal, and the price of






interest will fall to that rate which is the best proportioned to






the profits upon commerce; but this also will be less and less






the case every day, in proportion to the credit and circulation






of public funds in different nations.













Chap. IX













Does not Interest fall in Proportion as Wealth increases?













    I answer in the affirmative: provided it be supposed that






dissipation do not increase in proportion to the wealth. Now in a






general proposition, such as this which stands at the head of our






chapter, this very necessary proviso is apt to be overlooked, and






thus people are led to error. The manners of a people, not their






external circumstances as to riches, are that which renders them






frugal or extravagant. What, therefore, depends upon the spirit






of a people, cannot be changed, but in consequence of a change of






that spirit.






    If the rate of interest be high, from a taste of dissipation,






let foreign trade throw in what loads of money it may, interest






will stand high, until manners do change. Every class of a people






has their peculiar spirit. The frugal merchant will accumulate






wealth, and the prodigal lord will borrow it. In this situation,






internal circulation will be rapid, and lands will shift hands.






If this revolution should prove a corrective to dissipation, by






vesting property in those who have contracted a firm habit of






frugality, then an augmentation of wealth may sink the rate of






interest. But if, on the contrary, the laws and manners of the






country do distinguish classes by their manner of living, and






mode of expence, it is ten to one but the industrious and frugal






merchant will put on the prodigal gentleman, the moment he gets






into a fine country seat, and hears himself called your Honour.






In certain countries, the memory of past industry carries a dreg






along with it, which nothing but expensive living has power to






purge away.






    Let this suffice at present upon the subject of interest: it






is so connected with the doctrine of credit, that it will recur






again at almost every step as we go along.













NOTES:













1. In France particularly.













2. The terms regorging and stagnating, are the best I can fall






upon to express the idea here defined; and therefore I shall take






the liberty to use them in this sense wherever I shall have






occasion to speak concerning a superfluity of coin or of money.




















Part II













Of Banks













Chap. I













Of the various Kinds of Credit













    We have already pointed out the nature of credit, which is






confidence; and we have deduced the principles which influence






the rate of interest, the essential requisite for its support.






    We come now to treat of domestic circulation; where we are to






deduce the principles of banking. This is the great engine






calculated for carrying it on.






    That I may, with order, investigate the many combinations we






shall here meet with, I must point out wherein banks differ from






one another in point of policy, as well as in the principle upon






which their credit is built.






    If they be considered relatively to their policy, they may be






divided into banks of circulation, and banks of deposit.






    If they be considered relatively to the principles upon which






their credit is built, they may be divided into banks upon






private credit, banks upon mercantile credit, and banks upon






public credit.






    It is to this last division only I must attend, in the






distribution of what is to follow; and therefore it is proper to






set out by explaining what I understand by the terms I have here






introduced.






    First, private credit. This is established upon a security,






real or personal, of value sufficient to make good the obligation






of repayment both of capital and interest. This is the most solid






of all.






    Secondly, mercantile credit. This is established upon the






confidence the lender has, that the borrower, from his integrity






and knowledge in trade, may be able to replace the capital






advanced, and the interest due during the advance, in terms of






the agreement. This is the most precarious of all.






    Thirdly, public credit. This is established upon the






confidence reposed in a state, or body politic, who borrow money






upon condition that the capital shall not be demandable; but that






a certain proportional part of the sum shall be annually paid,






either in lieu of interest, or in extinction of part of the






capital; for the security of which, a permanent annual fund is






appropriated, with a liberty, however, to the state to free






itself at pleasure, upon repaying the whole; when nothing to the






contrary is stipulated.






    The solidity of this species of credit depends upon






circumstances.






    The difference between the three kinds of credit lies more in






the object of the confidence, and the nature of the security,






than in the condition of the borrower. Either a private man, a






merchant, or a state, may pledge, for the security of a loan, a






real or a moveable security, with an obligation to refund the






capital. In this case, the obligation stands upon the solid basis






of private credit.






    Either a private man, a merchant, or a state, may strike out






projects which carry a favourable appearance of success, and






thereupon borrow considerable sums of money, repayable with






interest. In this case, the obligation stands upon a mercantile






credit.






    Either a private man, a merchant, or a state, may pledge (for






the security of money borrowed) a perpetual annual income, the






fund of which is not their property, without any obligation to






refund the capital: such obligations stand upon the principles of






public credit.






    I allow there is a great resemblance between the three






species of credit here enumerated: there are however some






characteristic differences between them.






    First, in the difficulty of establishing and supporting them.






    Private credit is inseparable, in some degree, from human






society. We find it subsisting in all ages: the security is






palpable, and the principles on which it is built are simple and






easy to be comprehended. Public credit is but a late invention:






it is the infant of commerce, and of extensive circulation. It






has supplied the place of the treasures of old, which were






constant and ready resources to statesmen in cases of public






distress: the security is not palpable, nor readily understood,






by the multitude; because it rests upon the stability of certain






fundamental maxims of government. Mercantile credit is still more






difficult to be established; because the security is the most






precarious of any; it depends upon opinion and speculation, more






than upon a determinate fund provided for repayment of either






capital or interest.






    Secondly, they differ in the nature of the security and






object of confidence.






    Private credit has a determinate object of confidence, viz.






the real existence of a value in the hands of the debtor,






sufficient to acquit both capital and interest. Public credit has






the visible security of a fund appropriated for the perpetual






payment of the interest. Mercantile credit depends wholly upon






the integrity, capacity, and good fortune of the debtor.






    The third difference is with regard to the ease of transfer.






    All public debts stand generally on the same bottom. No part






of the same fund is better than another: the price of them is






publicly known, and the securities are laid in the most






convenient way for transfer, that is, for circulation, without






consent of the debtor. This is far from being the case in private






securities. Nor is it the case in the mercantile, except in bills






payable to order or to bearer; in which cases alone, the creditor






can effectually transfer without the consent of the debtor.






    The fourth difference is discovered in the stability of the






confidence.






    Nothing can shake private credit, but an appearance of






insolvency in the very debtor. But the bankruptcy of one






considerable merchant, may give a shock to mercantile credit all






over Europe: and nothing will hurt public credit, as long as the






stipulated interest continues regularly to be paid, and as long






as the funds appropriated for this payment remain entire.






    From what has been said, I hope the three species of credit






have been sufficiently explained; and, from what is to follow, we






shall feel the utility of this distribution.













Chap. II













Of private Credit













    Private credit is either real, personal, or mixed.






    Real security, every body understands. It is the object of






law, not of politics, to give an enumeration of its different






branches. By this term, we understand no more than the pledging






an immoveable subject for the payment of a debt. As by a personal






security we understand the engagement of the debtor's whole






effects for the relief of his creditor. The mixed, I have found






it necessary to superadd, in order to explain with more facility,






the security of one species of banks. The notes issued by banks






upon private credit, stand upon a mixed security: that is, both






real and personal. Personal, as far as they affect the banker,






and the banking stock pledged for the security of the paper: and






real, as far as they affect the real securities granted to the






banker for the notes he lends, which afterwards enter into






circulation.






    The ruling principle in private credit, and the basis on






which it rests, is the facility of converting, into money, the






effects of the debtor; because the capital and interest are






constantly supposed to be demandable. The proper way, therefore,






to support this sort of credit to the utmost, is to contrive a






ready method of appretiating every subject affectable by debts;






and secondly, of melting it down into symbolical or paper money.






    In former times, when circulation was inconsiderable, the






scheme of melting down the property of debtors, for the payment






of creditors, was impracticable; and accordingly we see that






capitals secured on land property were not demandable. This






formed another species of credit, different from any we have






mentioned; which differed from public credit in this only, that






the solid property producing the income, was really in the hands






of the debtor; whereas the fund which produces the public revenue






is not in the hands of the state. This subdivision we have






omitted, as its basis, in both cases, rests solely upon the






regular payment of the interest. Of this nature are the contracts






of constitution in France, and the old investments of annual rent






in Scotland. There are few nations, I believe, in Europe, where






some traces, at least, of this kind of security do not remain.






    In order, then, to carry private credit to its greatest






extent, all entails upon lands should be dissolved; all






obligations should be regularly recorded in public registers; the






value of all lands should be ascertained, the moment any security






is granted upon them; and the statesman should interpose between






parties, to accelerate the liquidation of all debts, in the






shortest time, and at the least expence possible.






    Although this method of proceeding be the most effectual to






secure, and to extend private credit, yet it is not, at all






times, expedient to have recourse to it: this has been abundantly






explained in the 27th chapter of the second book; and therefore I






shall not here interrupt my subject with a needless repetition.













Chap. III













Of Banks













    In deducing the principles of banks, I shall do the best I






can to go through the subject systematically.






    I have divided credit into three branches, private,






mercantile, and public. This distribution will be of use on many






occasions, and shall be followed as far as it will go,






consistently with perspicuity: but, as has been often observed,






subjects of a complex nature cannot be brought under the






influence of a few general principles, without running into the






modern vice of forming systems, by wire-drawing many relations in






order to make them answer.






    The great operations of domestic circulation may be better






discovered by an examination into the principles upon which we






find banking established, than by any other method I can






contrive. It has been by inquiring into the nature of those banks






which are the most remarkable in Europe, that I have gathered the






little knowledge I have of the theory of domestic circulation.






This induces me to think that the best way to communicate my






thoughts on this subject, is to lay down the result of my






inquiries relatively to the very object of them.






    After comparing the operations of different banks in






promoting circulation, I find I can divide them, as to their






policy, into two general classes, viz. those which issue notes






payable in coin to bearer; and those which only transfer the






credit written down in their books from one person to another.






    Those which issue notes, I call banks of circulation; those






which transfer their credit, I call banks of deposit.






    Both indeed may be called banks of circulation, because by






their means circulation is facilitated; but, as different terms






serve to distinguish ideas different in themselves, these I here






employ will answer the purpose as well as any others, when once






they are defined; and circulation undoubtedly reaps far greater






advantages from banks which issue notes transferable every where,






than from banks which only transfer their credit on the very spot






where the books are kept.






    I shall, according to this distribution, first explain the






principles upon which the banks of circulation are constituted






and conducted, before I treat of the others.






    This will lead me to avail myself of the division I have made






of credit, into private, mercantile, and public; because,






according to the purposes for which a bank is established, the






ground of confidence, that is, the credit of the bank, comes to






rest upon one or other of them.






    In countries where trade and industry are in their infancy,






credit can be but little known; consequently, they who have solid






property, must find great difficulty in turning it into money;






without money, again, industry cannot be carried on, as we have






abundantly explained in the 26th chapter of the second book;






consequently without credit the whole plan of national






improvement will be disappointed.






    Under such circumstances, it is proper to establish a bank






upon the principles of private credit. This bank must issue notes






upon land and other securities, and the profits of it must arise






from the permanent interest drawn for the money lent.






    Of this nature are the banks of Scotland. To them the






improvement of this country is entirely owing; and until they are






generally established in other countries of Europe, where trade






and industry are little known, it will be very difficult to set






these great engines to work.






    Although I have represented this species of banks, which I






shall call banks of circulation upon mortgage, as peculiarly well






adapted to countries where industry and trade are in their






infancy, their usefulness to all nations, who have upon an






average a favourable balance upon their trade, will sufficiently






appear upon an examination of the principles upon which they are






established.






    It is for this reason that I have applied myself to reduce to






principles the many operations of the Scotch banks, during the






time they were in the greatest distress imaginable, from the






heavy balance the country owed during the last years of the late






war, and for some time after the peace in 1763. By this I flatter






myself to do a particular service to Scotland, as well as to






suggest hints which may prove useful, not to England only, but to






all commercial countries, who, by imitating this establishment,






will reap advantages of which they are at present deprived.






    For these reasons, I hope the detail I shall enter into with






regard to Scotland, will not appear tedious, both from the






variety of CUriOus combinations it will contain, as also from the






lights it will cast upon the whole doctrine of circulation, which






is the present object of our attention.






    In countries where trade is established, industry






flourishing, credit extensive, circulation copious and rapid, as






is the case with England, banks upon mortgage, however useful






they may prove for other purposes, would not answer the demands






of the trade of London, and the service of government, so well as






the bank of England.






    The ruling principle of this bank, and the ground of their






confidence, is mercantile credit. The bank of England does not






lend upon mortgage, nor personal security: their profits arise






from discounting bills; loans to government, upon the faith of






taxes, to be paid within the year; and upon the credit cash of






those who deal with them.






    A bank such as that of England, cannot therefore be






established, except in a great wealthy mercantile city, where the






accumulation of the smallest profits amount, at the end of the






year, to very considerable sums.






    In France, under the regency of the Duke of Orleans, there






was a bank erected upon the principles of public credit. The






ground of confidence there, and the only security for all the






paper they issued, were the funds appropriated for the payment of






the interest of the public debts.






    It is for the sake of order and method, that I propose to






explain the principles of banking, according to this






distribution. I must however confess, that although I represent






each of the three kinds of banks as having a cause of confidence






peculiar to itself, to wit, either private, mercantile, or public






credit; yet we shall find a mixture of all the three species of






credit entering into the combination of every one of them.






    Banking, in the age we live, is that branch of credit which






best deserves the attention of a statesman. Upon the right






establishment of banks, depends the prosperity of trade, and the






equable course of circulation. By them(1*) solid property may be






melted down. By the means of banks, money may be constantly kept






at a due proportion to alienation. If alienation increase, more






property may be melted down. If it diminish, the quantity of






money stagnating, wil1 be absorbed by the bank, and part of the






property formerly melted down in the securities granted to them,






will be, as it were, consolidated anew. Banks must pay, as agents






for the country, the balance of their trade with foreign nations.






Banks keep the mints at work; and it is by their means,






principally, that private, mercantile, and public credit are






supported. I can point out the utility of banks in no way so






striking, as to recal to mind the surprising effects of Mr Law's






bank, established in France, at a time when there was neither






money or credit in the kingdom. The superior genius of this man






produced, in two years time, the most surprising effects






imaginable; he revived industry; he established confidence; and






shewed to the world, that while the landed property of a nation






is in the hands of the inhabitants, and while the lower classes






are willing to be industrious, money never can be wanting. I must






now proceed in order, towards the investigation of the principles






which influence this intricate and complicated branch of my






subject.













Chap. IV













    Banks of circulation upon mortgage or private credit, are






those which issue notes upon private security, payable to bearer






on demand, in the current coin of the nation. They are






constituted in the following manner.






    A number of men of property join together in a contract of






banking, either ratified or not by public authority, according to






circumstances. For this purpose, they form a stock which may






consist indifferently of any species of property. This fund is






engaged to all the creditors of the company, as a security for






the notes they propose to issue. So soon as confidence is






established with the public, they grant credits, or cash






accompts, upon good security; concerning which they make the






proper regulations. In proportion to the notes issued in






consequence of these credits, they provide a sum of coin, such as






they judge to be sufficient to answer such notes as shall return






upon them for payment. Nothing but experience can enable them to






determine the proportion between the coin to be kept in their






coffers, and the paper in circulation. This proportion varies






even according to circumstances, as we shall afterwards observe.






    The profits of the bank proceed from the interest paid upon






all the money advanced by the bank, in consequence of credits






given.(2*)






    Out of these profits must be deducted, first, the charge of






management; secondly, the loss of interest for all the coin they






preserve in their coffers, as well as the expence they are put to






in prodding it; and thirdly, the expence of transacting and






paying all balances due to other nations.






    In proportion, therefore, as the interest upon the money






advanced by the bank in consequence of the securities, exceeds






the loss of interest on the coin in the bank, the expence of






management, and of prodding funds abroad to pay balances, in the






same proportion is their profit; which they may either divide,






accumulate, or employ, as they think fit.






    Let it be observed, that I do not consider the original bank






stock, or the interest arising from that, as any part of the






profits of the bank. So far as it regards the bank, it is their






original property; and so far as it regards the public, it serves






for a collateral security to it, for the notes issued. It becomes






a pledge, as it were, for the faithful discharge of the trust






reposed in the bank: without such a pledge, the public could have






no security to indemnify it, in case the bank should issue notes






for no permanent value received. This would be the case, if they






thought fit to issue their paper either in payment of their own






private debts, or for articles of present consumption, or in a






precarious trade.






    When paper is issued by a bank for no value received, the






security of such paper stands upon the original capital of the






bank alone; whereas when it is issued for value received, that






value is the security on which it immediately stands, and the






bank stock is, properly speaking, only subsidiary.






    I have dwelt the longer upon this circumstance, because many,






who are unacquainted with the nature of banks, have a difficulty






to comprehend how they should ever be at a loss for money, as






they have a mint of their own, which requires nothing but paper






and ink to create millions. But if they consider the principles






of banking, they will find that every note issued for value






consumed, instead of value received and preserved, is neither






more or less, than a partial spending either of their capital, or






profits on the bank. Is not this the effect of the expence of






their management? Is not this expence paid in their notes? But






did ever any body imagine that this expence did not diminish the






profits of banking? Consequently, such expence may exhaust these






profits, if carried far enough; and if carried still farther,






will diminish the capital of the banking stock.






    As a farther illustration of this principle, let me suppose,






an honest man, intelligent, and capable to undertake a bank. I






say that such a person, without one shilling of stock, may carry






on a bank of domestic circulation, to as good purpose as if he






had a million; and his paper will be every bit as good as that of






the bank of England. Every note he issues will be secured on good






private security; this security carries interest to him, in






proportion to the money which has been advanced by him, and






stands good for the notes he has issued. Suppose then that after






having issued for a million sterling, all the notes should return






upon him in one day. Is it not plain, that they will find, with






the honest banker, the original securities, taken by him at the






time he issued them; and is it not true, that he will have,






belonging to himself, the interest received upon these






securities, while his notes were in circulation, except so far as






this interest has been spent in carrying on the business of his






bank? Large bank stocks, therefore, serve only to establish their






credit; to secure the confidence of the public, who cannot see






into their administration; but who willingly believe, that men






who have considerable property pledged in security of their good






faith, will not probably deceive them.






    This stock is the more necessary, from the obligation to pay






in the metals. Coin may be wanting, upon some occasions, to men






of the greatest landed property. Is this a reason to suspect






their credit? Just so of banks. The bank of England may be






possessed of twenty millions sterling of good effects, to wit,






their capital; and the securities for all the notes they have






issued; and yet that bank might be obliged to stop payment, upon






a sudden demand of a few millions of coin.






    Runs upon a bank well established, betray great want of






confidence in the public; and this want of confidence proceeds






from the ignorance the greatest part of men are in, with regard






to the state of their affairs, and to the principles upon which






their trade is carried on.






    From what has been said, we may conclude, that the solidity






of a bank which lends upon private security, does not so much






depend upon the extent of their original capital, as upon the






good regulations they observe in granting credit. In this the






public is nearly interested; because the bank securities are






really taken for the public, who are creditors upon them in






virtue of the notes which circulate through their hands.













Chap. V













Such Banks ought to issue their Notes on private, not mercantile






Credit













    Let me, therefore, reason upon the example of two bankers;






one issues his notes upon the best real or personal security;






another gives credit to merchants and manufacturers, upon the






principles of mercantile credit, which we have explained above;






the notes of the one and of the other enter into circulation, and






the question comes to be, which are the best? If we judge by the






regularity of the payment of notes on presentation, perhaps the






notes of the one are as readily paid as those of the other. If we






judge by the stock of the two bankers, perhaps they may be equal,






both in value and solidity; but it is not upon either of these






circumstances that the question depends. The notes in circulation






may far exceed the amount of the largest bank stock; and






therefore, it is not on the original stock; but on the securities






taken at issuing the notes, that the solidity of the two






currencies is to be estimated. Those secured on private credit,






are as solid as lands and personal estates; they stand upon the






principles of private credit. Those secured on the obligations of






merchants and manufacturers, depending upon the success of their






trade, are good or bad in proportion to such success. Every






bankruptcy of one of their debtors, involves the bank, and






carries off either a part of their profits, or of their stock.






Which way, therefore, can the public judge of the affairs of






bankers, except by attending to the nature of the securities upon






which they give credit.













Chap. VI













Use of subaltern Bankers and Exchangers













    Here it may be urged, that the great use of banks is to






multiply circulation, and to furnish the industrious with the






means of carrying on their traffic: that if banks insist upon the






most solid sureties before they give credit, the great utility of






them must cease; because merchants and manufacturers are never in






a situation to obtain credit upon such terms.






    This argument proves only, that banks are not, alone,






sufficient for carrying on every branch of circulation. A truth






which nobody will controvert. But as they are of use in carrying






on the great branches of circulation, it is proper to prevent






them from engaging in schemes which may destroy their credit






altogether.






    I have observed above, that this method of issuing notes upon






private security, was peculiarly well adapted to countries like






Scotland, where trade and industry are in their infancy.






    Merchants and manufacturers there, have constant occasion for






money or credit; and at the same time, they cannot be supposed to






have either real or personal estates to pledge, in order to






obtain a loan directly from the banks, who ought to lend upon no






other security.






    To remove this difficulty, we find a set of merchants, men of






substance, who obtain from the banks very extensive credits upon






the joint real and personal security of themselves and friends.






With this assistance from the bank, and with money borrowed from






private people, repayable on demand, something below the common






rate of interest, they support the trade of Scotland, by giving






credit to the merchants and manufacturers.






    To this set of men, therefore, are banks of circulation upon






mortgage to leave this particular branch of business. It is their






duty, it is the interest of the country, and no less that of






banks, that they be supported in so useful a trade; a trade which






animates all the commerce and manufactures of Scotland, and which






consequently promotes the circulation of those very notes upon






which the profits of the banks do arise.






    These merchants are settled in all the most considerable






towns: they are well acquainted with the stock, capacity,






industry, and integrity of all the dealers in their district:






they are, many. and by this are able to go through all the detail






which their business requires; and their profits, as we shall see






presently, are greater than those of banks, who lend at a stated






interest.






    The common denomination by which they are called in Scotland,






is that of bankers; but, to avoid their being confounded with the






bankers in England (whose business is very different) we shall,






while we are treating of the doctrine of banks, call them by the






name of exchangers, since their trade is principally carried on






by bills of exchange.






    As often as these exchangers give credit to dealers in any






way, they constantly state a commission of 1/2 per cent or more,






according to circumstances, over and above the interest of their






advance; these are profits, which greatly surpass those of any






bank. One thousand pounds credit given by a bank, may not produce






ten pounds in a year for interest: whereas were a like credit






given by a banker, to a merchant, who draws it out, and replaces






it forty times in a year, there will arise upon it a commission






of 20 per cent or 200 l.






    This set of men are exposed to risks and losses, which they






bear without complaint, because of their great profits; but it






implies a detail, which no bank can descend to.






    These exchangers break from time to time; and no essential






hurt is thereby occasioned to national credit. The loss falls






upon those who lend to them, or trust them with their money, upon






precarious security; and upon merchants, who make allowances for






such risks. In a word, they are a kind of insurers, and draw






premiums in proportion to their risks.






    To this set of men, therefore, it should be left to give






credit to merchants, as the credit they give is purely






mercantile; and to banks alone, who give credit on good private






security, it should be left to conduct the great national






circulation, which ought to stand upon the solid principles of






private credit.






    From this example we may discover the justness of the






distinction I have made between private and mercantile credit:






had I not found it necessary, I should not have introduced it.













Chap. VII













Concerning the Obligation to pay in Coin, and the Consequences






thereof













    In all banks of circulation upon mortgage, the obligation in






the note is to pay in coin, upon demand: and in the famous bank






of Mr Law, there was a very necessary clause added to the note;






to wit, that the coin was to be of the same weight, fineness and






denomination, as at the date of the note. This was done, in order






to prevent the inconveniences which might result to either party,






by the king's arbitrarily raising or sinking the denominations of






the coin; a practice then very familiar in France.






    This obligation to pay in coin, owes its origin to the low






state of credit in Europe at the time when banks first began to






be introduced; and it is not likely that any other expedient will






soon be fallen upon to remove the inconveniences which result






from it in domestic circulation, as long as some persons of the






most acute understanding in many things, consider all money,






except, coin to be false and fictitious.






    I have already thrown out abundance of hints, from which it






may be gathered, that, in my opinion, coin is not absolutely






necessary for carrying on domestic circulation, and more will be






said on this subject, as we go along. But I am here to examine






the nature and consequences of this obligation, contracted by






banks, to discharge their notes in the current coin of the






country.






    In the first place, it is plain, that no coin is ever (except






in very particular cases) carried to a bank, in order to procure






notes. The greatest part of notes issue from the banks,






concerning which we are treating, either in consequence of a






loan, or of a credit given by the bank, to such as can give






security for it. This loan is made in their own notes; which are






quickly thrown into circulation by the borrower; who borrowed






them, because he had occasion to pay them away. In like manner,






when a credit is given, the bank pays (in her notes) all the






orders she receives from the person who has the credit: in this






manner are notes commonly issued from a bank.






    Coin, again, comes to a bank, in the common course of






circulation, by payments made to it, either for the interest upon






their loans, or when merchants and landed men throw the payments






made to them into the bank, towards filling up their credits; or






by way of a safe deposit for their money. These payments are made






to the bank in the ordinary circulation of the country. When






there is a considerable proportion of coin in circulation, then






the bank receives much coin; and when there is little, they






receive little. Whatever they receive is laid by to answer notes






which are offered for payment; but whenever a draught is made






upon them for the money thrown in as above, they pay in paper.






    As we are here searching after principles, not after facts,






it is out of our way to inquire what may be the real proportion






of coin preserved by banks of circulation, for answering the






demand for it.






    Mr Megens, a very knowing man, and a very judicious author,






lately dead, who has written a small treatise in the German






tongue, translated into English, under the title of The Universal






Merchant, delivers his sentiments concerning the proportion of






coin preserved in the bank of England, which I shall here






transcribe in the translator's words. Sect. 60.






    'The bank of England consists of two sorts of creditors, the






one of that set of men, who, in King William's time, when money






was scarce and dear, lent the public 1,200,000 pounds, at 8 per






cent interest, and 4000 pounds were allowed them for charges,






amounting in whole to 100,000 pounds a year, an exclusive right






of banking as a corporation for 13 years, under the denomination






of the proprietors of the bank; and which, for obtaining






prolongation of their privileges, has been since increased by






farther loans to the public at a less interest, to near the sum






of 11,000,000 pounds, which if we compute the interest at 3 per






cent (as what they have more on some part answers incident






charges) it produces 330,000 pounds a year; and as they divide






annually 5 per cent to their proprietors, which is 550,000






pounds, it is evident that they make a yearly profit of 220,000






pounds, out of the money of the people who keep cash with them,






and these are the other sort of creditors: and as for what money






the bank lends to the government, they have for the most part but






3 per cent interest, I conclude that the credit cash they have in






their hands may amount to 11,000,000 pounds, and thereout is






employed in loans to the government, in the discounting of bills,






and in buying gold and silver 7,333,333 1/3 pounds, which, at 3






per cent interest or profit, will amount to the above 220,000






pounds, and remains 3,666,666 2/3 pounds in cash, sufficient for






circulation and current payments. And experience has evinced,






that whenever any mistrust has occasioned any run upon the bank






for any continuance, and the people not finding the treasure so






soon exhausted as they surmised, it flowed in again faster on the






one hand than it was drawn out on the other.'






    This gentleman lived long in England. He was very intelligent






in matters relating to commerce; and his authority may, I






believe, be relied on as much as any other person's, except that






of the bank itself; which, it would appear, has some interest in






keeping such affairs a secret.






    We see by his account, that the bank of England keeps in coin






one third part of the value of all their notes in circulation.






With this quantity, business is carried on with great smoothness,






owing to the prosperity of that kingdom, which seldom owes any






considerable balance to other nations.






    But the consequence of the obligation to pay in coin, is,






that when the nation comes to owe a foreign balance, the notes






which the bank had issued to support domestic circulation only,






come upon it for the payment of this balance; and thereby the






coin which it had provided for home demand only, is drawn out.






    It is this circumstance, above all others, which distresses






banks of circulation. Were it not for this, the obligation to pay






in coin might easily be discharged; but when in virtue of this






pure obligation, a heavy national balance is demanded from the






bank, which has only made provision for the current and ordinary






demand at home, it requires a little combination to find out, at






once, an easy remedy.






    This combination we shall, in the following chapters,






endeavour to unfold: it is by far the most intricate, and at the






same time the most important in the whole doctrine of banks of






circulation.






    Another inconveniences resulting from this obligation to pay






in coin, we have explained in the third book. It is, that the






confusion of the English coin, and the lightness of a great part






of it, obliges the bank of England to purchase the metals at a






price far above that which they can draw back for them after they






are coined. We have there shewn the great profit that might be






made in melting down and exporting the heavy species. This profit






turns out a real loss to the bank of England, which is constantly






obliged to provide new coin, in proportion as it is wanted. This






inconvenience is not directly felt by banks, in countries where






there is no mint established.






    Here then is another bad consequence of this obligation to






pay in the metals, which a proper regulation of the coin would






immediately remove. In countries which abound in coin, banking is






an easy trade, when once their credit is well established. It is






principally when either a foreign war, or a wrong balance of






trade has carried off the metals, that the weight of this






obligation to pay in coin is severely felt.













Chap. VIII













How a wrong Balance of Trade affects Banks of Circulation













    It is commonly said, that when there is a balance due by any






nation upon the whole of their mercantile transactions with the






rest of the world, such balance must be paid in coin. This we






call a wrong balance. Those who transact the payment of this






balance, are those who regulate the course of exchange; and we






may suppose, without the least danger of being deceived, that the






course is always higher than the expence of procuring and






transporting the metals; because the overcharge is profit to the






exchanger, who without this profit could not carry on his






business.






    These exchangers, then, must have a command of coin; and






where can they get it so easily, and so readily, as from banks






who are bound to pay in it?






    Every merchant who imports foreign commodities, must be






supposed to have value in his hands from the sale of them; but






this value must consist in the money of the country: if this be






mostly in bank paper, he must give the bank paper for a bill to






the exchanger, whose business it is to place funds in those parts






upon which bills are demanded. The exchanger again (to support






the fund which he exhausts by his draughts) must demand coin from






the banks, for the notes he received from the merchant when he






gave him the foreign bill.






    Besides the wrong balances of trade transacted in this






manner, which banks are constantly obliged to make good in coin,






every other payment made to foreigners has the same effect. It is






not because it is a balance of trade, but because it is a payment






which cannot be made in paper currency, that a demand is made for






coin. Coin we have called the money of the world, as notes may be






called the money of the society. The first then must be procured






when we pay a balance to foreigners; the last is full as good






when we pay among ourselves.






    It is proper, however, to observe, that there is a great






difference between the wrong balance of trade, and the general






balance of payments. The first marks the total loss of the






nations when her imports exceed the value of her exports; the






second comprehends three other articles, viz. 1. the expence of






the natives in foreign countries; 2. the payment of all debts,






principal and interest, due to foreigners; 3. the lending of






money to other nations.






    These three put together, make what I call the general






balance of foreign payments: and these added to the wrong balance






of trade may be called the grand balance with the world.






    Now as long as the payment of this grand balance is






negotiated by exchangers, all the coin required to make it good,






must be supplied by banks, while they have one note in






circulation.






    How then is this coin to be procured by nations who have no






mines of their own?













Chap. IX













How a grand Balance may be paid by Banks, without the assistance






of Coin













    Did all the circulation of a country consist in coin, this






grand balance as we have called it, would be paid out of the






coin, to the diminution of it.






    We have said that the acquisition of coin, or of the precious






metals, adds to the intrinsic value of a country, as much as if a






portion of territory were added to it. The truth of this






proposition will now soon appear evident.






    We have also said, that the creation of symbolical money,






adds no additional wealth to a country, but only provides a fund






of circulation out of solid property; which enables the






proprietors to consume and to pay proportionally for their






consumption: and we have shewn how by this contrivance trade and






industry are made to flourish.






    May we not conclude, from these principles, that as nations






who have coin, pay their grand balance out of their coin, to the






diminution of this species of their property, so nations who have






melted down their solid property into symbolical money, must pay






their grand balance out of the symbolical money; that is to say,






out of the solid property of which it is the symbol?






    But this solid property cannot be sent abroad; and it is






alleged that nothing but coin can be employed in paying this






grand balance. To this I answer, that in such a case the credit






of a bank may step in, without which a nation which runs short of






coin, and which comes to owe a grand balance must quickly be






undone.






    We have said that while exchangers transact the balance, the






whole load of providing coin lies upon banks. Now the whole solid






property melted down, in their paper, is in their hands; because






I consider the securities given them for their paper, to be the






same as the property itself. Upon this property, there is a






yearly interest paid to the bank: this interest, then, must be






engaged to foreigners by the bank, in lieu of what is owing to






them by the nation; and when once a fund is borrowed upon it






abroad, the rest is easy to the bank. This shall be farther






explained as we go along.






    I do not pretend that the common operation of providing coin,






when the grand balance is against a nation, is as simple as I






have represented it. I know it is not: and I know also, that I am






not in any degree capable to explain the finite combination of






mercantile operations necessary to bring it about; but it is no






less true, that these combinations may be shortened: because when






the whole of them have been gone through, the transaction must






end in what I have said; to wit, that either the grand balance






must be paid out of the national stock of coin, or it must be






furnished by foreigners upon a loan from them; the interest of






which must be paid out of that part of the solid property of the






nation which has been melted down into paper. I say farther, that






were not all this solid property (so melted down) in the hands of






banks, who thereby have established to themselves an enormous






mercantile credit; there would be no possibility of conducting






such an operation: that is to say, there would be no possibility






for nations to run in debt to nations, upon the security of their






respective landed property.













Chap. X













Insufficiency of temporary Credits for the Payment of a wrong






Balance













    I have said, that when the national stock of coin is not






sufficient to provide banks with the quantity demanded of them,






for the payment of the grand balance, that a loan must take






place. To this it may be objected, that a credit is sufficient to






procure coin, without having recourse to a formal loan. The






difference I make between a loan and a credit consists in this,






that by a credit we understand a temporary advance of money,






which the person who gives the credit expects to have repaid in a






short time, with interest for the advance, and commission for the






credit; whereas by a loan we understand the lending of money for






an indefinite time, with interest during non-payment.






    Now I say, the credit, in this case, will not answer the






purpose of supplying a deficiency of coin; unless the deficiency






has been accidental, and that a return of coin, from a new






favourable grand balance, be quickly expected. The credit will






indeed answer the present exigency; but the moment this credit






comes to be replaced, it must be replaced either by a loan, or by






a supply of coin; or by a renewal of the former credit; but, by






the supposition, coin is found to be wanting for paying the grand






balance; consequently, nothing but a loan, made by the lenders






either in coin, in the metals, or in a liberty to draw upon them,






can remove the inconvenience; and if recourse be had to a new






credit, instead of the loan, the same difficulty will recur,






whenever this credit again comes to be made good by repayment.






    Upon the whole, we may conclude, that nations who owe a






balance to other nations, must pay it either with their coin, or






with their solid property; consequently, the acquisition of coin






is, in this particular, as advantageous as the acquisition of






lands; but when coin is not to be procured, the transmission of






the solid property to foreign creditors is an operation which






banks must undertake; because it is they who are obliged either






to do this, or to pay in coin.













Chap. XI













Of the Hurt resulting to Banks, when they leave the Payment of a






wrong Balance to Exchangers













    We have seen in a former chapter, how exchangers and banks






are mutually assistant to one another: the exchangers by swelling






and supporting circulation; the bank by supplying them with






credit for this purpose. While parties are united by a common






interest, all goes well: but interest divides, by the same






principle that it unites.






    No sooner does a nation incur a balance against itself, than






exchangers set themselves to work to make a fortune, by






conducting the operation of paying it. They appear then in the






light of political usurers to a spendthrift heir, who has no






guardian. This guardian should be the bank, who upon such






occasions (and upon such only) ought to interpose between the






nation and her foreign creditors. This it may do, by constituting






itself at once debtor for the whole balance, and by taking






foreign exchange into its hand, until such time as it shall have






distributed the debt it has contracted for the nation, among






those individuals who really owe it. This operation performed,






exchange may be left to those who make this branch their






business, because then they will find no opportunity of combining






either against the interest of the bank or of individuals.






    When a national bank neglects so necessary a duty, as well as






so necessary a precaution, the whole class of exchangers become






united by a common interest against it; and the country is torn






to pieces, by the fruitless attempt it makes to support itself,






without the help of the only expedient that can relieve it.






    Those exchangers having the grand balance to transact with






other nations, make use of their credits with the bank, and of






its notes, in order to draw coin from the bank, which they






export. This throws a great load upon the bank, which is






constantly obliged to provide a sufficient quantity of coin for






answering all demands; for we have laid it down as a principle,






that whatever coin or bills are necessary to pay this grand






balance, in every way it can be transacted, it must ultimately be






paid by the bank; because whoever wants coin for any purpose, and






has bank notes, can force the bank to pay them in coin, or stop






payment.






    It cannot, therefore, be said, that exchangers do wrong; nor






can they be blamed for drawing from the bank whatever is wanted






for the purpose of paying to foreigners what is their due; that






is, what is justly owing to them. If they do more, they must hurt






themselves; because whatever is sent abroad more than what is






due, must constitute the rest of the world debtors to the country






which sends out their coin. The consequence of this would be to






turn exchange against foreigners, and to make it favourable for






the nation which is creditor. In this case, were the creditors






still to continue sending coin abroad, they would lose by this






operation, for the same reason that they gain, by that of sending






it out when they are debtors.






    It is very common for banks to complain, when coin is hard to






be procured, and when large demands are made upon them; they then






allege unfair dealings against exchangers; they fall to work to






estimate the balance of trade, and endeavour to show that it is






not in reality against the country.






    But alas! this is nothing to the purpose; the balance of






trade may be very favourable, although the balance of payments be






greatly against the country; and both must be paid, while the






bank has a shilling of cash, or a note in circulation. So soon






again as the grand balance is fairly paid off, it is impossible






that any one can find an advantage in drawing coin from a bank;






except in the single case of melting down the heavy species, in






nations which give their coinage gratis. Of this we have treated






at sufficient length in another place.






    Banks may indeed complain, that men of property sometimes






send their money out of the country, at a time when it is already






drained of its coin; because this raises exchange, and hurts the






trading interest.






    Exchange must rise, no doubt, in proportion as the grand






balance is great, and difficult to be paid: But where does the






blame lie? Who ought to provide the coin, or the bills for paying






this grand balance? Have we not shewn that it is the bank alone






who ought to provide coin for the ready answering of their notes?






Have we not said, that the method of doing this is to sacrifice a






part of the interest due upon the obligations in their hands,






which are secured upon the solid property of the country, and to






appropriate this sum of interest for a fund to pay regularly the






interest of the foreign loans, which will procure either the






metals themselves, or a power to draw on those places where the






nation's creditors reside?






    Which of the two has most reason to complain, the bank,






because the inhabitants think fit to send their effects out of






the country, being either forced so to do by their creditors, or






choosing so to do for their private advantage; or the creditors






of the bank, and the country in general, when (from the






obstructions the bank throws in the way, when required to pay its






notes) exchange is forced up to an exorbitant height; the value






of what private merchants owe to strangers is raised; and when,






by discouraging trade in their hands, a stop is put to






manufactures and credit in general?






    In a word, the bank has no reason to complain, unless they






can make it appear, how any person, exchanger or other, can find






an advantage in sending coin out of the country, at a time when






there is no demand for it; or when there is no near prospect of a






demand which is the same thing? To say that a principle of public






spirit should prevent a person from doing with his property what






is most to his advantage, for the sake of saving some money to a






bank, is supposing the bank to be the public, instead of being






the servant of the public.






    Another argument to prove that no profit can be made by






sending out coin, except when the balance is against a country,






is, that we see all runs upon banks stop, the moment exchange






becomes favourable. Were there a profit to be made upon sending






off coin, independently of the debts to be paid with it, which






cannot be paid without it, the same trade would be profitable at






all times. As this is not the case, it follows, that the






principle we have laid down is just; to wit, that the balance due






to foreigners must be paid by banks, while they have a note in






circulation; and when once it is fairly paid by them, all






extraordinary demands must cease.






    We now proceed to another point, to wit, What are the






consequences to circulation, when a great balance draws away a






large quantity of coin from the bank, and sends it out of the






country?













Chap. XII













    That I may communicate my ideas with the greater precision, I






must here enter into a short detail of some principles, and then






reason on a supposition.






    It has been said, that the consequence of credit and






paper-money, secured on solid property, was to augment the mass






of the circulating equivalent, in proportion to the uses found






for it.






    These uses may be comprehended under two general heads. The






first, payment of what one owes; the second, buying what one has






occasion for: the one and the other may be called by the general






term of ready-money demands.






    Whoever has a ready-money demand upon him, and property at






the same time, ought to be furnished with money by banks which






lend upon mortgage.






    Now the state of trade, of manufactures, of modes of living,






and of the customary expence of the inhabitants, when taken






altogether, regulate and determine what we may call the mass of






ready-money demands, that is, of alienation. To operate this






multiplicity of payments, a certain proportion of money is






necessary. This proportion again may increase or diminish






according to circumstances; although the quantity of alienation






should continue the same.






    To make this evident, let us suppose the accounts of a whole






city kept by one man; alienation may go on without any payment at






all, until accounts be cleared; and then nothing will be to be






paid, except general balances upon the whole. This however is






only by the bye. The point in hand is to agree, that a certain






sum of money is necessary for carrying on domestic alienation;






that is, for satisfying ready-money demands: let us call this






quantity (A).






    Next, in most countries in Europe (I may say all), it is






customary to circulate coin, which, for many uses, is found






fitter than paper (no matter for what reason); custom has






established it, and with custom even statesmen must comply.






    The paper-money is generally made payable in coin; from






custom also. Now, according to the manners of the country, more






or less coin will be required for domestic circulation. Let it be






observed, that hitherto we have not attended to foreign






circulation, of which presently: and I say, that the manners of a






country may make more or less coin necessary, for circulating the






same quantity of paper; merchants, for instance, circulate much






paper and little coin; gamesters circulate much coin and little






paper: one example is sufficient.






    Let this quantity of coin, necessary for circulating the






paper-money, be called (B), and let the paper-money be called






(C); consequently (A) will be equal to the sum of (B) and (C).






Again, we have said, that all balances owing by nation to nation,






must be paid either in coin, or in the metals, or in bills; and






that bank paper can be of no use in such payments. Let the






quantity of the metals, coin, or bills, going out or coming into






the country for payment of such balance, be called (D).






    These short designations premised, we may reason with more






precision. (A) is the total mass of money (coin and paper)






necessary at home: (A) is composed of (B) the coin, and of (C)






the paper-money, and (D) stands for that mass of coin, or metal,






or bills, which goes and comes according as the grand balance is






favourable or unfavourable with other nations.






    Now, from what has been said, we may determine that there






should at all times remain in the country, or in the bank, a






quantity of coin equal to (B); and if this be ever found to fall






short, the bank does not discharge its. duty It is unnecessary to






determine what part of (B) should be locked up in the bank, and






what part should remain in circulation: banks themselves cannot






determine this question: all we need to say is, that it is the






profit of banks to accustom people to the use of paper-money as






much as possible; and therefore they will draw to themselves as






much coin as they can.






    When a favourable balance of trade brings the price of






exchange below par, and brings coin into the country, the






consequence is, either to animate trade and industry, to augment






the mass of payments, to swell (A), and still to preserve (C) in






circulation; or else to make (A) regorge, so as to sink the






interest of money below the bank lending price: in this case






people will carry back the regorging part of (C) to the bank, and






withdraw their securities; which is consolidating, as we have






called it, the property which had been formerly melted down, for






want of this circulating equivalent (money).






    This is constantly the consequence of a stagnation of paper,






from an overcharge of it, thrown into circulation. It returns






upon the bank, and diminishes the mass of their securities, but






never the mass of their coin.






    From this we may conclude, that the circulation of a country






can only absorb a determinate quantity of money (coin and paper);






and that the less use they make of coin, the more use they will






make of paper, and vice versa.






    We may also conclude, that when trade and alienation






increase, caeteris paribus, so will money; that is, more solid






property will be melted down; and when trade and alienation






diminish, caeteris paribus, so will money; that is, some of the






solid property formerly melted down, will consolidate, as we have






called it.






    These vicissitudes in the mass of circulation are not






peculiar to paper currency. In countries where nothing circulates






but the metals, the case is the same; the operation only is more






awkward and expensive. When coin becomes scarce, it is hardly






possible, in remote provinces, to find any credit at all; and in






the centre of circulation, the use of it (interest) must rise






very considerably, and must stand high for some time, before even






intelligent merchants will import bullion to the mint; which is






the only bank they have to fit it for circulation. When the metal






is coined, then men of property are enabled to borrow, or to sell






their lands. On the other hand, when a favourable balance pours






in a superfluity of coin, which at the same time cuts off the






demands of trade for sending it abroad, it frequently falls into






coffers; where it becomes as useless as if it were in the mine;






and this clumsy circulation, as I may call it, prevents coin from






coming into the hands of those who would have occasion for it,






did they but know where to come at it. Paper-money, on the other






hand, when banks and trade are well established, is always to be






found. Thus, in an instant, paper-money either creates or






extinguishes an interest equal to its value, in favour of the






possessor. No part of it lies dead, not for a day, when employed






in trade: it is not so of coin.






    Let us now suppose a bank established in a country which owes






a balance to other nations.






    In this case, the bank must possess, or be able to command, a






sum of coin or bills equal to (B) and (D); (B) for domestic, and






(D) for foreign circulation.






    Those who owe this balance (D), and who are supposed to have






value for it, in the currency of the country, must, in order to






pay it, either exhaust a part of (B), by sending it away, or they






must carry part of (C) to the bank, to be paid for in coin. If






they pick up a part of (B) in the country, then the coin in






circulation, being diminished below its proportion, the






possessors of (C) will come upon the bank for a supply, in order






to make up (B) to its former standard. Banks complain without






reason. If they carry part of (C) to be changed at the bank, for






the payment of (D), they thereby diminish the quantity of (C);






consequently there will be a demand upon the bank for more notes,






to support domestic circulation; because those notes which have






been paid in coin by the bank are returned to the bank, and have






diminished the mass of (C); which therefore must be replaced by a






new melting down of solid property.






    Now I must here observe, that this recruit of notes, supposed






to be issued by the bank, in order to fill up (C) to the level,






really implies an addition made to the mass of securities






formerly lodged with the bank: and represents, not improperly,






that part of the landed property of a country which the bank must






dispose of to foreigners, in order to procure from them the coin






or bills necessary for answering the demand of (D).






    When notes, therefore, are carried to the bank for payment of






debts due to the bank, they then diminish the mass of solid






property melted down in the securities lodged in the bank: but






when notes are carried to the bank, to be converted into coin or






bills, for foreign exportation, they do not diminish the mass of






the securities: on the contrary, the consequence is, to pave the






way for the augmentation of them; because I suppose that these






notes, so given in to the bank, and taken out of the circle, are






to be replaced by the bank, to domestic circulation, to which






they belonged; and the bank must be at the expence of turning






into coin or foreign bills, the value of these additional






securities granted for this new recruit of notes.






    Is not this quite consistent with reason, fact, and common






sense? If a country contract debts to foreigners, are not the






consequences just the same as when one man contracts a debt to






another in the same society? Must not the ultimate consequence of






such debts be, that they must be paid, either with the coin, with






the moveables, or with the solid property of the debtor,






transferred to the creditor, in lieu of the money owing?






    When a nation can pay with its coin, or with its effects






(that is to say, with its product and manufactures), the






operation is easily and mechanically performed by the means of






trade: when these objects are it, not sufficient; then land, or






an annual and perpetual income out of must make up the






deficiency; in which case more skill and expence is required; and






this expence falling upon banks, makes their trade less lucrative






than in times when commerce stands at par, or is bringing in a






balance.






    Were trade to run constantly against a country, the






consequence would be, that the whole property of it would, by






degrees, be transferred to foreigners. But in this case, banks






never could neglect laying down a plan whereby to avoid a






constant loss similar to what they casually sustain, when such a






revolution comes suddenly or unexpectedly upon them.






    The method would be, to establish an annual subscription






abroad, for borrowing a sum equivalent to the grand balance; the






condition being to pay the interest of the subscriptions out of






the revenue of the country.






    If the security offered be good, there is no fear but






subscribers will be found, while there is an ounce of gold and






silver in Europe.






    The bank of England has an expedient of another nature, in






what they call their bank circulation; which is a premium granted






to certain persons, upon an obligation to pay a certain sum of






coin upon demand. This is done with a view to answer upon






pressing occasions. But England being a prosperous trading






nation, which seldom has any considerable grand balance against






her (except in time of war, when the public borrowings supply in






a great measure the deficiency, as shall be afterwards






explained), this bank circulation is turned into a job; the






subscriptions being lucrative, are distributed among the






proprietors themselves, who make no provision for the demand; and






were the demand again to come upon them (as has been the case)






the subscribers would, as formerly, make a call on the bank






itself, by picking up their notes, and pay their subscriptions






with the bank's own coin.






    To obviate this inconvenience, which was severely felt in the






year 1745, the bank of England should have opened a subscription






for a perpetual loan in some foreign country; Holland, for






example; where she might have procured large quantities of






foreign coin: such a seasonable supply would have proved a real






augmentation of the metals; the supply they got from their own






domestic subscribers was only fictitious.(3*)






    But banks in prosperous trading nations sit down with casual






and temporary inconveniences; and exchangers carry on a






profitable trade, whether the nation be gaining or losing all the






while. For such nations, and such only, are banks advantageous.






Were banks established in Spain, Portugal, or any other country






which pays a constant balance from the produce of their mines,






they would only help on their ruin a little faster.






    In the infancy of banking, and in countries where the true






principles of the trade are not well understood, we find banks






taking a general alarm, whenever a wrong balance of trade






occasions a run upon them. This terror drives them to expedients






for supporting their credit, which we are now to examine, and






which we shall find to have a quite contrary tendency.






    The better to explain this combination, we must recall to






mind, that the payment of the grand balance in coin or bills is






unavoidable to banks. We have said that this balance is commonly






paid by exchangers, who pick up the coin in circulation; a thing






the bank cannot prevent. This we have called exhausting a part of






(B). the consequence of this is, to make the proprietors of (C)






come upon the bank, and demand coin for filling up (B): to this






the bank must also agree. But by these operations (C) comes to be






diminished, below the level necessary for carrying on trade,






industry, and alienation: upon which I have said there commonly






comes an application to the bank to give more credit, in order to






support domestic circulation, which if complied with, more solid






property is consequently melted down.






    This swells the mass of securities, and raises (A) to its






former level. But here the bank has a choice, and may refuse to






grant more credit: in the former operations it had none. Now if






the bank, from a terror of being drained of coin, should refuse






to issue notes upon new credits, for the demands of domestic






circulation; in this case, I say, they fail in their duty to the






nation, as banks, and hurt their own interest. As to their duty






to the nation, I shall not insist upon it; but I think I can






demonstrate that they fail in their manner of reasoning, with






respect to their own interest, and that is enough.






    I say, then, that as long as there is one single note in






circulation, and any part of a grand balance owing, this note






will come upon the bank for payment, without a possibility of its






avoiding the demand. Refusing therefore credit, while any notes






remain in the hands of the public, is refusing an interest which






may help to make up the past losses: but of this more hereafter.






    In the next place, I think I have demonstrated, that as soon






as the grand balance is paid, it is impossible that any more






demands for coin can come upon the bank for exportation. Why then






should a bank do so signal a prejudice to their country, as to






refuse to lend them paper, which the ready-money demands of the






country must keep in circulation? And why do this at so great a






loss to themselves? It has been said above, and I think with






justice, that this recruit, issued to fill up circulation, adds






to the mass of bank securities, and very properly represents that






part of the income of the solid property of the country, which






the bank must dispose of to foreigners, in order to procure from






them the coin or bills necessary for answering the demand for






payment of a grand balance.






    In this light nothing can appear more imprudent, than to






refuse credit.






    A bank is forced to pay to the last farthing of this balance;






by paying it, the notes that were necessary for domestic






circulation are returned to them; and they refuse to replace






them, for fear that their supplying circulation should create a






new balance against them! This is voluntarily taking on






themselves all the loss of banking, and rejecting the advantages






of it.






    Such management may be prudent when the circulating notes of






a bank are very few, and when the balance is very great. In this






case, indeed, were the thing possible, it might be prudent to






give over banking for a while, till matters took a favourable






turn. But if we suppose their circulating notes to exceed the






balance due, then all the hurt which can be done is done already;






and the more notes that are issued, and the more credit that is






given, must be so much the better for the bank; because the






interest due upon all that are issued above the balance, must be






clear profit to the bank.






    To bring what has been said within a narrower compass, and to






lay it under our eye at once, let us call the sum of money






necessary for carrying on the domestic circulation of a country,






where a bank is established, (A).






    The specie itself, to carry it on, (B).






    The balances to other nations, (D).






    The bank must be able to command coin and credit equal to the






sum of (B) and (D). If they have in credit the value of (D) in






any foreign place, where a general circulation of exchange is






carried on, then they have occasion only for (B) at home, and can






furnish bills to the amount of (D).






    But in furnishing bills to the amount of (D), those who






receive the bills from the bank, must pay to the bank the value






of these bills in bank notes; and the notes with which they pay






for the bills, must be taken out of (A), which (A) we suppose to






be necessary for carrying on domestic circulation. This






diminution upon the value of (A), will occasion a new demand for






notes in order to carry (A) to its former extent; and the bank at






issuing the notes demanded, will receive new securities from






those who demand them. Farther, the interest paid upon these new






securities, will answer for the payment of the interest of the






money owing to foreigners, in consequence of the bills drawn upon






them to the order of those who bought the bills from the bank for






the payment of (D).






    This transaction concluded, the consequence will be: that (A)






will be made up to the complete sum necessary for domestic






circulation; and that the interest of the money borrowed from






foreigners, in order to acquit the balance (D), will be paid out






of the interest paid upon the new securities.






    As soon as (D) is thus completely paid off, were coin drawn






from the bank, and sent away by private people, (exchangers,






etc.) it would, form a balance due to the country; which balance






would render exchange favourable, and would occasion a loss to






those who sent away the coin. During this period, the more credit






the bank gives, so much more will its profits increase, and no






demand can be made upon it for coin.






    To conclude: Let banks never complain of those who demand






coin of them, except in the case when it is demanded in order to






be melted down, or for domestic circulation, which may as well be






carried on with paper.






    And so soon as a demand for coin to pay a foreign balance






begins, it is then both the duty and interest of all good






citizens to be as assistant as possible to banks, by contenting






themselves with paper for their own occasions, and by throwing






into the bank all the coin which casually falls into their hands.






As for duty, I shall offer no argument to enforce it. But I say






it becomes a national concern to assist the bank; because the






loss incurred by the bank in procuring coin, falls ultimately on






every individual, by raising exchange; by raising prices; by






raising the interest of money to be borrowed; and, last of all,






by constituting a perpetual interest to be paid to foreigners,






out of the revenue of the solid property of the country. Upon






such occasions, a good citizen ought to blush at pulling out a






purse, when his own interest, and that of his country, should






make him satisfied with a pocket book.













Chap. XIII













Continuation of the Same Subject; and of the Principles upon






which Banks ought to borrow Abroad, and give credit at Home.













    In every question relative to this subject, we must return to






principles. This is the only sure method of avoiding error. The






more intelligent reader, therefore, must excuse short






repetitions, and consider them as a sacrifice he is making to






those of slower capacities, to whom they are useful.






    The principle of banking upon mortgage, is to lend paper






money, and to give credit to those who have property, and a






desire to melt it down. This is calculated for the benefit of






trade, and for an encouragement to industry. If such banks,






therefore, borrow, it must be done consistently with the






principles upon which their banking is founded. If the borrowing






should tend to destroy those advantages which their lending had






procured, then the operation is contrary to principles, and






abusive. So much for recapitulation.






    While trade flourishes and brings in a balance, banks never






have occasion to borrow; it is then they lend and give credit.






This, I believe, we may take for granted.






    When the country where the bank is established begins to owe






a balance to other nations, the bank, as we have seen in the last






chapter, is obliged to pay it off in coin or in bills. We have






there shewn, that in such cases it is inconsistent with their






principles and interest, to withhold lending and giving credit,






as far as is necessary for keeping up the fund of domestic






circulation to that standard which alienation and ready-money






demands require.






    To refuse credit, and at the same time to borrow at home,






must then, at first sight, appear to be doubly inconsistent. But






in order to set this point in the clearest light I am capable, I






shall reason upon a supposition analogous to the situation of the






Scotch banks, and by this means avoid abstract reasoning as much






as I can.






    Let me then suppose that Scotland, during the last years of






the war, ended in 1763, and ever since (I write in 1764), from






the unavoidable distress of the times, was obliged, first, to






import considerable quantities of grain in some bad years;






secondly, to refund the English loans of money settled there in






former times; thirdly, to furnish some of the inhabitants with






funds, which they thought fit to place in England; fourthly, to






pay the amount of additional taxes imposed during the war; while,






at the same time, several of the ordinary resources were






withdrawn; such as, first, a great part of the industrious






inhabitants who went to supply the fleets and armies; secondly,






the absence of the ordinary contingent of troops; and thirdly,






the cutting off of several beneficial articles of commerce. Let






me suppose, I say, that from the total of these losses incurred,






and advantages suspended, Scotland has lost annually, for eight






years past, two hundred thousand pounds. I am no competent judge






of the exactness of this estimate, it is of no consequence to the






argument; but I think I have carried it, as I wish to do, rather






beyond the truth.






    On the other hand, let me suppose that the sum of currency in






paper, sufficient (with the little coin there was) to circulate






the whole of the alienations in Scotland (that is to say, the






whole domestic circulation, supposing no balance to be owing to






England or other countries) to be one million sterling. I am






persuaded I am here below the true estimate, but no matter.






    Is it not evident, from this supposition, and from the






principles we have been deducing, that unless the banks of






Scotland had borrowed every year 200,000 l. sterling, and






alienated annually in favour of England, a fund for paying the






interest of two hundred thousand pounds capital; the million of






Scots currency would have been diminished in proportion to the






deficiency: and would not the consequence of this be, caeteris






paribus, to bring the currency below the demand for it; and,






consequently, to hurt trade, industry, and alienation?






    Now supposing the banks, instead of borrowing in England a






fund equal to this grand balance (as I have said they should do),






to remain in consternation and inactivity, giving the whole of






their attention to the providing of coin and bills to supply the






demand of exchangers, whose business it is to send out this






annual balance; what would the consequence be?






    I answer, that if the banks, in such a case, do not follow






the plan I have proposed, the consequence will be, that two






hundred thousand pounds of their paper will be, the first year,






taken out of the domestic circulation of Scotland; will be






carried to the bank, and coin demanded for it. If the coin is






found in the bank, it is well: it goes away, and leaves the paper






circulation of Scotland at 800,000 l. This void must occasion






applications to the bank for credits to supply it. Is it not then






the interest of the bank to supply it? We have said in the former






chapters that it is. But now let us suppose it to be objected,






that if banks should issue notes at such a time, their cash






having been exhausted, they would be obliged to stop altogether,






upon a return of those notes issued upon additional credits.






    To this I repeat again, because of the importance of the






subject, that notes issued to support the demand of circulation






never can return upon the bank, so as to form a demand for coin;






and if they do return, it must be in order to extinguish the






securities granted by those who have credit in banks (I except






always that regular demand for coin, at all times necessary for






circulating the paper for domestic uses); and if those notes






return of themselves, without being called in, this phaenomenon






would be a proof that circulation is diminishing of itself: but






supposing such a case to happen, it is plain that such return can






produce no call for coin; because when the notes return it is not






for coin, but for acquitting an obligation or mortgage, as has






been often repeated.






    Notes are paid in, I say, because circulation has thrown them






out. Now if circulation has thrown them out as superfluous, it






never can have occasion for coin in their stead; because coin






answers the same purpose.






    But then it is urged that they do not return, because






circulation has thrown them out, but because coin is wanted: be






it so. Then we must say, that circulation is not diminished, as






we at first supposed; but that the return of another year's






balance, makes a new demand for coin necessary.






     Now I ask, how the withholding of this 200,000 l. from






circulation, after the first year's drain, can prevent the






balance from returning? There are by the supposition still






800,000 l. of notes in the country; will not exchangers get hold






of two hundred thousand out of this fund, as well as out of the






million? For he who owes, must pay, that is, must circulate. It






is the circulation of the industrious only, and of the rich; in






short, it is buying, that is to say, voluntary circulation, which






is stopped for want of currency: paying, that is, involuntary






circulation, never can be stopped; debtors must find money, as






long as there is any in the country, were they to give an acre






for a shilling, or a house for half a crown. Now those who owe






this foreign balance are debtors; consequently, they must draw






200,000 l. out of circulation, the second year as well as the






first, whether the standard million be filled up or not. The






withholding, therefore, the credits demanded upon the first






diminution, has not the least effect in preventing the demand for






coin the year following: it only distresses the country, raising






exchange, and the interest of money, by rendering money scarce;






and, what is the most absurd of all, it deprives the bank of






10,000 l. a year interest, at 5 per cent upon 200,000 l. which it






may issue anew.






    Suppose again, that a second year's demand for a balance of






200,000 l. comes upon the bank: if the coin is out, as we may






suppose that after the first year's drain it will not be in great






plenty, expedients must be fallen upon. In such a case, if the






bank do not at once fairly borrow at London (without any






obligation to repay the capital) a sum of 200,000 l. and pay for






it a regular interest, according to the rate of money, as






government does, half yearly, on the change of London, it will be






involved in expedients which will create a monstrous circulation






of coin in the bank, perhaps double of the sum required, and all






these operations will end (as to the bank) in paying this sum out






of the mass of its securities or stock. If the bank should borrow






this 200,000 l. in London, in the manner we have said, the






circulating fund of coin will be noise diminished; there will be






no call extra-ordinary for coin, no rising of exchange; the bank






will have this in its hands; and if it rise, it will be the bank,






not the exchangers who will profit by it.






    But let us suppose that instead of this, it should have






recourse to temporary credits upon which the capital is






constantly demandable, or to other expedients still less






effectual for answering the call which is to come upon it for the






second year's balance; what will be the consequence? To this I






answer, that those merchants, or others who owe the balance, will






apply to exchangers for bills, for which they must pay a high






exchange: these bills will be bought from the exchangers with






notes (taken out of circulation), and will reduce this to 600,000






l. the exchangers ill carry these to the bank and demand coin. If






the bank should make use of an optional clause, to pay in six






months, with interest at 5 per cent the exchangers ill obtain six






months' credit at London, and in consequence of this, their bills






will be honoured and paid. This credit, however, costs them






money, which is added to the exchange: the bank, at the end of






six months, must pay 200,000 l. sterling in coin, which in the






interval it must provide from London. It must pay also six






months, interest upon the paper formerly presented by the






exchanger: add to the account, that bringing down the coin must






cost the bank at least 12 shillings per hundred pounds, and as






much more to the exchanger who receives it in order to send it






back again; and after all these intricate operations which have






cost so much trouble, ill blood, stagnation and diminution of






circulation, expence in exchange to the debtors of the balance,






stress of credit upon exchangers for procuring so large advances






with commission, etc. expence to the bank in providing coin,






expence to the exchangers in returning it: after all, I say, the






operation ends in this; that 200,000 l. of notes, taken out of






the circulation of Scotland returns to the bank, who must have






provided at last, either coin, or credit at London for them. This






return of 200,000 l. of notes does not diminish the mass of those






obligations lodged in the bank, in virtue of which they are






creditors upon the proprietors of Scotland: consequently the bank






has constituted itself debtor to England for those funds which






have been torn from it in the manner above described:






consequently, had it, by a permanent loan, constituted itself






voluntarily debtor to England from the beginning, it would have






paid no more, nay less than it has been obliged to pay;






circulation would not have lost 200,000 l. and the bank would






have had the interest of 200,000 l. added to its former






securities, which would compensate (pro tanto at least) the






expence of borrowing this sum in England upon a permanent fund.






Instead of which it compensates the interest taken out interest






of a temporary loan, with the same sum of of the securities in






its hand. If, therefore, from an ill-grounded fear of issuing as






much paper as is demanded, it shall withhold it, there will






result to itself a loss equal to the interest of what it refuses






to lend; that is to say, there will be a lucrum cessans to the






bank of the interest of this 200,000 l. at 5 per cent or 10,000






l. a year; which other banking companies will fill up, and






thereby extend their circulation.






    If, besides refusing credits, it should call in any part of






those credits already given, it will still more diminish






circulation: but then by this operation it will diminish the mass






of its securities, and so diminish the sum of the interest






annually paid to itself. If it go farther and borrow money at






home, such loans will be made in its own paper, which will






diminish farther the mass of circulation; and if it go on






recalling its credits and mortgages, it will soon draw every bit






of its paper out of circulation, and remain creditor upon






Scotland for the balance only it has paid to England on her






account. Such are the consequences, when a bank which lends upon






private security withholds credit, at a time when a national






balance is due, and when applications are made to it for new






credits, to fill up the void of circulation occasioned by the






operations used for the payment of the balance: such also are the






additional fatal consequences, when to this it adds so






inconsistent an operation as that of borrowing its own notes, or






recalling the credits it had formerly given.






    By the first step, namely, by refusing credit, it appears






passive only in allowing natural causes to destroy both the bank






and the nation, as I think has been proved.






    By the second, namely, by borrowing its own notes, it is






active in destroying both itself and the country.






    What benefit can ever a bank which lends upon private






security reap by borrowing within the country of which it is the






centre of circulation; nay, what benefit can it ever reap from






withholding its notes from those who can give good security for






them!






    Every penny it borrows, or calls in, circumscribes its own






profits, while it distresses the country. After considering all






circumstances, I can discover but one motive which (through a






false light) may engage a bank to this step, to wit, jealousy of






other banks.






    As this speculation is designed to illustrate the principles






of circulation, from circumstances relative to the present state






of the Scotch banks, let us call things by their names.






    The banks of Edinburgh resemble, more than any other in






Scotland, a national bank. Let me then suppose all that can be






supposed, viz. that the abundance of their paper has given






occasion to smaller banks to pick up from them every shilling of






coin which these smaller banks have ever had; and that these have






had the address also to throw the whole load of the balance upon






those of Edinburgh: let this be supposed, more cannot, and let us






allow farther, that this must ever continue to be the case. In






these circumstances, what motive can the banks of Edinburgh have






for withholding credit from those who are able to give security?






What motive can they have for borrowing their own notes?






    Indeed I can account for this plan of management in no other






way than by supposing, that, disgusted at the long continuance of






an unfavourable balance of trade against their country, and vexed






to find the whole load of it thrown upon themselves, they have






taken the resolution to abandon the trade, and are taking this






method to recall their paper altogether.






    Let me suppose the contrary, and I shall not be able to






discover how it is possible that such a conduct can turn to their






own advantage, throwing out all consideration for the public






good, which for some time, no doubt, must be greatly hurt by it.






    As long as any considerable quantity of their notes is in






circulation, and while the principal exchangers reside at






Edinburgh, they never can avoid the loss of paying the balance;






consequently, by refusing to fill up the void occasioned by the






return of their notes, they deliver the whole profit of replacing






them to the other banks, their rivals.






    Let me next estimate the loss they sustain by furnishing coin






to the other banks for the payment of the balance; and then






compare this with what they lose by not keeping circulation full.






    I shall suppose the balance to cost them two hundred thousand






pounds per annum; and I shall suppose that all the smaller banks






put together have occasion for two hundred thousand pounds in






their chests: Is not this computation far above what can possibly






be supposed?






    Will it be allowed that if the banks of Edinburgh willingly






submit to pay the whole of the bills of exchange demanded on






London, for this balance, they will have at least the preference






in replacing this sum to circulation?






    If they pay the balance of 200,000 l. a like sum of their






notes must come in to them, without diminishing one shilling of






the interest paid upon the securities lodged in their banks;






consequently, the only loss incurred is the difference between






the interest they receive, which is 5 per cent and what it would






cost them to borrow a like sum in London, and to remit the






interest of this sum twice a year.






    Now the value of a 4 per cent is at present about 96; so in






paying 40 s. half yearly on the change of London, the Edinburgh






banks may have at London a capital of 96 l. Let me call it only






94 l. supposing their credit not to be quite so good as that of






the funds. I think it as good to the full; and I am sure it is






so. At this rate, the 200,000 l. will cost them an interest of






8510 l. instead of the 10,000 l. which they will receive for the






like sum added to their former securities. Now let me suppose






that they shall have recourse to exchangers to remit this






interest, and that they shall pay for it 5 per cent (which is an






absurd supposition, as they will have the exchange entirely in






their own hands) and that they give all the bills for the 200,000






l. at par (also a ridiculous supposition); the 5 per cent on 8510






l. is 425 l. 10 s. which added to the interest, makes 8935 l. 10






s. so that after all, they will have upon the whole transaction






1064 l. 10 s. of profit.






    Next, as to the loss incurred in furnishing 200,000 l. to the






other banks: If this coin be demanded of them by those banks, the






demanders must, for this purpose, draw 200,000 l. of Edinburgh






notes out of the circulation of Scotland; which I have supposed






may be replaced in some little time by the Edinburgh-banks;






consequently, if this sum also be borrowed at London, there will






result upon this operation, as well as upon the last, a profit of






1064 l. 10 s. But then indeed they must be at the expence of






bringing down the coin borrowed, at 12 s. per 100 l. because






those banks will insist upon having coin, and refuse bills on






London. This will cost 1200 l. from which deduct the profit of






1064 l. 10 s. gained by the first operation, remains of loss upon






this last transaction 135 l. 10 s. no great sum.(4*) Does it not






follow from this reasoning, that the banks of Edinburgh will have






the whole business of exchange in their own hands? What exchanger






then will enter into competition with them? The domestic






transactions with the merchants and manufacturers of Scotland






will be their only business. Farther:






    What prevents the banks of Edinburgh to have offices in every






trading town in Scotland, where their notes may be regularly paid






on presentation, and new credits given as circulation demands






them?






    The only objection I can find to this plan of banking, is the






difficulty of finding credit at London to borrow such large sums.






    This, I think, may also be removed, from the plain principles






of credit. If the banks of Edinburgh enter into a fair coalition,






as they ought to do, I think, in order to form really a national






bank, totally independent of that of England; may they not open a






subscription at London, and establish a regular fund of their






own, as well as any other company, such as the India, or South






Sea? By borrowing in the beginning at a small advance of interest






above the funds, and paying as regularly as government does, will






not all those who make a trade of buying and selling stock fill






their loan, rather than invest it in any other carrying a less






interest? And if the whole land securities, and stocks of those






banks at Edinburgh be pledged for this loan, will it not stand on






as good a bottom as any fund upon earth? And can it be doubted






but parliament will encourage such a scheme, upon laying the






affairs of Scotland and the banks properly before them?






    By this means they will really become a national bank:






because England seems at present to be to Scotland, what all the






rest of the world is to England. Now, the bank of England has no






such fund of credit on the continent, that I know; and were that






country to fall into as great distress, by a heavy balance, as






Scotland has, she would find as many difficulties in extricating






herself by domestic borrowings, bank circulation, etc. as






Scotland has found by the like domestic expedients. She would






then be obliged, for her relief, to have recourse to a fund






opened in Holland, Spain, or Portugal, like to what I propose for






Scotland with respect to England.






    I have heard it alleged, that the whole distress occasioned






to the banks and circulation of Scotland, was occasioned by a






false step taken by them, some years ago; at the time when the






lowness of the English funds, and a prospect of a peace,






occasioned great remittances from Scotland, and a withdrawing of






the large capital of, perhaps, 500,000 l. owing in Scotland to






English persons of property.






    At that time, it is said, the banks imprudently launched out






in giving extensive credits to the debtors of those capitals, and






to those who wanted to remit the funds they had secured in the






hands of people who could not pay them; that this threw a load of






paper into circulation, which it could not vent, being far beyond






the extent of it; and that, consequently, the paper came back






upon the bank, produced a demand for coin, which soon exhausted,






in a manner, all that was in Scotland; and that the country has






never been able to recover itself since.






    This representation is plausible, and has an air of being






founded on principles: in order therefore to serve as a further






illustration of the subject of circulation, I shall point out






where the fallacy of it lies.






    It is said the banks did wrong in giving those credits. I






say, they did right; but they did wrong in not providing against






the consequences.






    Had they refused the credits, the English and other creditors






would have fallen directly upon their debtors, and obliged them






to pay, by a sale of their lands, at an under value; which, I






think, would have been an infinite loss to Scotland. In this way






the price would have been paid in bank paper, taken out of






circulation; for we have said, that he who owes must pay, be the






consequence what it will. This paper would have come upon the






banks at any rate: and being a balance due to strangers, must






have been paid by the banks. The banks therefore did right to






supply the credits demanded; but then they might have foreseen






that the whole load of paying those debts would fall upon them;






which they being in no capacity to do, should have immediately






pledged in England, the interest of the credits they had given






out, after supplying the want of Scots circulation, and when the






notes came in, they would have had at London the capital of that






interest prepared for paying them off, and no inconvenience would






have been found.






    The only thing then the banks seem to have misjudged, was the






granting those credits too hastily, and to people who perhaps






would not have invested their funds in England, had it not been






from their facility in giving credit.






    Banks therefore should well examine the state of circulation,






and of the grand balance, in difficult times, before they give






credit. If circulation be full, they may, with justice, suspect






that the credits are demanded with a view of expediency, to






transport property out of the country, which otherwise may






remain. But in favour of circulation, or in favour of what may be






exacted by foreign creditors, banks never can misjudge it in






giving credit; because, if they should refuse to do it, they in






the first place incur a loss themselves; and in the second place,






they diminish the fund of circulation, and thereby hurt the






country. Now when, at such times, a credit is asked or given,






that demand is a warning to banks to prepare; and by preparing






they are ready, and nO loss is incurred.






    Upon the whole, it is an unspeakable advantage to a nation to






have her foreign debts paid by her bank, rather than to remain






exposed to the demands of private foreign creditors; because,






when a bank pays them, I suppose her to do it upon a loan in the






funding way, where the capital is not demandable by the creditor;






whereas when private citizens are debtors to strangers, the






capitals are always demandable; and when a call comes suddenly






and unexpectedly, the country is distressed. What would become of






Great Britain, were all her debts to strangers demandable at any






time? It is the individuals who owe, in effect, all that is due






to foreigners; because they pay the interest: but they pay this






interest to the public; and the public appears as the debtor to






all strangers, who have no right to exact the capital, although






the state may set itself free by making payment of it whenever it






is convenient.






    I have said above, that after all my reasonings, I could






discover but one motive to induce a bank to withhold credit at a






time when it was demanded for the use of domestic circulation,






viz. jealousy of other banks. What my combinations could not then






discover, my inquiries have since unfolded.






    It is said, that the banks finding so great a propensity in






the inhabitants of Scotland to consume foreign manufactures and






produce, fell upon this expedient for calling in the old, and for






refusing new credits, in order to cut off such branches of






hurtful luxury and expence.






    Could the execution of such a plan prove a remedy against the






vice complained of, this circumstance alone would more clearly






demonstrate the utility of banks upon mortgage, than all I have






been able to say in favour of this establishment.






    Let us therefore have recourse to our principles, in order to






discover what influence a bank can have in this particular.






    We have distinguished between necessary and voluntary






circulation: the necessary has the payment of debts; the






voluntary has buying for its object.






    We have said that he who owes is either a bankrupt, or must






pay, as long as there is a shilling in the country.






    But he who buys, or inclines to buy, must have money, or he






can buy nothing; for if he buys on credit, he then falls






immediately into the former category, and must pay.






    By withholding money for the uses of circulation, which banks






may do for some time, buying may be stopped; paying never can.






    Now if the mass of money in circulation be brought so low, as






that the higher classes of the people, who consume foreign






productions, cannot find money to buy with, what are we to






suppose will be the case with manufacturers, and with the






merchants who buy up their work? Could this operation of the bank






affect the higher classes only, by curbing their anti-patriot






expences, without affecting the lower classes, by curbing their






industry, I should think it an admirable discovery. If it even






could be made to affect those merchants and shopkeepers only, who






deal in foreign commodities, so as to discourage them from






carrying on that business, there would result from it a notable






advantage.






    But alas! wherein are they hurt? They trade in such






commodities, not because they are bad citizens, but because they






are freemen, and seek for profit wherever the laws permit.






    Perhaps, they find more difficulty than other people in






forcing coin from the bank, as matters stand: perhaps, they are






loaded with opprobrious appellations for extorting such payments






from the bank: perhaps, their credits with the bank are recalled.






But must not those who buy from them, pay them? And must not the






bank give coin, or bills, for the notes they receive, when






presented for payment? Why, therefore, throw difficulties in the.






way? All the world knows, that no human engine can prevent a






merchant from laying all the expences of his trade upon the






consumer. Correct the taste of the consumers, and you may stop






the trade: no other restraint will be of any consequence. But in






order to correct the taste of consumers, do not deprive them






absolutely of money; because the money the extravagant landlord






receives, comes from the industrious farmer, for the price of his






grain, etc. Would it be a good scheme for preventing soldiers






from drinking brandy, to cut off their subsistence-money? Give a






drunkard but a penny a day, it will go for liquor; and those who






are fond of foreign clothing, will take the price of it from






their bellies, to put it on their backs.






    If this scheme of the bank's withholding credit, prove, at






present, any check to those dealers in English goods, it will be






but for a very short time. They have been taken by surprize; and






perhaps, thrown into inconveniences from an unexpected change of






bank management; but as long as there is a demand for such






commodities, there will be a supply of them; and when people owe,






they must pay. No operation of a bank can prevent this.






    I must, therefore, according to principles, disapprove of






this public-spirited attempt in the banks of Edinburgh; because,






if it should succeed, it will have the effect of ruining all the






trade and industry of Scotland, in order to prevent the sale of






English goods: and if it does not succeed, which is more than






probable, from the assiduity of other banks in supplying credit,






it will have the effect of ruining the banks of Edinburgh






themselves.






    This step, of calling in the bank credits, and opening a






subscription for a loan, is represented by others in a light






somewhat different.






    By these it is alleged, that in the beginning of the year






1762, when the Edinburgh banks withdrew 1/4 of all their cash






accompts, and opened a subscription for borrowing their own






notes, at an interest of 4, and even 5 per cent the demand for






money, to send to England, was not occasioned by the great






balance owing by Scotland, but to the high premium money then






bore at London; because says the author of a letter to J...






F...... Esq; published at that time,






    'This demand arises from a profit on carrying money to






London, as a commodity, and not as a balance of trade.'






    It is not easy to comprehend how there could be much profit






in carrying money to London at 3 per cent loss by exchange, from






Scotland, where it bore 5 per cent interest.






    It is true, that at certain times, there were considerable






profits made upon stock-jobbing; by which some won, and others






were ruined. I agree, that the country was greatly hurt by the






folly of those who played away their own property, and by the






roguery of others, who borrowed that of their neighbours, with an






intention of gaming at their risk. But is this a vice which any






bank can correct, while it has a note in circulation?






    Had it therefore been a sentiment of patriotism which moved






the banks to such a plan of conduct, I say they thereby did more






hurt to industry, by contracting circulation, than good to






Scotland, by attempting a thing which was beyond their power to






accomplish.






    If they were moved to it by a principle of self-preservation,






I say they lost their aim, by cutting off their own profits,






which would have done much more than indemnify them for the loss






of borrowing at London, at the time when money there was hardest






to be got: for whatever exorbitant expence of exchange gamesters






may incur, to procure ready money to play with, the rate of the






stocks at that time never was so low, as to afford a profit upon






money remitted at 3 per cent loss by exchange, while that money






was bearing 5 per cent interest at home.






    The lowest rate of stocks was in January 1762. Towards the






end of that month 3 per cents fell to 63 1/4: this makes the






value of money to be about 4 l. 12 s. per cent. In these funds,






certainly, no body could invest, with profit, money sent from






Scotland.






    After the new subscription had been open for some time, scrip






indeed, or 4 per cent fell in this month so low as 74 1/2, that






is, money rose to 5.4 per cent whereas had scrip stood at the






proportion of the 3 per cents it should have been worth about 84:






but at the beginning of a war with Spain, when the minds of men






were depressed, and filled with apprehensions, and when a new






loan was perhaps expected at a higher interest than ever






government had given, was it natural for people to be fond of






investing in a 4 per cent stock, which was to fall to 3 per cent






in a few years?






    Besides, let us examine the profit to be made by investing






even in this fund. 100 l. produced in Scotland 5 l. interest,






this capital remitted to London at 3 per cent exchange, was






reduced to 97 l. now if 74.5 l. produced 4 l. the produce of 97






l. would be about 5 l. 4 s. Would any man for the sake of 1/5 per






cent advance of interest on money remitted, ever think of sending






large sums to London to be invested in a falling stock?






    I allow that, upon opening subscriptions, great profit was






sometimes made by those who contracted with government, and who






received the subscriptions at prime cost. But this profit






depended entirely upon the subsequent rise of the subscription,






when the original subscribers brought it first to market; as also






from the small sums they had advanced: this operation was over






before the end of January 1762. The smallness of the sum






advanced, upon which the profit was made, and the ministerial






interest which was necessary to obtain a share in those






subscriptions, rendered it extremely difficult for people in






Scotland to share in the profit by remitting large sums in the






proper point of time.






    Farther, might not the banks, in the short period during






which such large profits were made, had they had the exchange in






their hands, have raised it so high as to frustrate the attempts






of our Scots gamesters? If it be said, that exchangers would have






disappointed them, by giving it, lower. I answer in the negative:






because with this set of men exchange will rise, of itself, in






proportion to the value of money in the place to which people






incline to remit it. And could money at any time bring in, at






London, 20 per cent interest, exchange upon that place would rise






universally in proportion.






    The only motive, not already mentioned, for sending money to






London at this time, under so great disadvantages, was the






prospect of a great rise upon the stocks, in the event of a






peace. Upon which I observe, that the value of that probability






was included in the then price of stock; and had the probability






of a peace, in January 1762, been great, stocks would have risen






in proportion: he, therefore, who vested his money in stock, by






remitting from Scotland at that time, upon an expectation






peculiar to himself, I consider as a gamester, and as an ignorant






gamester too; because he was giving odds upon an equal bett. This






every man does, who, without any prospect of a profit peculiar to






himself, pays a high exchange to bring money to a market, where






he buys at the same price with those who pay no exchange at all.






    From these considerations, I am led to differ from the






ingenious author of the letter to J. F. Esq; who says, 'That in






the present case' (the circumstances operating in January 1762,)






'the demand' (for money to remit to London) 'is unlimited, and no






provision the banks can make can be of use; on the contrary,






could they find a treasure, suppose of a million, it would only






serve to increase it; because this demand arises on a profit on






carrying money to London as a commodity, and not as the balance






of trade.'













Chap. XIV













Of optional Clauses contained in Bank Notes













    As we are examining the principles upon which banks of






circulation upon mortgage, which issue notes payable in coin, are






established in Scotland, it is proper to take notice of every






circumstance which may arise from the extensive combination of






the interests of trade and circulation, especially when we find






such circumstances influencing the political welfare of society.






    An optional clause in a bank note is added to prevent a






sudden run upon banks, at a time when more coin may be demanded






of them than they are in a capacity to pay.






    Banks not regulated by statute, are private conventions, in






which the parties may include what conditions they think fit.






Banks, therefore, may insert in their notes, the conditions they






judge most for their own advantage. Thus, they may either promise






peremptory payment in coin upon demand, or they may put in an






alternative, that in case they do not choose to pay in coin, they






may pay in bills, or in transfer of their stock, or in other






circulating paper not their own; or they may stipulate payment at






a certain time after the demand, with interest during the delay.






All these alternatives are inserted, in order to avoid the






inconvenience of running short of coin, and of being obliged to






stop payment altogether.






    We have said above, that the profits of banks consist in






their enjoying the same interest for the notes they lend, as if






the loan had been made in gold or silver. This is a very great






object, no doubt; but the policy of nations has established it,






and therefore we shall suppose it to be an incontroverted






principle.






    In which ever way, therefore, an optional clause is inserted,






it should be such as to cut off all profit from the bank, upon






all paper presented for payment, from the time of presentation;






and every artifice used to suspend the liquidation of the paper,






to the advantage of the bank, and prejudice of the bearer, should






be considered as unfair dealing in the bank, and prohibited by






law.






    When the optional clause has no tendency to procure an






advantage to the bank, in prejudice of the holder of the paper






(except as far as the holder is thereby deprived of the use of






the coin, which on certain occasions cannot be supplied by the






paper), it becomes the duty of a statesman to examine how far it






is expedient to suffer such stipulations to be inserted in a






money, which is calculated to carry on the mercantile interest of






the nation.






    Banks, we have said, are the servants of the public, and they






are well paid for their services. Although the notes issued by






them are not commonly made a legal tender in payment; yet the






consequence of a well established bank, is to render them so






essential to circulation, that what is not a legal obligation






becomes one, in fact, from the force of custom.






    Let us therefore examine the advantages which result to banks






from this optional clause, and the loss which results to a nation






from their using it, and then compare the advantages with the






inconveniences, in order to determine whether it be expedient to






permit such obstructions in the circulation of paper.






    The advantage which banks reap is confined to that of gaining






time, at the expence of paying interest. The interest paid by






them is an aukward operation. They receive interest for the note;






because they have in their possession the original security given






for the notes when they were first issued; and they begin to






refund this interest to the holder of the note from the time they






avail themselves of the optional clare. Could banks, therefore,






borrow coin in a moment, at the same interest which they pay to






the holder of the note, they would certainly never make use of






this optional clause. But this coin can not be found in a moment;






and the banks, to save themselves the trouble, and the expence of






augmenting their fund of coin, or of procuring a fund in another






country, upon which they might draw for the payment of that






national balance, which, by becoming banks, they tacitly engage






to pay for the nation; render the credit of individuals






precarious with strangers, and raise a general distrust in the






whole society which they ought to serve. Here then is a very






great loss resulting to a nation from the establishment of banks.






Were no bank established, no merchant would contract a debt to






strangers, without foreseeing the ready means of discharging it






with the coin circulating in the country. In proportion as this






coin came to diminish, so would foreign contracts of debt






diminish also. Thus credit, at least, might be kept up, although






trade might be circumscribed, and manufactures be discouraged.






Now when, in order to advance trade and encourage manufactures, a






statesman lends his hand towards the melting down of solid






property, and countenances banks so far as to leave this






operation to them, with the emolument of receiving interest for






all their paper; and when, in order to facilitate the circulation






of this paper, the very inhabitants concur in throwing all their






specie into a bank, is it reasonable to indulge banks so far as






to allow them to add an optional clause, which disappoints the






whole scheme, which stops trade, ruins manufactures, raises the






interest of money, and renders the operation of melting down






property quite ineffectual for the purposes which it was intended






to answer. Farther:






    The loss a bank may be at, in providing coin, is susceptible






of estimation, let it be brought from ever so distant a country;






because we know that the quantity to be provided never can exceed






the value of the grand balance. But who can estimate the loss a






nation sustains, when an interruption is put to the carrying on






of trade and manufactures? When the industrious classes of






inhabitants are forced to be idle for a short time, the






consequences are hardly to be repaired: they starve, they desert;






the spirit of industry is extinguished: in short, all goes to






ruin.






    Besides, when banks do not lay down a well digested plan for






paying regularly, and without complaining, this grand balance due






to strangers, they are forced to have recourse to expedients for






preserving their credit, more burdensome, perhaps, than what is






required of them; and not near so effectual for removing the






inconveniences complained of.... This being the case, the






shortest and the best method for preventing such abuses, is to






oblige banks to pay upon demand, in coin or bills, at the option






of the holders of the note. This will force them into the method






for providing them; to wit, fairly to borrow money from nations






to whom we owe, and to pay a regular interest for it, without an






obligation to refund the capital, until the grand balance shall






take a favourable turn; in which case, the banks will regorge






with coin drawn from strangers; and these strangers will then






find as great an interest in being repaid, as the bank found in






borrowing from them, while the balance was in their favour.













Chap. XXII













Of the Bank of England and of the Banks of Circulation






established on Mercantile Credit













    I have examined, with all the care I am capable of, the






nature of banks calculating for the melting down of solid






property, and the converting of it into paper for the use of






circulation.






    The nature of such banks is but little known in countries






where they have not been established; therefore a distinct






account of them may suggest hints, which in time may prove






useful.






    People who do not employ their thoughts on the theory of






trade and credit, are apt to overlook objects of real utility;






and those who do, have seldom the opportunity of being informed






of the customs of different nations. Were my experience greater,






or had I more opportunities to dive into the recesses of this






great object, the work I now present to the public would better






deserve its attention.






    I now proceed to a deduction of the principles upon which are






founded those banks which are chiefly calculated for the use of






commerce; and as the ground-work of my inquiry, I shall trace






some of the principal operations of the bank of England.






    The establishment of this great company was formed about the






year 1694. Government at that time having great occasion for






money, a set of men was found who lent to it about 1,200,000 l.






sterling, at 8 per cent for the exclusive privilege of banking






for 13 years: with this additional clause, that 4000 l. sterling,






per annum, should be given them to defray the expence of the






undertaking. This sum of 1,200,000 l. sterling, was the original






bank stock. It has been since increased to 11,000,000 l. by






farther loans to government, for the prolongation of their






privileges; as has been taken notice of in the 16th chapter of






the second part.






    This stock, as in banks of circulation upon mortgage, is to






be considered only as a subsidiary security to the public for the






notes they issue: were it the principal and only security for






their paper, this bank would then be founded on the principle of






public, not of mercantile credit; under which last denomination






we are going to point out in what the nature of it differs from






those we have already explained.






    It is a rule with the bank of England to issue no notes upon






mortgage, permanent loan, or personal security. The principal






branches of their business may be comprehended under four






articles, viz. 1. The circulation of the trade of London: 2. The






exchequer business of Great Britain: 3. The paying of the






interest of all the funds transferable at the bank: 4. Their






trade in gold and silver. I shall now shortly explain the nature






of these four great operations; and first as to the circulation






of the trade of London.






    When we speak of the circulation of trade, we understand the






circulation of money paid on the account of trade.






    The great occupation of the London merchants engages them to






simplify their business as much as possible. For this they commit






to brokers every operation which requires no peculiar talents or






ingenuity in the merchant himself; and, for a like reason, they






commit to the bank and private bankers the care of their cash.






    A Scots merchant begins by drawing money from the bank, or






from an exchanger, for which he pays interest: a London merchant






begins by putting money into the bank, for which he draws no






interest at all.






    A London merchant, therefore, can give no order upon the






bank, unless at a time when he has money lodged in it.






    If he has occasion for money at any time, he sends to the






bank the bills he has before they become due, and the bank






discounts them at certain rates, according to their nature.






    If it be a foreign bill, the bank, in discounting it, retains






of the sum, at the rate of 4 per cent per annum, for the time the






bill has to run; but if the bill be at a longer day than 6o days






they will not discount it. So in this case the merchant must keep






his bill until it is within 6o days of the term of payment.






    The reason for this is evident: the security upon which such






bills stand, is purely mercantile. The nearer, therefore, the






payment is, the less risk the bank incurs from the failure of






those who are bound in it.






    The intention of this operation of discounting hills, is






plainly to employ the cash of the bank in a way to draw an






interest for it; but as merchants allow their money to lie dead






for as short a time as they possibly can, the bank must have






quick returns for what they advance upon discount, in order to be






constantly ready to answer all demands. This is no loss to the






bank, and a prodigious advantage to trade, as I shall briefly






explain.






    The bank is constantly receiving cash from every person who






keeps their cash with it. This occasions a constant fluctuation






of payments, which of course must leave at all times a






considerable sum of other people's money in the bank; because it






never is in advance to any one.






    By long practice in the trade, this sum of money becomes






determinate: let us call it the average-money in the hands of the






bank. It is then with this average-money alone, that the bank can






discount bills. Now if the trade of London do afford bills to be






discounted at different dates within 60 days, sufficient to






absorb the whole average-money of the bank, appropriated for






discounting; this branch of business would not go forward with






the celerity required for the trade of London, did the bank






indulge merchants so far as to discount at a longer day.






    From this we learn another reason why the bank of England






discounts no bill which has more than 60 days to run. The first,






mentioned already, is for the greater security of payment; and






the second, which we now discover, is in order to be able to






discount more bills than otherwise they could do, did they






discount at a longer day.






    As I am here upon the subject of discounting bills of






exchange by the bank of England, an operation it has in common






with all the private bankers in the capital, I must answer a






question I have frequently heard proposed.






    How does it happen, that in a city of so great trade as






London, it is possible that people should be found even among






merchants, who allow their money to remain in the hands of






bankers without interest; when in Scotland, a place of so little






trade, interest may always be got for money for the shortest






time?






    The answer to this question is to be gathered from the very






principles of trade itself.






    The money which merchants have either in the hands of the






bank, or of bankers, though very considerable at all times, is in






perpetual fluctuation: it cannot then be lent to any but to a






banker, who would consent to pay interest for the sums in hand.






But no such banker can be found, nor ever will be found, until






all the bankers in London consent to such a regulation. The






reason is plain. One principal use the bankers make of the






average-money in their hands, is the discounting of bills. Who






then could pay interest for money, and discount, in competition






with others of the same trade, who have it for nothing?






    But suppose the bank, and all the bankers in town, should






come to the resolution of giving interest for the money in their






hands, what would be the consequence?






    I answer, that upon such an alteration, discount would rise






above the present rates, to the great prejudice of the trade of






the nation; and bankers would lend money in their hands upon a






more precarious security for the sake of a higher interest.






    All the landed men who reside in London, and many other






wealthy people, not concerned in trade, constantly keep their






money either in the bank, or in some banker's hand without






interest: this enables bankers in general to discount foreign






bills at 4 per cent as has been said, even when the rate of






interest is rather above this standard. This is, as it were, a






contribution from the rich and idle, in favour of the trade of






the nation.






    Let, therefore, gentlemen who have much idle money, think of






any other expedient than that of obtaining interest for it, from






those who discount bills in London. Not one of them can afford to






do it, and thrive by his business; and the hurt which would






result to trade in general, will constantly be a sufficient bar






against a general resolution for that purpose.






    What has been said, will, I hope, prove satisfactory as to






the resolution of the question above proposed, so far as regards






London. It remains to be answered, how those who supply the place






of bankers in Scotland, and even the banks themselves can afford






to pay interest for any sum put into their hands for a short






time.






    I answer, that as to the Scotch exchangers, as we have called






them, the profits on their trade admit of borrowing money at






interest, which that of the bank of England and private bankers






cannot do. If these last can gain 4 or 5 per cent by discounting






of bills, it is all they can honestly expect: every other






employment of the money in their hands is precarious, either as






to the security or promptitude of calling it in, to answer the






demands which are made upon them.






    As to Scotland, we have seen how directly contrary to all






principles it is, for its banks to borrow money within the sphere






of their own circulation. How this diminishes the profits upon






their own trade, and hurts the circulation of the country; but






although it diminish their profit, it carries along with it no






positive loss to them, as would be the case, were a London banker






to pay interest for all the money in his hands, when he never can






draw any back, except for that part which we have called the






average.






    Every London banker is obliged to have a certain sum of cash






constantly in his chest, the interest of which would be all lost,






did he pay for it: whereas the exchangers in Scotland never have






a shilling by them; and when any demand is made upon them, they






draw the money from the banks, in consequence of their credit by






cash accompts.






    Besides foreign bills, which the bank of England discounts at






4 per cent they also discount inland bills, and notes of hand






between merchants in London, at 5 per cent.






    The inland bills to be discounted at the bank must all be






payable in London. The bank calls in no money from any distant






quarter of the kingdom.






    As the discounting of notes of hand between London merchants






might operate the same effect, as if the bank should advance them






money upon personal security, which would be the case, were the






notes of hand drawn for obtaining credit, instead of paying money






really due between the merchants, in the course of business; the






clerks of the bank keep a watchful eye over this branch of






management, and, by examining the reciprocal draughts of






merchants between themselves, they easily acquire a knowledge of






the state of their affairs, and are thereby enabled to judge how






far it is expedient to launch out in discounting either the notes






or bills wherein they are concerned.






    I shall not pretend to assign a reason why, in the price of






discount, the bank makes a difference of 1 per cent between






foreign and inland bills of exchange. It may either be an






indulgence and encouragement to foreign trade; or it may be upon






the consideration of the better security of foreign bills, which






commonly pass through several indorsations before they are






offered to be discounted at the bank.






    I come next to the circulation between the bank and the






exchequer.






    The bank of England is to the exchequer, what a private






person's banker is to him. It receives the cash of the exchequer,






and answers its demands.






    Cash comes to the exchequer from the amount of taxes. The two






great branches of which are the excise and customs. To explain






this operation with the more distinctness, I shall take the






example of the excise.






    The excise is computed to bring in annually from London, and






the fifty two collections over all England, nett into the






exchequer, above four and a half millions sterling.






    The fifty two collectors send the amount of their collections






to London eight times a year, almost entirely in bills. As the






same may be said of the remittances of all the other taxes, we






may from this circumstance observe by the way, that London alone






must constantly owe to the country of England a sum equal to all






the bills drawn upon it; that is to say, to all the taxes which






the country pays: a circumstance not to be overlooked, from which






many things may be learned, as will be taken notice of in the






proper place.






    The bills sent by the fifty two collectors, are drawn payable






to the commissioners of excise; they indorse them to the receiver






general; he carries them to the bank as they fall due, and gets a






receipt for the amount; this receipt he carries to the exchequer,






who charge it in their account with the bank, and deliver tallies






to the receiver general for the amount of his payments; these






tallies he delivers to the commissioners of excise, who enter






them in their book of tallies. This operation is performed once






every week, and serves as a discharge from the commissioners to






the receiver general.






    The bank, again, keeps an account with the exchequer, which






is settled once every day, by two clerks, who go from the bank to






the exchequer for this purpose. When coin is wanted by the






exchequer, for payments where bank notes will not answer, the






coin is furnished by the bank; when paper will serve the purpose,






paper is issued.






    Besides this operation in the receipt of taxes, the bank






advances to government, that is to the exchequer, the amount of






the land or other taxes imposed, which are to be levied within






the year. This we see is a loan upon government security for a






short term, quite consistent with the principles upon which the






bank is established. The large sums the bank is constantly






receiving of public money, and the great assistance it obtains






from thence in carrying on the other branches of its trade,






enable it at present to make advances of money to government at 3






per cent. It observes the same rule with respect to the great






companies of the East Indies, and South Sea, for the same reason;






but no advances are made to private people; and in the






discounting of bills and notes of hand, the regulations above






mentioned are adhered to.






    Thus the whole amount of taxes is poured into the bank, in






the manner we have been describing.






    The bank also keeps the transfer books of all the funds






negotiated at the bank; and out of the public money in its hand,






it pays the interest of these funds for which government allows






to the bank a sum proportionate to the expence of this branch of






management.






    When the bank, as a company, lends to government upon a






permanent fund, the capital whereof is not demandable, this






operation is foreign to their business as a bank, and is






conducted by the company as an article of management of their






private property.






    Let us now examine by what channels their notes enter into






circulation, and the security upon which they stand.






    When issued in the discount of bills, they stand upon the






principles of mercantile credit, and depend upon the goodness of






the bills discounted. When issued upon the faith of taxes to be






paid within the year, they stand upon the security of this






payment, which is of a very complex nature, as any one may






perceive. As long as the inhabitants of England consume






exciseable goods, the excise will be paid: as long as trade goes






on, customs will be paid: and as long as government subsists, the






collateral security of the state will serve to make up all






deficiencies in the amount of taxes. No security, therefore, can






be better than the notes of the bank of England, while government






subsists. The losses that great companies meet with from bad






debts, I am informed, are very inconsiderable.






    The greatest risk the bank runs, is in discounting bad bills;






but by the extent of their business in this branch, and by






circulating the cash of all the merchants who keep accounts with






them, they acquire so perfect a knowledge of the state of their






affairs, that it rarely happens that any one can break for very






considerable sums, without the bank's having a previous notice of






it. A sudden loss may no doubt happen, without a possibility of






being foreseen; but the matter of fact proving that their losses






upon bad bills are inconsiderable, we may thence infer, that






there is but little mystery to the bank, with regard to the






credit of London merchants.






    I come now to the last branch of their management, to wit,






their trade in gold and silver.






    For the circulation of bank notes, coin is necessary. We have






seen, in treating of the Scotch banks, how coin is brought it: to






wit, in consequence of all the payments made to the bank, in






which there must be a proportion of coin equal to what is found






in common circulation. What is not paid in coin, comes in, in






their own notes, which are thereby taken out of the circle; and






consequently make place for a subsequent supply, which issues in






the manner we have described.






    In times of peace, and a favourable balance of trade, the






bank suffers little by the obligation it is under to pay in coin,






except as far as the great confusion of the present currency






affords an occasion to money-jobbers to melt down the new






guineas. The extent of this traffic I am no judge of, and the






bank no doubt has an interest in preventing it as far as the laws






have provided a remedy against it.






    But when large payments are to be made abroad, the distress






of the bank is no doubt very great.






    In Scotland, the banks, upon such occasions, are totally






drained of coin. They have no market for the metals; because they






have no mint to manufacture them into coin. It is different with






respect to the bank of England; their distress proceeds from






another cause.






    The exportation of the heavy guineas in time of war, and






during a wrong balance upon the trade of England, leaves






circulation provided with a light currency only, in which the






bank is obliged to pay their notes; and the intrinsic value of






the gold in which they pay, regulates the price of the metals






they are obliged to buy at market. If they provide them






themselves from abroad, they must pay the price of them in bills






of exchange. But then the lightness of the currency at home sinks






the value of the pound sterling, as it raises the value of the






ounce of gold and silver. So the only considerable loss they






incur, is in providing the metals, which must ever be






considerable, as long as the old guineas remain in circulation.






    The loss upon coining silver is still greater than upon gold;






because besides the loss incurred by reason of the lightness of






the gold, the metals in the silver and gold coin of Great






Britain, are not proportional to the value they bear in the






London market, where they have been bought; as has been






sufficiently explained already in another place.




















Chap. XXIII













Of the first Establishment of Mr Law's Bank in France, in the






year 1716













    In deducing the principles of credit, I have it chiefly in






view, to set in a fair light, the security upon which paper money






is established: and as I imagine, this important branch of my






subject will still be rendered more intelligible, by an example






of the abuse to which this great engine of commerce is exposed, I






now propose to give my reader a short account of the famous bank






of circulation first established in France by Mr Law; but






afterwards prostituted (whether by design, or by fatality, I






shall not here determine) to serve the worst of purposes;






defrauding the creditors of the state, and a multitude of private






persons.






    So dreadful a calamity brought upon that nation, by the abuse






of paper credit, may be a warning to all states to beware of the






like. The best way to guard against it, is to be apprised of the






delusion of it, and to see through the springs and motives by






which the Missisippi bank was conducted.






    After the death of the late King of France, Louis XIV, the






debts contracted by that Monarch were found to extend to 2000






millions of livres, that is, to upwards of 140 millions sterling.






    It was proposed to the Duke of Orleans, regent of the






kingdom, to expunge the debts by a total bankruptcy. This






proposal he rejected nobly; and, instead of it, established a






commission (called the Visa) to inquire into the claims of such






of the nation's creditors as were not then properly liquidated,






nor secured by the appropriation of any fund for the payment of






the interest.






    In the course of this commission, many exorbitant frauds were






discovered; by which it appeared, that vast sums of debt had been






contracted, for no adequate value paid to the King.






    After many arbitrary proceedings, this commission threw the






King's debts, at last, into a kind of order.






    Those formerly provided for were all put at 4 per cent. The






creditors to the amount of six hundred millions, which had not






been liquidated, nor provided for, had their claims reduced, by






the commission, to two hundred and fifty millions. for which they






obtained notes of state, (Billets d'état, as they were called,)






bearing an interest of 4 per cent also.






    These operations performed, the total debts of the late King






were reduced to the sum above mentioned; to wit, two thousand






millions; bearing an interest of 4 per cent or eighty million per






annum.






    From the necessities of government, and the distressed






situation of the kingdom, this interest was ill paid; and there






hardly remained, out of an ill-paid revenue, wherewith to defray






the expence of the civil government.






    About this time, Mr Law presented to the Regent the plan of a






bank of circulation.













Chap. XXV













Continuation of the Account of Law's Bank













    The bank accordingly was established in favour of Law and






Company, by letters patent, of the 2nd of May 1716. The Company






was called, the General Bank; and the note run thus:






    The bank promises to pay to the bearer at sight livres, in






coin of the same weight and fineness with the coin of this day,






value received at Paris.






    The first fund of this bank consisted in 1200 actions (or






shares) of one thousand crowns (or 5000 livres) bank money; in






all six millions; the crown being then 5 livres, 8 to the marc;






silver coin at 40 livres per marc, as has been said: which makes






this livre just worth one shilling sterling: consequently, the






shares were worth 250 l. sterling, and the bank stock worth






300,000 l. sterling.






    By the clause in the note, by which the bank was obliged to






pay according to the then weight and fineness of the coin, those






who received their paper were secured against the arbitrary






measures common in France of raising the denomination of the






coin; and the bank was secured against the lowering of it. In a






short time, most people preferred the notes to the coin; and






accordingly they passed for 1 per cent more than the coin itself.






    This bank subsisted, and obtained great credit, until the 1st






of January 1719: at which time the King reimbursed all the






proprietors of the shares, and took the bank into his own hand,






under the name of the Royal Bank.






    Upon this revolution, the tenor of the note was changed. It






ran thus: The bank promises to pay to the bearer at sight,






livres, in silver coin, value received at Paris.






    By this alteration, the money in the notes was made to keep






pace with the money in the coin; and both were equally affected






by every arbitrary variation upon it. This was called rendering






the paper monnoie fixe; because the denominations contained in it






did not vary according to the variations of the coin: I should






have called it monnoie variable; because it was exposed to






changes with respect to its real value.






    Mr Law strenuously opposed this change in the bank notes. No






wonder! it was diametrically opposite to all principles of






credit. It took place, however; and nobody seemed dissatisfied:






the nation was rather pleased: so familiar were the variations of






the coin in those days that nobody ever considered anything with






regard to coin or money, but its denomination: the consequences






of the variations in the value of denominations, upon the






accompts between debtors and creditors, were not then attended






to; and the credit of the notes of the royal bank continued just






as good as the credit of those of Mr Law's had been; although the






livres in this contained a determinate value; and the livres in






that could have been reduced at any time to the value of






halfpence, by an act of the King's authority, who was the debtor






in them. Nay more, they in fact stood many variations during the






course of the system, without suffering the smallest discredit.






This appears wonderful; and yet it is a fact.(5*)






    Political writers upon the affairs of France at this period,






such as De Melon, Savarie, Dutot and others, abundantly certify






the incredible advantage produced by the operations of Mr Law's






Bank; and the chain of events which followed, in the years 1719,






and 1720, when it was in the King's hands, shew to what a






prodigious height credit arose upon the firm foundation laid by






Mr Law.(6*)






    But alas! the superstructure, then, became so far beyond the






proportion of the foundation, that the whole fabric fell to ruin,






and involved a nation, just emerging from bankruptcy and ruin,






into new calamities, almost equal to the former.






    As long as the credit of this bank subsisted, it appeared to






the French to be perfectly solid. The bubble no sooner bursted,






than the whole nation was thrown into astonishment and






consternation. Nobody could conceive from whence the credit had






sprung; what had created such mountains of wealth in so short a






time; and by what witchcraft and fascination it had been made to






disappear in an instant, in the short period of one day.






    Volumes have been since written in France, by men of






speculation, in order to prove, that it was a want of confidence






in the public, and not the want of a proper security for the






paper, which occasioned this downfal.






    This, if we judge by what has been written, has been the






general opinion of that nation to this day: and since it was






found impossible, in France, to create confidence in circulating






paper, which had no security for its value, many people there,






and some even among ourselves, conclude, that a great part of the






wealth of Great Britain, which consists in paper, well secured,






is false and fictitious.






    I shall now proceed to set before my reader the great lines






of the royal Missisippi bank of France, from the 1st of January






1719, to the total overthrow of all credit, upon the fatal 21st






day of May 1720. This was a golden dream, in which the French






nation, and a great part of Europe was plunged, for the short






space of 506 days.













Chap. XXVI













Account of the Royal Missisippi Bank of France, established on






Public Credit













    In order to unravel the chaos of this affair in a proper






manner, it will not be amiss to begin by giving the reader an






idea of the plan which naturally might suggest itself to the






regent of France, from the hint of Mr Law's bank. By the help of






this clue, he will be the better able to conduct himself through






the operations of this system, as the French call it.






    The Regent perceived, that in consequence of the credit of






Law's bank, people grew fond of paper-money. The consequence of






this, he saw, was to bring a great quantity of coin into the






bank. The debts of France were very great, being, as has been






said, above 2000 millions. The coin, at this time, in France, was






reckoned at about 1200 millions, at 60 livres the marc, or 40






millions sterling. The Regent thought, that if he could draw






either the whole, or even the greatest part of this 1200 millions






of coin into his bank, and replace the use of it to the kingdom,






by as much paper, secured upon his word, that he should then be






able to pay off, with it, near one half of all the debts of






France: and by thus throwing back the coin into circulation, in






paying off the debts, that it would return of itself into the






bank, in the course of payments made to the state; that credit






would be thereby supported, as the bank would be enabled to pay






in coin the notes as they happened to return, in the course of






domestic circulation.






    This was both a plausible and an honest scheme, relatively to






a Duke of Orleans, whom we cannot suppose to have been master of






the principles of credit; and very practicable in a country where






there was so great a quantity of coin as 40 millions sterling,






and a well-established credit in the bank, which prevented all






runs upon it from diffidence. Nothing but a wrong balance of






trade could have occasioned any run for coin; because, for the






reason already given, the paper bore for the most part a premium






of 1 per cent above it.






    Accordingly, during the whole year 1719, the credit of the






royal bank was without suspicion, although the regent had, by the






last day of December of that year, coined of bank paper, for no






less a sum than 769 millions, reckoning in 59 millions of paper,






which had been formerly issued by the general bank of Law and






company; for which he had given value to the proprietors, when he






took the bank into his own hands, as we have said above.






    I must here observe, that by this plan of the Regent, there






was, in one sense, a kind of security for the notes issued. So






far as they were issued for coin brought in from the advanced






value of the paper, this coin was the security: in the second






place, when the coin was paid away to the creditors of the state,






the Regent withdrew the obligations which had been granted to






them; and although I allow that the King's own obligation






withdrawn, was no security to the public, who had received bank






notes for the payment of it; yet still the interest formerly paid






to the creditors, was a fund out of which, upon the principles of






public credit, the annual interest for the notes was secured.






Had, indeed, the French nation perceived upon what bottom the






security for the paper stood, during the year 1719, perhaps the






credit of the bank might have been rendered precarious; but they






neither saw it or sought after it: and the men of speculation






were all of opinion, that as long as there was no more paper






issued by the bank than there was coin in the kingdom, there






could be no harm done. Of this, any person who has read Dutot, De






Melon, Savarie, and others, will be perfectly satisfied. And I






desire no farther proof of the total ignorance of the French in






matters of this kind, than to find them agreeing, that bank paper






must always be good, provided there be coin in the nation to






realize it, although that coin be not the property of the bank.






(Dutot, p. 132, 133.) On the contrary, it is very evident from






what has been said, that although there should be a thousand






times more coin in a country than the bank paper, still that bank






paper must be a mere delusion, and, in fact, of no value






whatsoever, except so far as the bank is possessed of the value






of it in one species of property or another.






    And on the other hand, let the bank paper exceed the quantity






of coin in the proportion of a thousand to one, yet still it is






perfectly good and sufficient, provided the bank be possessed of






an equivalent value in any species of good property. This I throw






in here to point out how far the French were, at least at that






time, and many years after, when Dutot and Melon wrote, from






forming any just notion of the principles of banking. And, I






believe, I may venture to say, that the only reason why banks






have never been established in France, is, because the whole






operation is still a mystery to them. I ground this conjecture






upon an opinion of M. de Montesquieu, who thinks that banks are






incompatible, with pure monarchy; a proposition he would never






have advanced, had he understood the principles upon which they






are established.






    The next remarkable and interesting revolution made upon this






famous bank, was by the arret of February 22, 1720; which






constituted the union of the royal bank with the company of the






Indies.






    By this arret, the King delivered to that company the whole






management of the bank with all the profits made by him since the






first of January 1719, and to be made in time to come.






Notwithstanding this cession, the King remained guarantee for all






the notes, which were not to be coined without an order of






council: the company was to be responsible to the King at all






times for their administration; and, as a security for their good






management, they engaged to lend the King no less than sixteen






hundred millions of livres.






    Here is the aera and beginning of all the confusion. From






this loan proceeded the downfal of the whole system.




















Chap. XXIX













Continuation of the Account of the Royal Bank of France, until






the time that the Company of the Indies promised a Dividend of






200 Livres per Action













    These things premised, what follows will, I hope, be easily






understood.






    As soon as the Regent of France perceived the wonderful






effects produced by Law's bank, he immediately resolved to make






use of that engine, for clearing the King's revenue of a part of






the unsupportable load of 80 millions of yearly interest, due,






though indeed very irregularly paid, to the creditors.






    It was to compass this end, that he bestowed on Law the






company of the West Indies, and the farm of the tobacco.






    To absorb 100 millions of the most discredited articles of






the King's debts, 200,000 actions or shares of this company were






created. These were rated at 500 livres each, and the






subscription for the actions was ordered to be paid in billets






d'état, so much discredited by reason of the bad payment of the






interest, that 500 livres, nominal value in these billets, would






not have sold upon change for above 160 or 170 livres. In the






subscription they were taken for the full value. As these actions






became part of the company's stock, and as the interest of the






billets was to be paid to the company by the King, this was






effectually a loan from the company to the King of 100 millions






at 4 per cent.






    The next step was to pay the interest regularly to the






company. Upon this the actions which had been bought for 170






livres, real value, mounted to par, that is, to 500 livres.






    This was ascribed to the wonderful operations of the bank;






whereas it was wholly owing to the regular payment of the






interest.






    In May following 1719, the East India company was






incorporated with the West India company: and it was stipulated






that the 200,000 actions formerly created, were to be entitled to






a common share of the profits of the joint trade.






    But as the sale of the first 200,000 actions had produced no






liquid value which could be turned into trade (having been paid






for in state billets), a creation of 50,000 new actions was made






in June 1719, and the subscription opened at 550 livres payable






in effective coin.






    The confidence of the public in Mr Law, was at this time so






great, that they might have sold for much more: but it was judged






expedient to limit the subscriptions to this sum; leaving the






price of the actions to rise in the market, according to demand,






in favour of the original subscribers.






    This money amounting to 27,500,000 livres in coin, was to be






employed in building of ships, and other preparations for






carrying on the trade.






    The hopes of the public were so much raised by the favourable






appearance of a most lucrative trade, that more actions were






greedily demanded.






    Accordingly in a month after (July 1719) another creation was






made of 50,000 actions; and the price of them fixed at 1000






livres.






    It must be observed, that all actions delivered by the






company of the Indies, originally contained an obligation on the






company for no more than 4 per cent upon the value of 500 livres,






with a proportion of the profits on the trade; so that the rise






of the actions proceeded entirely from the hopes of those great






profits, and from the sinking of the rate of interest; a






consequence of the plenty of money to be lent.






    But besides the trade, what raised their value at this time,






was, that just before the last creation of actions,June 10, 1719,






the King had made over the mint to the company for a






consideration of 50 millions of livres; and this opened a new






branch of profit to every one interested.






    The sale of the last coined actions taking place at 1000






livres each, so great a rise seems to have engaged the Regent to






extend his views much farther than ever. To say that he foresaw






what was to happen, would be doing him the greatest injustice. He






foresaw it not, most certainly; for no man could foresee such






complicated events. But had he conducted himself upon solid






principles; or by the rules which, we now say, common honesty






required, he certainly never would have countenanced the






subsequent operation.






    The fourth creation of actions was in the beginning of






September 1719.






    In the interval between the third and the fourth creation,






the Regent made over the general farms to the company, who paid






three millions and a half advanced rent for them. And the company






obliged themselves to lend the King (including the 100 millions






already lent upon the first creation of actions) the immense sum






of 1600 millions at 3 per cent that is, for 48 millions interest.






Now it is very plain, that before the month of September 1719, it






was impossible they could lend the King so great a sum.






    They had already lent him, in September 1718, 100 millions,






by taking the billets d'état for the subscription of the first






creation of actions; the second creation had produced coin, laid






out in mercantile preparations; and the third creation of






actions, at the standard value, was worth no more than 50






millions of livres: this was their whole stock. Where then could






they find 1500 millions more to lend?






    I therefore conclude, that at this time, the scheme which I






am now to unfold, must have more or less, taken place between the






Regent and this great company.






    The public was abundantly persuaded of the prodigious profits






of the company, before they got possession of the general farms.






No sooner had they got this new source of riches into their






hands, than they promised a dividend of no less than 200 livres






on every action, which was ten times more than was divided on






them when at first created.






    The consequence of this was, that (supposing the dividend to






have been permanent and secure) an action then became as well






worth 5000 livres as at first it was worth 500 livres;






accordingly to 5000 did it rise, upon the promise of this new






dividend.






    But what could be the motive of the company to promise this






dividend, three months only after their establishment? Surely,






not the profits upon a trade which was not as yet opened. Surely,






not the profits upon the King's farms; for these profits it was






greatly their interest to conceal.






    Their views lay deeper. The Regent perceived that the spirit






of the nation was too much inflamed, to suffer people to enter






into an examination of the wonderful phaenomena arising from the






establishment of the bank, and company of the Indies. If the






company promised 200 livres dividend, the public concluded that






their profits would enable them to pay it; and really in this






particular the public might be excused.






    The plan, therefore, concerted between the Regent and the






company seems to have been, to raise the actions to this great






value, in order to keep up a greater quantity of notes in






circulation.






    This was to be accomplished, first by the Regent's purchasing






the actions himself from the company; secondly, by borrowing back






the notes he had paid for them, in order to fill up the loan






which the company had agreed to make; thirdly, to pay off all the






public creditors with those notes so borrowed back; and fourthly,






when the nation was once filled with bank paper, to sell at an






adequate price, the actions he had purchased from the company, to






withdraw his own paper, and then to destroy it.






    By this operation the whole debts of France were to be turned






into actions; and the company was to become the public debtor,






instead of the King, who would have no more to pay but 48






millions of interest to the company.






    By this operation also, the Regent was to withdraw all the






bank notes which he had issued for no other value but for the






payment of debts; which notes were demandable at the bank: and






for the future, he was to issue no more (I suppose) but for value






preserved.













Chap. XXX













Inquiry into the Motives of the Duke of Orleans in concerting the






Plan of the Missisippi













    Now if we examine the motives of the Regent, with regard to






this plan, and suppose that he forsaw all that was to happen in






consequence of it; and if we also suppose that he really believed






that the company never could be in a situation to make good the






dividend of 200 livres, which they had promised upon their






actions; in a word, if we put the worst interpretation upon all






his actions, we must conclude that the whole was a most






consummate piece of knavery.






    But as this does not appear evidently, either by the






succeeding operations, or ultimate consequences of this scheme, I






am loth to ascribe, to that great man, a sentiment so opposite to






that which animated him, on his entrance upon the regency, when






he nobly rejected the plan proposed to him for expunging the






debts altogether.






    I may therefore suppose, that he might believe that the






company to whom he had given the mint, the tobacco, the farms,






and the trade of France, and to whom he soon after gave the






general receipt of all the revenue, might by these means be






enabled to make good their engagements to the public. I say, this






may be supposed; in which case justice was to be done to






everyone; and the King's debts were to be reduced to 48 millions






a year, instead of 80 millions.






    That this is a supposeable case, I gather from Dutot, who






gives us an enumeration of the revenue of the company, Vol. I, p.






162, as follows:













 Revenue of the Company of the Indies.













Interest paid to the company per annum......    48,000,000






Profits upon the general farms.........         15,000,000






Ditto upon the general receipt of other taxes... 1,500,000






Ditto upon the tobacco............               2,000,000






Ditto upon the mint..............                4,000,000






Ditto upon their trade............              10,000,000













 In all of yearly income............            80,500,000




















    Now if we suppose the interest of money at 3 per cent this






sum would answer to the capital of 2664 millions, which was more






than all the debts of the kingdom, for which they were to become






answerable.






    Upon this view of the matter, I say, it was possible, that






the Regent might form this plan, without any intention to defraud






the creditors; and more I do not pretend to affirm.






    I have said that he purposely made the company raise the






price of their actions, in order to draw more notes into






circulation.






    To this it may be objected, that he might as well have paid






off the creditors with bank notes, without going this round-about






way to work; and have left them to purchase the actions directly






from the company.






    I answer, that such an operation would have appeared too






barefaced and might have endangered the credit of the bank.






Whereas in buying the actions, which were sought after by






everybody, the state appeared desirous only of acquiring a share






of the vast profits to be made by the company. Farther:






    As the company appeared willing to accept of bank notes from






the state, in payment of their actions, this manoeuvre gave an






additional credit both to the actions, and to the notes; a thing






very necessary to be attended to, in a scheme which was






calculated to bring about a total transformation of the security






for the King's debts.






    I must however observe, that at the period concerning which






we are now speaking (viz. at the time the company promised the






dividend of 200 livres per action) the plan we have been






describing could not have been carried into execution.






    There were at that time no more than 400,000 actions created,






rated at 777 millions: of these were already disposed of at least






250,000, to wit, the original 200,000; and the second creation of






50,000, sold for coin. Besides, there were then only coined in






bank notes for 520 millions. So there was not a possibility of






executing the plan I have mentioned, as matters then stood.






    It is from the subsequent operations of the system, that it






appears evident that this and this only could be the intention.






    We shall see how the number of actions were multiplied,






without any other view than to make the public imagine, that the






funds necessary for carrying on the trade of the company were






immense.






    The number of the actions sold to the public was very






inconsiderable, compared with those sold to the Regent, and found






in his hands at the blowing up of the system.






    Besides, at the period when the number of actions was carried






to the utmost, viz. to 624,000, the bank notes bore no proportion






to their value; for, on the 4th of October 1719, when the last






creation of actions was made, the bank notes did not exceed the






sum above specified, to wit, 520 millions.






    But in tracing the progress of the system upon the preceeding






table, we perceive, that after the actions were once carried to






their full number (October 4th 1719), the coining of bank notes






went on at a most prodigious rate: so much that by the month of






May 1720, they were increased from 520 millions, to above 2696






millions; and on the 21st of that month, all this sum, except 461






millions, were found in circulation.






    Farther: We shall see, that when the Regent and the company






made out their accompts, there were found in the Regent's hands






no less than 400,000 actions, which were burnt; and in






consequence of this 25 millions of interest upon the sum of money






due by the King to the company, were extinguished.






    These facts prove beyond a doubt, that these 400,000 actions






had been bought with the notes coined posterior to the 4th of






October 1719; otherwise the actions could not have become the






property of the state.






    Besides, it was acknowledged publicly, that the notes were






coined for this purpose. (See Dutot, Vol. I, p. 144.) In the next






place, it is evident, that the notes which had been given by the






state in payment for these actions, must have been paid back to






the state, by the company, in order to fill up the loan of 1600






millions of livres; which the company never could have otherwise






lent to the King. And in the last place, it is certain that the






public debts were paid off with these notes, so borrowed back






from the company: because we shall find the notes in circulation






at the blowing up of the system, on the 21st of May 1720; and we






shall see how they were paid and withdrawn in October following.






    This detail is, I confess, a little long, and perhaps too






minute: but I thought it necessary to prove the solidity of my






conjectures concerning the Regent's motives in concerting this






plan; which no French author, that ever I saw, has pretended to






unfold, except by hints too dark to be easily comprehended.






    What is now to follow, will still set my conjectures in a






fairer light. We have seen already from the table, with what






rapidity the creation of actions went on from the 13th of






September to the 4th of October 1719. No less than 324,000 were






created in this interval.






    Yet Dutot, vol. ii, p. 169, et seq. positively says, that on






the 4th of October, the company had not sold for more than






182,500,000 livres of their actions. Now the total value, as they






were rated when created, extended to 1,797,500,000; so there was






little more than one tenth part of the value sold off.






    Why therefore create such immense quantities of actions, and






so far beyond the demand for them, but to throw dust in the eyes






of the public; to keep up the spirit of infatuation; and to pave






the way for the final execution of the plan?






    The actions being brought, by four successive creations, of






the 13th and 28th of September, the 2nd and 4th of October, to






their full number, the company, during this interval, obtained






the general receipt of the whole revenue. Thus, says Dutot, vol.






ii, p. 197, the company was intrusted with the whole revenue,






debts and expenses of the state, and all unnecessary charge was






avoided in collecting and administering it.






    In the month of November 1719, the credit of the bank, and of






the company, was so great, that the actions rose to 10,000






livres. Notwithstanding, says Dutot, vol. ii, p. 198, that the






company did what they could to keep down the price, by throwing






into the market, in one week, for no less than 30 millions. He






assigns seven different reasons for this, which, all put






together, are not worth one; to wit, that the Regent was ready to






buy up every one that lay upon hand, in concert with the company.






    If the company had been inclined to keep down the price of






the actions, they had nothing more to do than to deliver part of






the vast number they still had unsold, at the standard value of






5000 livres, at which they were rated when created; and this






would have effectually prevented their rising to 10,000 livres.






    But it was the interest of the Regent, who was at that time






well provided with actions, to stock-job, and to buy with one






hand, while he was selling with the other: these operations were






then as well known in the street called Quinquempoix, as now in






Change-alley.






    As a proof of the justness of my allegation, that the Regent






was doing all he could to raise the price of the actions, Dutot






informs us, in the place above cited, that the bank, at this very






time, was lending money, upon the security of actions, at 2 per






cent. Since this was the case, how was it possible that an






action, with 200 livres dividend, should sell for less than






10,000 livres, which is the capital corresponding to 200 livres,






at 2 per cent?






    This is evident; and were it necessary, it may be proved to






demonstration, that the rise of the actions was merely the






consequence of a political contrivance.






    But if money, at that time, came to bear no more than 2 per






cent and if the company were able to afford 200 livres upon the






action; where was the iniquity of raising the actions to 10,000






livres? I confess I can see none, nor do I perceive either the






impossibility or improbability of the two postulata, had matters






been rightly conducted.






    As to money's falling to 2 per cent any man of 20 years old






may expect to see it, without a Missisippi: and as for the






payment of the dividends, there never were in the hands of the






public, nor ever could be, had all the creditors of the 2000






millions of public debts invested in actions at 10,000 a-piece,






one half of 624,000 actions disposed of: consequently, the 200






livres dividend would not have amounted, upon 312,000 actions, to






more than 62,400,000 livres; and the revenue of the company, as






we have seen, exceeded 80 millions a year.






    This still tends to justify the Regent from the gross






imputation of fraud, in the conduct of the Missisippi.






    But what should still more exculpate this Prince, in the eyes






of every impartial man who examines the whole conduct of the






affair, is the uniform sentiments of the most intelligent men in






France concerning the doctrine of money and credit.






    When we find Dutot, who wrote against the arbitrary change of






the coin; and De Melon, the Regent's man of confidence and






secretary, who wrote in favour of it, two persons considered in






France as most able financiers, both agreeing, that during the






operations of the system, money never was to be considered but






according to denominations; that there was nothing against good






policy in changing the value of these denominations; and that






paper-money, whether issued for value, or for no value, or for






the payment of debts, was always good, provided there was coin






enough in France for the changing of it; and this, although the






coin itself did not belong to the debtors in the paper: when






these principles, I say, were adopted by the men of penetration






in France; when we find them published in their writings, many






years after the Regent's death, as maxims of what they call their






credit public; I think it would be the highest injustice to load






the Duke of Orleans with the gross imputation of knavery, in the






Missisippi scheme.






    Law no doubt saw its tendency. But Law saw also, that credit






supported itself on those occasions, where it stood on the most






ticklish bottom; he saw bank notes to the amount of more than two






thousand millions, issued in payment of the King's debts, without






occasioning any run upon the bank, or without suggesting an idea






to the public that the bank should naturally have had some fund,






to make them good: he saw people, who were in possession of a






value in paper exceeding 6000 millions of livres, 60 to the marc,






(Dutot, vol. i, p. 144.) look calm and unconcerned, when, in one






day, the coin was raised in its denomination to 80 livres in the






marc; by which operation, the 6000 millions of the date before






lost 25 per cent of their real value. He saw that this operation






did not in the least affect the credit of the bank paper; because






people minded nothing but denominations.






    He saw farther, that by the operation proposed, the whole






debt of the King would be transferred upon the company. He saw






that these debts, being turned into bank notes, would not be






sufficient to buy above 200,000 actions, at the value they then






sold for. He knew that the Regent, who had bought 400,000 of






these actions at 5000 livres apiece, that is, at half price,






would remain in possession of 200,000 actions, after selling






enough to draw back the whole of the bank notes issued for the






payment of the debts; and he saw that the company of the Indies






had a yearly income of above 80 millions to enable them to make






good their engagements: besides, he saw a power in the King to






raise the denominations of the coin at will, without shocking the






ideas of his people; by which means he might have paid the 2000






millions with one louis d'or. Put all these circumstances






together, and I can imagine that Law's brain was turned; that he






had lost sight of all his principles; and that he might believe






that his former common sense was, at that time, become absolute






nonsense in France.






    That common sense may become nonsense, is a thing by no means






peculiar to France, but quite peculiar to man.






    I shall offer but one argument more, to prove that the Duke






of Orleans, and Law, could have no premeditated design of






defrauding the public, by these wonderful operations; which is,






that to suppose the contrary, would be to allow them an finite






superiority of understanding over all the rest of Europe.






    Until the bubble bursted nobody could know where it was to






end: everything appeared very extraordinary indeed; and the fatal






catastrophe might have been expected from the greatness of the






undertaking, merely. But had there been any roguery in the plan






itself, it must have appeared palpable long before; because the






whole of the operations in which only it could consist, were






public.






    All the notes were created by public act of council; so were






the actions: the loan of 1600 millions to the King, by the






company, was a public deed; so was the alienation in their






favour, of 48 millions for the interest of this sum. Notes were






avowedly coined in order to purchase actions, (Dutot, Vol I, p.






144.) the creditors were avowedly paid with bank notes, at a time






when it was forbidden to have 500 livres in coin in any person's






custody; consequently, it was also forbidden to demand coin for






bank notes.






    Now all this was going on in the months of February, March,






April and the beginning of May 1720; without any suspicion of any






failure of credit. The coin also was sometimes raised, sometimes






diminished in its value, and still the fabric stood firm.






    Under these circumstances, to say there was knavery, is to






say that all the world were absolutely blockheads, except the






Regent and John Law: and to this opinion I never can subscribe.






    It may seem surprising that I should take so much pains to






justify the two principal conductors of this scheme. My intention






is not so much to do justice to their reputation, which has been






grossly calumniated by many, who have written the history of






those times, as to prove, that an ill-concerted system of credit






may bring ruin on a nation, although fraud be out of the






question: and if a nation be plunged into all the calamities






which a public bankruptcy can occasion, it is but a small






consolation to be assured of the good intentions of those who






were the cause of it.













Chap. XXXI













Continuation of the Account of the Royal Bank of France, until






the total Bankruptcy on the 21st of May 1720













    I now resume the thread of my story. We left off at that






period when the credit of the company and of the bank was in all






its glory (November 1719); the actions selling at 10,000 livres,






dividend 200 livres a year per action, and the bank lending at 2






per cent: all this was quite consistent with the then rate of






money.






    In this state did matters continue until the 22nd of February






1720, when the bank was incorporated with the company of the






Indies.






    The King still continued guarantee of all the bank notes;






none were to be coined but by his authority: and the






comptroller-general for the time being, was to have, at all






times, together with the Prevot des marchands of Paris, ready






access to inspect the books of the bank.






    As the intention, at the time of the incorporation, was to






coin a very great quantity of notes, in order to buy up the






actions, and to borrow back the money, in order to pay off the






creditors, it was proper to gather together as much coin as






possible, to guard against a run upon the bank: for which






purpose, the famous Arret de Conseil, of the 27th of February






1720, was published, forbidding any person to keep by them more






than 500 livres in coin.






    This was plainly annulling the obligation in the bank paper,






to pay to the bearer on demand the sum specified, in silver coin.






    Was it not very natural, that such an arret should have, at






once, put an end to the credit of the bank? No such thing however






happened. The credit remained solid after this as before; and






nobody minded gold or silver any more than if the denomination in






their paper had had no relation to these metals. Accordingly,






many, who had coin and confidence, brought it in, and were glad






to get paper for it.






    The coin being collected in about a week's time, another






Arret de Conseil, of the 5th of March, was issued, rising the






denomination from 60 livres to 80 livres the marc. Thus, I






suppose, the coin which the week before had been taken in at 60






livres, was paid away at 80: and the bank gained 33 1/3 per Cent.






upon this operation. Did this hurt the credit of the bank paper?






Not in the least.






    As soon as the coin was paid away, which was not a long






operation, for it was over in less than a week; another Arret de






Conseil, of the 11th of the same month of March, came out,






declaring that, by the first of April, the coin was to be again






reduced to 70 livres the marc, and on the first of May to 65






livres. Upon this, the coin, which had been paid away the week






before, came pouring into the bank, for fear of the diminution






which was to take place the first of April. In this period of






about three weeks, the bank received in coin about 44 millions of






livres; and those who brought it in thought they were well rid of






it.






    It was during the months of February, March, and April 1720,






that the great operations of the system were carried on.






    We may see by the chronological anecdotes in the 28th






chapter, what prodigious sums of bank notes were coined, and






issued during that time. It was during this period also, that a






final conclusion was put to the reimbursing all the public






creditors with bank notes: in consequence of which payment, the






former securities granted to them by the King, under the






authority of the parliament of Paris, were withdrawn and






annulled.






    Here then we have conducted this scheme to the last period.






    There remained only one step to be made to conclude the






operation; to wit, the sale of the actions, which the Regent had






in his custody to the number of 400,000.






    These were to be sold to the public, who were at this time in






possession of bank notes to the value of 2,235,083,590 livres.






See the foregoing table.






    Had the sale of the actions taken place, the notes would all






have returned to the bank, and there have been destroyed: by






which operation, the company would have become debtor to the






public for the dividends of all the actions in their hands, and






to the King for all those which might have remained in the hands






of the Regent. These proportions we cannot bring to any






calculation, as it would have depended entirely on the price of






the actions during so great an operation; and on the private






conventions between the parties, the Regent and the company.






    But alas! all this is a vain speculation. The system, which






hitherto had stood its ground in spite of the most violent






shocks, was now to tumble into ruin from a childish whim.






    In order to set this stroke of political arithmetic in the






most ludicrous light possible, I must do it in Dutot's own words,






uttered with a sore heart and in sober sadness.






    He had said before, that the coin of France was equal to 1200






millions of livres at 60 livres the marc. This marc was now at 65






livres (in May 1720, as above) so the numerary value, as he calls






it, (that is the denomination,) of the coin was now risen to






1,300,000,000; but the bank notes circulating in the month of May






were carried to 2,696,400,000; then he adds,






    'The 1300 millions of coin which were in France, were very






far from 2696 millions of notes. In that case the sum of notes






was to the sum of coin, nearly as 2 2/27 are to 1; that is to






say, that 207 livres 8 sols 1 7/8 denier in notes, was only worth






100 livres in coin; or otherwise, that a bank note of 100 livres






was only worth 48 livres 4 sols 5 deniers in coin, or






thereabouts.' Would not any mortal conclude from this calculation






of Dutot's, that the whole sum of 1300 millions had been in the






bank, as the only fund for the payment of the paper?






    This is a laboured equation, and from it we have a specimen






of this gentleman's method of calculating the value of bank






paper: but let us hear him out.






    'This prodigious quantity of money in circulation', says he,






'had raised the price of every thing excessively: so in order to






bring down prices, it was judged more expedient to diminish the






denomination of the bank notes, than to raise the denomination of






the coin; because that diminished the quantity of money, this






augmented it.'






    This was the grand point under deliberation, before the






famous arret of the 21st of May was given, viz. whether it were






better to raise the value of the coin, which did not belong to






the bank, but to the French nation, to double the denomination it






bore at this time, that is, to 130 livres the marc, by which






means the 1300 millions would have made 2600 millions, or to






reduce the 2600 millions of bank notes to one half, that is, to






1300 millions, the total denomination of the coin.






    To some people it would have appeared more rational to reject






both the alternatives, and to allow matters to stand as they






were, as long as they would stand, at least until the actions had






been all sold off; but this was not thought proper. After a most






learned deliberation, it was resolved to reduce to one half, the






denomination of all the paper of France, bank notes as well as






actions, instead of raising the denomination of the coin; and






this because the prices of commodities were supposed to be in






proportion to the quantity of the denominations of money.






    The arret was no sooner published than the whole paper fabric






fell to nothing. The day following, the 22nd of May, a man might






have starved with a hundred millions of paper in his pocket.






    This was a catastrophe the like of which, I believe, never






happened: it is so ridiculous that it is a subject fit only for a






farce.






    Here Dutot's lamentations and regrets are inimitable.






    In one place he says, 'Credit was too far fetched to be






solid. It was therefore proper to sacrifice one part, to give a






soliditY to the other. Even this was done; but the consequences






did not correspond to the intention. Confidence, which is the






soul of credit, eclipsed itself, and the loss of the bank note,






drew on the loss of the action.'






    In another place he says, 'This arret of the 21st of May,






which according to some blessoit l'équit*,' (a very mild






expression!) 'destroyed all confidence in the public; because the






King had diminished one half of that paper money (the bank notes)






which had been declared fixed.'






    Is it not a thousand pities that confidence should have






disappeared upon so slight a wound given to equity, only in the






opinion of some? For Dutot thought the operation perfectly






consistent with the principles of public credit.






    He tells us, that a letter was written to calm the minds of






the people, and to shew them how absurd it was, to allow the






paper to be fixed, while the coin varied; but, says he, 'as there






was a revenue attached to the action, the value of that paper did






not depend so much upon the capital, as on the sum of the






interest.' Very just. But were the dividends to stand at 200






livres, without suffering the same diminution as the action? And






how was confidence to subsist in a county, where the






denominations of both the paper and the coin were at the disposal






of a minister?






    The diminution upon the paper, by the arret of the 21st of






May, raised a most terrible clamour; and Law became the






execration of France, instead of being considered as its saviour.






He was banished, and reduced to beggary the same day.






    What profit could either the Regent, or Law, have reaped from






the success of such an operation? Had the coin been raised to 130






livres the marc, no hurt would probably have ensued, and the same






effect would have been produced.






    Had matters been left without any change at all, no bad






consequences would have followed: these existed only in the heads






of the French theorists. There was, indeed, twice as much money






in bank notes as in coin, in the whole kingdom of France: and






what then?






    When the Regent saw the fatal effects of his arret of the






21st of May, he revoked it on the 27th of the same month. On the






29th, he raised the coin to 82 livres 10 sols in the marc, and






re-established all the paper at its former denomination: but, as






Dutot has said, confidence was gone, and was no more to be






recalled. Nothing surprises me, but that she lived so long under






such rough management.






    Dutot, in talking of this augmentation of the coin, on the






29th of May, to 82 livres 10 sols, says, 'This operation was






consistent with the principles of public credit, and






advantageous. They would have done better had they pushed the






augmentation to 135 livres the marc; which would have made the






specie of France equal to the sum of bank notes.' These are his






words, p. 165.






    Are not these very sensible principles, coming from a man who






has written a book, which indeed few people can understand, in






order to prove the great hurt of tampering with the coin of






France?













Chap. XXXII













Conclusion of the Mississippi Scheme













    The Regent, persuaded that the blunder of the 21st of May was






absolutely irreparable, fell to work next to clear accompts with






the company.






    He owed them 1600 millions capital, and 48 millions a year of






interest upon it.






    On the other hand, he had in his possession no less than






400,000 actions, which at 200 livres dividend, which the company






was obliged to pay, amounted to 80 millions a year.






    How the Regent and the company settled matters I do not know






precisely. This, however, is certain, that by the arret of the 3d






of June 1720, the number of 400,000 actions, belonging to the






Regent, were burnt; and 24,000 more, which had been created by






his particular order, the 4th of October 1719, and never






delivered to the company, were suppressed.






    On the other hand, the company ceded 25 millions a year, of






the 48 millions which had been transferred to them.






    This sum was constituted anew upon the town-house of Paris,






as a fund to be subscribed for by the proprietors of bank notes,






at the rate of 2 1/2 per cent or as the French call it at the






40th penny. (Dutot, p. 168.) In consequence of this, 530 millions






of bank notes were subscribed for, and paid in, in the month of






June 1720.






    After the destruction of the 400,000 actions, the credit of






the bank notes languished until the 10th of October 1720.






    The object for which they were created was now gone. The






whole scheme of transferring the King's debts upon the company






vanished in the conflagration of the actions. What was then to be






done?






    The bank was at an end: 2235 millions of discredited bank






notes in circulation, and a small sum of coin to make them good,






was a situation which no authority could long support.






    The resolution then was taken to put a final conclusion to






this great affair; to bid a long farewell to credit and






confidence; and to return to the old system of rents upon the






town-house of Paris; and of coming at money in the best way they






could.






    In this light I see the Missisippi scheme. I may, no doubt,






be mistaken in many things: the lights, or rather the






glimmerings, by which I have been conducted through this inquiry,






must plead my excuse.






    But it is not facts so much as principles, I have been






investigating through this whole disquisition; and the imperfect






account I have been able to give of the former, will at least






point out, I hope, the notions which the French nation, at that






time, had of the latter. If the contrast between French






principles, and those I have laid down, tend to cast any light






upon the subject of paper credit in general, my end is






accomplished: if they ever prove of use to mankind, I shall not






think my labour lost.













Chap. XXXIII













Why Credit fell, and how it might have been supported













    I shall now make a few general observations upon the total






and sudden fall of credit in France in May 1720: and I shall






suggest the means by which, I think, it might have been






sustained, even after all the preceding mismanagement.






    Was it any wonder that the French should be astonished at






this prodigious revolution, at this immense value of paper on the






21st of May, and at the total discredit of every bit of it the






very day following?






    If there had been a value, said they, what became of it? If






there never was any value, how could a nation be so deceived?






This phaenomenon has puzzled many a head; but the nature and






principles of credit furnish an easy solution of it.






    In deducing the principles of credit, we have shewn that a






permanent and well secured fund of interest is always equal in






value to a corresponding capital.






    The difference between a permanent and well secured fund, and






a precarious and ill secured fund, consists in this, that the






first never can disappear, and the other may.






    Now the fund, in this case, was at first real and did exist;






but it was rendered precarious, by a blundering administration:






then credit filed, and in that convulsion, the fund of interest






was fraudulently diminished by an act of power.






    Had the true principles of credit been understood in France,






the bank notes and actions might have been supported, even after






the arret of the 21st of May: and all the monstrous value of






paper, rised so high by the low rate of interest, might have been






preferred: consequently this value, in capital, really existed






relatively to the rate of interest.






    As the object of the present disquisition into the principles






upon which the Missisippi scheme was conducted, is only intended






as an illustration of the principles of credit in general; I






shall first account for the wonderful phaenomenon above mentioned






and then shew how, in the greatest of all the French distress,






their credit might have been reestablished in a more solid manner






than ever.






    As to the wonderful phaenomenon of the prodigious wealth






created by the system, and annihilated in one day, I answer, that






there had been no creation of wealth at all, except in






consequence of the fall of interest.






    First, We have seen that at the death of the late King of






France, the interest of his debts amounted to 80 millions. Was






not this a fund which ought to have been made solid and






permanent? Will any man say, that a regular plan of paying this






interest was a means of creating new wealth? Certainly not.






    Secondly, These debts were mostly secured by contracts of






constitution of annual rents upon the town-house of Paris: a






security taken in the name of a particular creditor, which






requires a form of law to transfer.






    By the scheme we have been explaining, all these securities






were changed: and instead of constitutions of rent, bank notes,






in which the King was equally debtor, were given.






    Will any man say, that this was the means of either






increasing or diminishing the wealth of France? Certainly not. A






man who has a good bond in his pocket is as rich before it is






paid with bank notes as after: but he has not so much money in






his hands; because the bond is not money, and the notes are.






    Thirdly, We have said that the interest of the King's debts






amounted to 80 millions a year, at 4 per cent.






    We have seen how the company of the Indies were provided with






a fund equal to this sum, arising from the 48 millions which the






King paid for the loan of the paper with which the debts were to






be paid, and from many other lucrative branches of revenue; which






instead of being burthensome to the King, were, on the contrary,






the means of augmenting his income, by the advanced rent the






company gave for the different farms which produced them.






    Had the public creditors, therefore, vested their claims in






actions, they would, in consequence of that operation, have






become sharers in the fund of 80 millions a year, administered by






themselves, (and they would then have been the company) open to






be improved by trade abroad, and by a good administration at






home.






    Had this system been carried on in a plain easy way,






consistently with common sense, the public creditors would have






been paid; the King's revenue augmented; and it would have been






put under a good and a cheap administration.






    But, when, by the absurd operations of changing the






denominations of coin and paper, and wantonly playing with every






man's property, the creditors saw themselves standing on the






brink of a precipice; and finding, instead of a good contract on






the town-house of Paris, a bank note put into their hands, which






might be diminished in its value by one half every month, while






at the same time the coin might be raised to double, it was very






natural to suppose, that the intention of the King's ministers






was to withdraw from them totally these 80 millions, to which






they were entitled: in which case, there was an annihilation






indeed of all the notes; but there was no annihilation of wealth:






for in that case, the wealth was still the same, only it was






transferred from the creditors to the King the debtor: that is,






the creditors were defrauded.






    On the other hand, stood the proprietors of the actions sold.






These had been used to make a traffic of buying and selling the






200,000 actions which had been in their hands ever since






September 1717, when they were first created. For we have shewn,






that the posterior creation of actions by the united company, was






a mere delusion, as they were all found in the custody of the






Regent. The actions, I say, were immediately put into a state of






stagnation; because of the discredit cast upon the bank notes,






with which it had been usual to buy them.






    Fourthly, I must observe, that the stagnation of a paper






which carries no interest, is equal to a temporary annihilation.






The holder then is deprived of the use of his money; and he is






not paid for the loss he sustains.






    If, therefore, it had been possible to have given a new






activity to this bank paper, without allowing it to die away, as






it were, in this temporary fit of fainting, credit would have






revived: all accompts would have been kept clear, for this is the






use of paper money, and so short a shock would hardly have been






felt.






    But the great damage resulting to the public, upon every






occasion of this kind, proceeds from the delay in applying the






proper remedy. When any paper is discredited, it immediately






falls in its value. The person then who is the original and real






creditor for the whole value, and in whose hands the paper is






when it suffers the discredit, sells at discount: this is an






irretrievable loss to him; and when the paper recovers its credit






again, either in part, or on the whole, the profit then belongs






to the person who had bought it at discount, and does not go to






indemnify the real sufferer.






    This was the case with respect to the notes of the French






bank: they were allowed to languish from the 21st of May that






they were discredited, until the 10th of October, when their fate






was decided, as has been said.






    Farther, we have seen, that this whole movement of credit had






for its basis 80 millions a year, originally paid to the






creditors for their interest. This sum answered to the capital of






2000 millions; because at the old King's death, interest was






fixed at 4 per cent.






    When, by the operations of the system, all this capital was






turned into money, that is, bank notes, the regorging plenty of






it made interest fall to 2 per cent consequently, the capital,






which constantly draws its value from the interest paid for it,






rose to 4000 millions. We have said that the total value of the






paper rose to 6000 millions, but we must reflect, that above 2000






millions of these 6000 millions was in bank notes, and employed






in buying of actions. So that both the notes and the actions must






not be reckoned as existing together.






    Had the Regent sold the actions, he would have burnt 2000






millions of bank notes, and thus the value in paper would have






remained at 4000 millions, so long as interest remained at 2 per






cent; and had interest fallen still lower, and dividends remained






at 200 livres per action, the value of actions, and consequently






of this capital of 4000 millions, would have risen in proportion,






just as the value of the capital of the debts of Great Britain






rises and falls according to the rate of money; although the same






sum of interest be paid to the creditors at all times.






    This augmentation, therefore, upon the value of all capitals,






during the Missisippi, of lands as well as actions, was in






consequence of the fall of interest, and from no other artifice






whatever. Lands in France, at that time, sold at 80 and 100 years






purchase. (Dutot, vol. II, p. 200.)






    When credit failed, and when all the circulating paper was






thrown into a state of stagnation, interest rose, in proportion






to the deficiency of the supply for the demands of borrowers. The






value of capitals then diminished. But this might have happened






from another cause, had there been no bankruptcy, or intention to






defraud the creditors: a war might have produced it; or any






circumstance which might have raised the rate of interest.






    The rise, therefore, upon capitals, from the fall of






interest, I consider here as no acquisition of wealth: I reckon






wealth to be that which is the annual produce of the capitals.






    So much for the resolution of this wonderful phaenomenon.






    I must now shew that in the height of the distress, the






confidence of the public was still to be regained, and credit






recovered, even after the fatal arret of the 21st of May 1720.






    I lay it down as a principle, that whoever has a sufficient






fund, and pays interest regularly for the money he owes, runs no






risk of losing his credit.






    So soon, therefore, as the Regent found that by his arret of






the 21st of May, all credit had disappeared; had he, upon the






27th of the same month, or at the time he raised the coin to 82






livres 10 sols per marc, ordered all bank notes presented to the






bank, either to be paid in coin, or marked in the books of the






bank as bearing interest at 2 per cent. I say, credit would not






have suffered in any comparison to what it did. Nobody then would






have sold a note at discount; and, had it been necessary, he






might have ordered the interest to be paid monthly.






    The authority I have for this opinion is Dutot, who says,






that upon opening the subscription of 25 millions in the month of






June, the notes fell in their value 11 1/2 per cent only.






    Now the rate of this subscription was at 2 1/2 per cent as we






have seen; consequently, if 100 livres of notes lost but 11 1/2






per cent they were worth 88 1/2 livres in coin; but these 100






livres in notes were worth 2 1/2 per cent because the






subscription was open at that rate: consequently 88 1/2 livres in






coin was also worth 2 livres 10 sols per annum: consequently






interest, at that time, was at 2.825 per cent that is, below 3






per cent even after the bankruptcy.






    Where then was the great harm? Where was the occasion to fly






immediately to the destruction of actions, which were in the






Regent's own hand? A little patience, and good management, would






have set all to rights.






    I should, therefore, have left the notes in circulation under






this regulation, viz. that such as should be presented to the






bank should have had a transfer of 2 per cent paid quarterly; or






a value, in actions, at 10,000 livres per action; which is the






capital answering a dividend of 200 livres at 2 per cent at the






option of the holder: and in case interest had come to fall still






lower, the price of actions might have been augmented.






    I should have set before the public a full and exact account






of the company's funds. I should have banished all mystery from






the affairs of credit. I should have registered a declaration in






parliament, setting forth,






    First, That all future changes either upon the denominations






of paper or coin, were contrary to the maims of good government.






    Secondly, That all stipulations between the King and his






creditors, were to be inviolable. And,






    Thirdly, That the parliament of Paris should for ever remain






invested with an exclusive right to watch over these regulations






in time to come; and I should have bound the parliament by a






special oath for this purpose. I should even have had the King to






take the same oath: and he might have ratified it at his






coronation in 1725.






    By these steps I should have vested a new power in the Kings






of France which they never had before: a power of having money






from their subjects, from their allies, and from their enemies: a






power they have not, nor ever will have, until the principles of






credit be better understood among them.






    Had such a plan been followed, I have not the least doubt,






but that, first, The actions would have been sold at a very great






advanced value above the standard of 5000 livres, at which the






Regent had bought them: secondly, That money would have come back






to 2 per cent and then, thirdly, Had banks been established upon






a proper plan, ease, with industry, would long ere now have






appeared in every corner of that kingdom.






    How finitely more easy would it have been to establish such a






plan in 1720 than at present? At that time the most difficult






part of the whole was executed. The creditors had taken notes for






their claims: the credit then was given and accepted. There was






nothing to be done but to support it. The creditors were then at






the mercy of the state: at present the state is at the mercy of






the creditors. Were such operations on coin to take place at






present, as were then familiar; were the King at present to






attempt to turn the constitutions of rent, perpetual and






life-annuities, into any other form than what they have, the






credit of France would be undone for a long time; and who knows






what views of ambition a situation so deplorable might not stir






up in certain courts of Europe.






    What state would pay its debts, if it durst do otherwise? And






what state can diminish its debts in any other way than by






lowering the interest upon them? But of this more in its proper






place.













Chap. XXXVI













Of Banks of Deposit and Transfer













    I now dismiss the subject of banks of circulation. The






unspeakable advantages drawn from this institution, when properly






regulated, in supplying money at all times to those who have






property for the encouragement of industry, and for improvements






of all sorts, and the bad consequences which result to society,






from the abuse they are exposed to, has engaged me, perhaps, in






too long a discussion of various circumstances relating to them.






    I now come to treat of banks of deposit or of transfer of






credit: an institution of the greatest utility for commerce.






    These two species of banks differ essentially in two






particulars.






    First, That those of circulation serve the purpose of melting






down unwieldy property into money; and of preserving the quantity






of it at the proportion of the uses found for it. Those of






deposit, are calculated to preserve a sum of coin, or a quantity






of precious moveables, as a fund for carrying on the circulation






of payments, with a proportional value of credit or paper money






secured upon them.






    Secondly, In the banks of circulation, the fund upon which






the credit is built, is not corporeally in the custody of the






bank; in the other it is.






    The fundamental principle, then, of banks of deposit, is the






faithful preservation of the fund delivered to the bank, upon






which credit, in money, is given for the value.






    If at any time a bank of deposit should lend, or should in






anywise dispose of any part of this fund, which may consist in






coin, bullion, or any other precious moveable, once delivered to






them, to the end that a credit in money may be written down for






it in their books of transfer, in favour of the depositor, and






his assigns; by this act, the bank departs from the principles






upon which it is established. And if any bank be established






which, by its regulations, may so dispose of the fund of its






credit, then such a bank becomes of a mixed nature, and






participates of that of a bank of circulation.






    These things will be better understood by reasoning from an






example of a true bank of deposit.













Chap. XXXVII













Of the Bank of Amsterdam













    Many authors have written concerning this great bank of






deposit: particularly, Davenant, Sir William Temple, Ricard, in






his Trait* de Commerce revu par Struyk, the author of the Essai






sur le Commerce, and Mr Megens, in his book, which has been






translated into English, under the title of The Universal






Merchant.






    In these authors we find a number of facts, which I shall






combine with my own informations, and here apply principles to






them; in order to communicate a distinct idea of this






establishment. A detail of its particular operations regards






practice, and falls not within my subject.






    The original intention of the States of Holland, in






establishing the bank of Amsterdam, was to collect a large






capital in coin within that city, which might there perpetually






remain, buried in a safe repository for the purposes which we are






now to explain.






    In order to accomplish this plan they established the bank






upon the 31st day of January 1609.






    The method they fell upon to collect the coin, was to order,






that all bills of exchange, for any sum exceeding 300 florins,






should be paid in specie to the bank; and that the holder of such






bills should, instead of receiving the coin, have the value of it






written down in the books of the bank to his credit, at his






command, to be transferred to any person he should appoint; but






never more to be demandable from the bank in specie.






    By this operation, the mass of coin circulating constantly






from hand to hand, between the merchants of Amsterdam, began, by






degrees, to be heaped up in the bank; and as the heap augmented,






so did the sum of credit augment upon the books of the bank.






    It is evident, from this change in the mode of circulation,






that no loss could be incurred from the locking up of the coin.






    As long as coin is in a state of constant circulation, it can






produce no interest to any person. Interest commences from the






moment the coin begins to stagnate; that is to say, so soon as it






comes into the hands of one who has no ready money demand upon






him. When this happens, the proprietor lends it at interest.






    Now the credit in the books of the bank, which is every day






transferable at the bank, answers every purpose of coin, either






for payment or loan: and the proprietor has neither the trouble






of receiving the species, nor any risk from robbery, or false






coin.






    The first advantage the city reaped from this institution,






was, to secure the residence of trade in that place.






    Capitals transferable only at the bank, laid the proprietors






under a necessity of fixing their dwelling where their funds






were, and where only they could be turned to accompt.






    It had another excellent effect in commerce: it pointed out






the men of substance. A credit in bank is no wise equivocal: it






is a fund of undoubted security.






    From the constitution of this bank we may form an estimate of






the extent of the deposit.






    It can only swallow up a sum equal to what is necessary for






circulating the payments of the city of Amsterdam. Were a sum






exceeding this to be shut up in the bank, and were the credits






written in the books of the bank to exceed this proportion, it is






plain, that the value of the bank money would sink immediately.






The reason is obvious: the credits transferable are of no use to






those who have no occasion to transfer; that is, to pay, lend, or






exchange at Amsterdam. So soon, then, as all the demand of






Amsterdam is satisfied, the proprietors of the overplus will seek






to realize their superfluous credit, in order to invest the value






arising from it, in some other place where a demand may arise.






    In order to realize, they must sell their bank credit for






coin; because the bank pays in transfer only. Coin then would be






demanded preferably to credit in bank; consequently, coin would






rise in its proportional value to bank money, or bank money would






lose, which is the same thing. This fluctuation between bank






money and coin, leads me to explain what is called the agio of






the bank.




















NOTES:













1. Solid property, here, is not taken in the strictest






acceptation. In countries of commerce, where banks are generally






established, every denomination of good personal security may be






considered as solid property. Those who have personal estates,






may obtain credit from banks as well as landed men; because these






personal estates are secured either on lands, or in the funds, or






in effects which contain as real a value as lands, and these






being affected by the securities which the proprietors grant to






the bank, may with as much propriety be said to be melted down,






as if they consisted in lands. In subjects of this nature, it is






necessary to extend the meaning of our terms, in proportion to






the circumstances concerning which we reason.













2. Let it be remarked in this place, that although all persons






obtaining credit from a bank for a determinate sum, be obliged to






grant a proper security for the whole sum; yet by the nature of






the obligation, no interest becomes due to the bank in






consequence of it, except in proportion to the sums advanced, and






to the time of such advance by the bank. Example: A. Obtains a






credit from a bank for one thousand pounds. After one month he






mikes a call for one hundred pounds; the interest of this hundred






pounds commences from the day only on which the bank pays it; and






were A. to replace this sum to the bank one week after, he will






be liable for one week's interest only, of one hundred pounds






notwithstanding that his obligation lies in the hand of the bank






for one thousand pounds. When, therefore, in the course of this






subject, we shall mike mention of the interest due to the bank






upon the securities in their hand, for the credits they have






given; this is always understood to be restricted to the sums






actually advanced by the bank upon such credits.













3. At this time there was another circumstance, besides the






demand of a balance to be paid abroad, which distressed the bank,






viz. a suspicion which took place, that if the rebellion had






succeeded, the credit of the bank would have totally failed.






    This very case points out the great advantage of banks upon






mortgage of private credit.






    We have said, that the credit of such banks ought to be






established upon the principles of private securities only. If






their notes be issued upon solid property, then no rebellion can






influence them : but of this more hereafter.













4. We are not to suppose that this yearly balance of 200,000 l.






is always to continue. We have seen how it has been occasioned by






a course of unfavourable circumstances, which have run Scotland






in debt; we have seen how the banks may interpose their credit,






in order to assist the country in paying it; and we shall see,






before we dismiss this subject, how they will be enabled to repay






it, and set Scotland free, by a return of a favourable balance






upon their commerce. Let it then be remembered, that all those






contracts in England are properly the debts of Scotland, not of






the banks. Scotland, therefore, and not the banks, must be at all






the expence thereby incurred. These points shall be explained as






we go along.













5. Here the bank departed from the principles of private and






mercantile credit, upon which Law had formed it, and proceeded






upon those of public credit. Public credit in France is the






credit of the Sovereign ; the solidity of which depends upon the






maxims which he follows in the course of his administration.













6. Dutot, speaking of the great value of paper in notes and






actions, throws out several reflections, in the passage I am now






to transcribe from him, which, at the same time that they prove






the great advantages resulting to France from the establishment






of credit among them, abundantly evince how lame this author's






ideas were concerning the principles of paper credit, and of






circulation. He says, (vol. ii p. 200) 'This paper was indeed






just so much real value, which credit and confidence had created






in favour of the state: and by this sum was circulation






augmented, independently of all the coin which was then in






France.






    Upon this revolution, Plenty immediately displayed herself






through all the towns, and all the country. She there relieved






our citizens and labourers from the oppression of debts, which






indigence had obliged them to contract: she revived industry: she






restored that value to every fund, which had been suspended by






those debts: she enabled the King to free himself, and to make






over to his subjects, for more than fifty-two millions of taxes,






which had been imposed in the years preceding 1719; and for more






than thirty-five millions of other duties, extinguished during






the regency. This plenty sunk the rate of interest; crushed the






usurer; carried the value of lands to eighty and a hundred years'






purchase; raised up stately edifices both in town and country;






repaired the old, which were falling to ruin, improved the soil;






gave a value to every fruit produced by the earth, which before






that time had none at all. Plenty recalled those citizens, whom






misery had forced to seek their livelihood abroad. In a word,






riches flowed in from every quarter. Gold, silver, precious






stones, ornaments of all kinds, which contribute to luxury and






magnificence, came to us from every country in Europe. Whether






these prodigies, or marvellous effects, were produced by art, by






confidence, by fear, or by whim if you please, one must agree,






that that art, that confidence, that fear, or that whim, had






operated all these realities which the ancient administration






never could have produced.






    What a difference in the situation of France at the beginning






of the regency, and the situation in which she was in November






1719!






    Thus far the system had produced nothing but good: everything






was commendable, and worthy of admiration.' These are the






sentiments of Dutot concerning this system of paper credit.













Part III













Of Exchange













Chap. I













Of the first Principles of Exchange













    Having ended what I had to say of banks, in which most of the






principles of private credit and domestic circulation, have been






sufficiently deduced, I now proceed to the doctrine of exchange,






which is the principal operation of mercantile credit, for the






carrying on of foreign circulation.






    The security which merchants commonly take from one another






when they circulate their business, is a bill of exchange, or a






note of hand: these are looked upon as payment. When they give






credit to one another in account, or otherwise, the cause of






confidence is of a mixed nature; established partly upon the






security of their effects, partly on the capacity, integrity, and






good fortune, of the person to whom the credit is given.






    No man but a merchant has any idea of the extent and nature






of this kind of credit. It is a thing to be felt, but cannot be






reduced to principles; and merchants themselves can lay down no






certain rules concerning it. It is an operation which totally






depends upon their own sagacity.






    But when they deal by bills of exchange, the case is very






different. The punctuality of acquitting these obligations is






essential to commerce; and no sooner is a merchant's accepted






bill protested, than he is considered to be a bankrupt. For this






reason, the laws of most nations have given very extraordinary






privileges to bills of exchange. The security of trade is






essential to every society; and were the claims of merchants to






linger under the formalities of courts of law, when liquidated by






bills of exchange, faith, confidence, and punctuality, would






quickly disappear; and the great engine of commerce would be






totally destroyed.






    A regular bill of exchange is a mercantile contract, in which






four persons are concerned, viz. First, The drawer, who receives






the value: Secondly, His debtor in a distant place, upon whom the






bill is drawn, and who must accept and pay it: Thirdly, The






person who gives value for the bill, to whose order it is to be






paid: and, Fourthly, The person to whom it is ordered to be paid,






creditor to the third.






    By this operation, reciprocal debts, due in two distant






parts, are paid by a sort of transfer, or permutation of debtors






and creditors.






    (A) in London, is creditor to (B) in Paris, value 1OO l. (C)






again in London, is debtor to (D) in Paris for a like sum. By the






operation of the bill of exchange, the London creditor is paid by






the London debtor, and the Paris creditor is paid by the Paris






debtor; consequently, the two debts are paid, and no money is






sent from London to Paris, nor from Paris to London.






    In this example, (A) is the drawer, (B) is the acceptor, (C)






is the purchaser of the bill, and (D) receives the money. Two






persons here receive the money, (A) and (D), and two pay the






money, (B) and (C); which is just what must be done when two






debtors and two creditors clear accounts.






    This is the plain principle of a bill of exchange. From which






it appears, that reciprocal and equal debts only can be acquitted






by them.






    When it therefore happens, that the reciprocal debts of






London and Paris (to use the same example) are not equal, there






arises a balance on one side. Suppose London to owe Paris a






balance, value 100 l. How can this be paid? I answer, that it may






either be done with or without the intervention of a hill.






    With a bill, if an exchanger, finding a demand for a bill






upon Paris, for the value of 100 l. when Paris owes no more to






London, shall send 100 l. to his correspondent at Paris in coin,






at the expence, I suppose, of 1 l. and then, having become






creditor on Paris, he can give a bill for the value of 100 l.






upon his being repaid his expence, and paid for his risk and






trouble.






    Or it may be paid without a bill, if the London debtor shall






send the coin himself to his Paris creditor, without employing an






exchanger.






    This last example shews of what little use bills are in the






payment of balances. As far as the debts are equal, nothing can






be more useful than bills of exchange, but the more they are






useful in this easy way of business, the less profit there is to






any person to make a trade of exchange, when he is not himself






concerned, either as debtor or creditor.






    When merchants have occasion to draw and remit bills for the






liquidation of their own debts, active and passive, in distant






parts, they meet upon Change; where, to pursue the former






example, the creditors upon Paris, when they want money for






bills, look out for those who are debtors to it. The debtors to






Paris again, when they want bills for money, seek for those who






are creditors upon it. This is a representation of what we have






frequently called the money market, in which the demand is for






money, or for bills.






    This market is constantly attended by brokers, who relieve






the merchant of the trouble of searching for those he wants. To






the broker every one communicates his wants, as far as he finds






it prudent; and by going about among all the merchants, the






broker discovers the side upon which the greater demand lies, for






money, or for bills.






    We have often observed, that he who is the demander in any






bargain, has constantly the disadvantage in dealing with him of






whom he demands. This is no where so much the case as in






exchange, and renders secrecy very essential to individuals among






the merchants. If the London merchants want to pay their debts to






Paris, when there is a balance against London, it is their






interest to conceal their debts, and especially the necessity






they may be under to pay them; from the fear lest those who are






creditors upon Paris should demand too high a price for the






exchange over and above par.






    On the other hand, those who are creditors upon Paris, when






Paris owes a balance to London, are as careful in concealing what






is owing to them by Paris, from the fear lest those who are






debtors to Paris should avail themselves of the competition among






the Paris creditors, in order to obtain bills for their money,






below the value of them, when at par. A creditor upon Paris, who






is greatly pressed for money at London, will willingly abate






something of his debt, in order to get one who will give him






money for it.






    It is not my intention to dip into the intricacies of






exchange: all intricacies must here be banished; and instead of






technical terms, which are very well adapted for expressing them,






recourse must be had to plain language, for pointing out the






simple operations of this trade. It is by this method that






principles must be deduced, and from principles we shall draw the






consequences which may be derived from them.






    From the operation carried on among merchants upon Change,






which we have been describing, we may discover the consequence of






their separate and jarring interests. They are constantly






interested in the state of the balance. Those who are creditors






on Paris, fear a balance due to London; those who are debtors to






Paris, dread a balance due to Paris. The interest of the first is






to dissemble what they fear; that of the last, to exaggerate what






they wish. The brokers are those who determine the course of the






day: and the most intelligent merchants are those who dispatch






their business before the fact be known.






    Now I ask, how trade, in general, can be interested in the






question, who shall outwit, and who shall be outwitted, in this






complicated operation of exchange among merchants?






    The interest of trade and of the nation is principally






concerned in the proper method of paying and receiving the






balances. It is also concerned in preserving a just equality of






profit and loss among all the merchants, relatively to the real






state of the balance. Unequal competition among men engaged in






the same pursuit, constantly draws along with it bad consequences






to the general undertaking, as has been often observed; and






secrecy in trade will be found, upon examination, to be much more






useful to merchants in their private capacity, than to the trade






they are carrying on.






    Merchants, we have said, in speaking of the bank of England,






endeavour to simplify their business as much as possible; and






commit to brokers many operations which require no peculiar






talents to execute. This of exchange is of such a nature that it






is hardly possible for a merchant to carry on the business of his






bills, without their assistance, upon many occasions. When






merchants come upon Change, they are so full of fears and






jealousies, that they will not open themselves to one another,






lest they should discover what they want to conceal. The broker






is a confidential man, in some degree, between parties, and






brings them together.






    Besides the merchants, who circulate among themselves their






reciprocal debts and credits, arising from their importation and






exportation of goods, there is another set of merchants who deal






in exchange; which is the importation and exportation of money






and bills.






    Were there never any balance on the trade of nations,






exchangers and brokers would find little employment: reciprocal






and equal debts would easily be transacted openly between the






parties themselves. No man feigns or dissembles, except when he






thinks he has an interest in so doing.






    But when balances come to be paid, exchange becomes






intricate; and merchants are so much employed in particular






branches of business, that they are obliged to leave the






liquidation of their debts to a particular set of men, who make






it turn out to the best advantage for themselves.






    Whenever a balance comes to be paid, that payment costs, as






we have seen, an additional expence to those of the place who owe






it, over and above the value of the debt.






    If, therefore, this expence be a loss to the trading man, he






must either be repaid this loss by those whom he serves, that is,






by the nation; or the trade he carries on will become less






profitable to him.






    Every one will agree, I believe, that the expence of high






exchange upon paying a balance, is a loss to a people, no way to






be compensated by the advantages they reap from enriching the few






individuals among them, who gain by contriving methods to pay it






off: and if an argument be necessary to prove this proposition,






it may be drawn from this principle, to wit, whatever renders the






profit upon trade precarious or uncertain, is a loss to trade in






general: this loss is a consequence of high exchange; and






although a profit do result from it upon one branch of trade,






namely, the exchange business, yet this profit cannot compensate






the loss upon every other.






    We may, therefore, here repeat what we have said above, that






the more difficulty, there be found in paying a balance, the






greater will be the loss to the nation.






    This being admitted, I shall here enumerate all the






difficulties which occur in the paying of balances. Most of them






have been already mentioned from their relation to subjects






already discussed; and could it be supposed, that every reader






had retained the whole chain of reasoning already gone through, a






repetition in this place would be superfluous: but as this cannot






be expected, I shall, in as short and distinct a manner as






possible, recapitulate, under four articles, what I hope will be






sufficient to refresh the memory upon each of them.






    The first difficulty which occurs in paying a balance, is to






determine exactly the true and intrinsic value of the metals or






coin in which it is to be paid; that is to say, the real par.






    The second, How to remove the domestic inconveniences which






occur in paying with the metals or coin.






    The third, How to prevent the price of exchange from






operating upon the whole mass of reciprocal payments, instead of






affecting the balance only.






    The remedies and palliatives for these three inconveniences






once discovered, comes the last question, viz. How, when other






expedients prove ineffectual for the payment of a balance, the






same may be paid by the means of credit, without the intervention






of coin; and who are those who should conduct this operation.













Chap. II













How to determine exactly the true and intrinsic value of the






Metals, Coin, or Money, in which a Balance to foreign Nations is






to be paid













    This first question regards the whole mass of reciprocal






payments, as well as that of the balance.






    Every payment to be made of a determinate and fixed value,






that is to say, of a liquidated debt, must be paid in a value






equally determinate in its nature.






    This I suppose to be the case, whether payment be made in the






precious metals unmanufactured, that is bullion, or in a nation's






coin, or in denominations of money of account. All payments in






merchandize, except bullion, must suffer conversions of value






before the debts can be liquidated.






    Money of accompt, which is what we understand by






denominations, we have defined to be a scale of equal parts,






calculated to determine the value of things, relatively to one






another. It must, therefore, be by the money of accompt of






different nations, that the value of bullion and of coin can be






ascertained.






    When coin is introduced, the denominations of money are






realized in a determinate quantity of the precious metals, and






the fabrication of the bullion into coin, raises the value of






this commodity, bullion, like the manufacturing of every other






natural production.






    When coin, therefore, is employed in paying sums according to






the legal denomination which it carries, it is money, not






merchandize; but when it is given at any other rate than its






denomination, it is merchandize, not money.






    In the third book, we have shewn how utterly impossible it is






to realize with exactness, the denominations of money of accompt,






in the metals which are constantly varying in their value, and






exposed to waste in circulation.






    We have shewn, by many examples, how, in fact, the value of






the pound sterling has been subject to great vicissitudes of






late, from the great disorder of the coin.






    The coin of France, is, indeed, upon a better footing in






point of uniformity of weight, than ours; and the proportion of






the metals in it comes nearer their present value in the market:






but then as oft as the balance turns against France, the high






imposition upon her coinage, exposes the coin to great






fluctuations of value, when compared with bullion in the Paris






market. This is also to be ascribed to the imperfection of the






metals when used as money, while they are merchandize at the same






time.






    This being the case, the way to calculate the real par of






exchange between nations, who have in common no determinate and






invariable money, exclusive of coin, is to consider fine gold and






silver as the next best standard.






    This is a merchandize which never varies in its quality. Fine






gold is always the same in every mass; and weight for weight,






there is no difference in its value or quality any where.






    This standard being once adopted, the calculation of the real






par becomes an easy operation to those who know the course of the






bullion market in the two places exchanging.






    If, by the exportation of all the heavy coin of London, bills






must be paid in a worn out currency, the rise in the price of






gold in their market, above mint price, will mark pretty nearly






how far it is light.






    If, on the other hand, the wars of France, or an unfavourable






balance upon her trade, shall oblige her to export her coin, this






operation will sink the value of it, or raise the price of






bullion, which ever way you choose to express it.






    It is not here a proper place to resume the question, which






of the two expressions is the most proper: we are here






considering the value of the bullion to be the thing fixed,






because it answers the purpose. But whether we say that bullion






rises in the markets of Paris and London; or that the value of






their currencies sink, though from very different causes, the






calculation of the real par will proceed with equal accuracy. An






example will illustrate this.






    When fine gold is at the lowest price to which it can ever






fall at Paris, that is to say, at the mint price, it is worth 740






livres 9 sols, or 740.45 livres per mark, in decimals, for the






ease of calculation. The mark contains eight ounces Paris weight.






    Were the ounces of Paris equal to those of troy weight, 1/8






of this sum, or 92.5562 livres, would be the value of that ounce






by which gold is sold at London.






    But the Paris ounce is about 1 1/2 per cent lighter than the






troy ounce; and the exact proportion between them is unknown,






from the confusion of weights, and the want of a fixed standard






in England. By the best calculation I have been able to make, a






Paris ounce should contain 473 grains troy, which makes the






proportion between the two ounces to be as 473 is to 480, which






last is the number of grins in the troy ounce.






    Gold bullion at Paris is regulated by the mark fine, at






London by the ounce standard.






    When standard gold bullion is at the lowest price it can be






at London, it is worth the mint price, or 3 l. 17 s. 101/2 d. per






troy ounce, which, expressed in decimals, is 3.8937 l. sterling.






Standard is to fine, as 11 is to 12; consequently, the ounce fine






is 4.2476 l. sterling: and if the Paris ounce of fine bullion be






worth at the mint, as has been said, 92.5562 livres; the ounce






troy, according to the above proportion, will be worth 93.926






livres. Divide then the livres by the sterling money, and the






quotient will give you the real par of exchange of the pound






sterling, while bullion remains at the mint price in Paris and in






London, viz. 93/42 920/476 = 22.112 livres for the pound, or






32.56 d. sterling for the French crown of 3 livres.






    Gold bullion never can rise in the Paris market, at least all






the last war it never did rise, above the value of the coin; that






is, to 801.6 livres the mark fine, or 100.2 livres per ounce






Paris, and 101.7 livres the troy ounce.






    How high the price of gold bullion may rise at London no man






can say; but the highest it rose to, during the last war, was, I






believe, 4 l. 0 s. 8 d. per ounce standard, or to 4.3999 l.






sterling per ounce fine. By this divide the value of the ounce






troy fine in French livres, the real par at this rate of the






metals in both cities will be 101.7/4.3999 = 23.11 livres for the






pound sterling, or 31.155 pence sterling for the French crown of






3 livres. But suppose two cases which may happen, viz. 1. That






gold bullion at Paris should be at the price of coin, while at






London it may be at mint price: or, 2. That at Paris it may be at






mint price, when at London it is at 4 l. 0 s. 8 d. what will then






the real par of exchange be?






    I answer, that on the first supposition, it will be one pound






sterling, equal to 23.939 livres, and the crown of 3 livres equal






to 30.076 pence sterling. In the other, equal to 21.34 livres for






the pound sterling, and for the crown of 3 livres 33.728. A






difference of no less than 8.9 per cent.






    Is it not evident that these variations must occur in the






exchange between London and Paris? And is it not also plain, that






they proceed from the fluctuation of the price of bullion, not






from exchange?






    We have, I think, demonstrated, in the third book, that a






wrong balance upon the French trade may raise bullion in the






Paris market to the price of coin; and that a right balance may






bring it down to mint price. The price of coinage is above 8 per






cent. So that 8 per cent of fluctuation in the price of bullion






is easily accounted for in the Paris market, without taking into






the account the variations in the English market.






    In London, where no coinage is paid, were all the coin of






full weight, and exportation free, coin and standard bullion






would constantly stand at the same price: but when the heavy coin






is exported, and the currency becomes light by the old coin






remaining in circulation, the price of bullion rises in






proportion.






    Is it surprising that, at London, gold in bullion should be






worth as much as gold of the same standard in guineas, weight for






weight? Is it not worth as much at the mint? Why should it not be






worth as much at the market? I affirm that any man may offer to






pay for the ounce of all the guineas coined by Charles II, James






II, and William III, now in circulation, the highest market price






that ever was given for standard gold bullion in London, and gain






by the bargain.






    This, I hope, will be sufficient to satisfy any body that






there is a mistake in ascribing the high price paid for the






French crown in the London exchange to a wrong balance upon the






trade of England with France.






    From this new light in which I have placed the question, I






hope the arguments used in the 16th chapter of the first part of






the third book, will acquire an additional force; and that






thereby the eyes of this nation may be opened with regard to the






interests of the French trade; a point, I should think, of the






highest concern.






    To calculate, as every body does, the par of the French






crown, either by the gold or the silver in the English standard






coin, when no such standard coin exists; and to state all that is






given for the crown above 29 1/2 d. if you reckon by the silver,






or 30 3/4 d. if you reckon by the gold, for the price of a wrong






balance, is an error which may lead to the most fatal






consequences.






    If government should think fit to impose, in their own mint,






a coinage, equal to that of France, and make all their coin of






equal weight, and at the due proportion, it will take off all the






loss we suffer by paying coinage to France (which we at present






impute to the exchange) while she pays none to us. But then it






will occasion nearly the same fluctuations upon the real par of






exchange as at present; only from another cause on the side of






Great Britain. At present our exchange becomes favourable from






the weight of our own currency, and the balance against France






upon her trade; which, in Paris, raises the price of the bullion






with which we pay our French debts. On the other hand, our






exchange becomes unfavourable from the lightness of our own






currency, from the coinage we pay to France, and balance against






us; which last carries off all our new guineas; and in the Paris






market, sinks the value of that bullion in which we pay our






French debts.






    Were matters put upon a right footing, we should gain from






France the price of our coinage, when our balance is favourable,






and pay coinage to France when their balance is favourable;






instead of seeing our exchange turn more in our favour, from the






additional weight only of the coin in which we pay.






    If French coinage should appear too high a price for the






interest of other branches of British trade, a question I shall






not here determine, let us impose at least as much as to keep our






guineas out of the melting pot, and banish all the old coin which






throws us into such confusion.






    What has been said is undoubtedly too much upon this subject






for the generality of readers. The number of those who can go






through a chapter like this with pleasure is very small. But if






the idea I have been endeavouring to communicate, be found just






by one man of capacity, whose opinion shall have weight in the






deliberations of Great Britain, the consequences may be of great






advantage to this nation; and this consideration will, I hope,






plead my excuse.






    I shall now set this question in another point of view, from






which the stress of my arguments will be felt, and all intricate






reasonings will be laid aside.






    Does not the price of exchange, or what is given above the






par, proceed from the expence of sending the metals from the one






place to the other, the insurance of them, and the exchanger's






profit? If this be true, which I believe nobody will deny, must






not what is paid for the bill, over and above these three






articles, be considered as the real par, relatively to exchange?






Now does the price of the bullion which the exchanger pays in his






own market, or the price he gets for that bullion in the market






to which he sends it, at all enter into the account of the






transportation, risk, and profit, which the exchanger has on the






operation? Certainly not. May there not be a very great






difference between the buying and selling the very same bullion






in different markets at one time and another? Ought we not to






charge this to some other accompt than to the price of exchange,






which is confined to the expence of transporting the balance






only, and when two objects totally different are included under






the same term, does it not tend to perplex our notions concerning






them?






    The great variation in the price of bullion in France, for






example, and the expence of procuring it, proceeds from three






causes. The first is, the coinage imposed in France, while none






is imposed in England. What, therefore, is paid upon this






account, is profit to France, and loss to England.






    The second cause of variation, is the debasement of the value






of the pound sterling, when the heavy gold has been sent abroad.






This loss affects the nation, and every man in England, in the






quality of creditor for sums specified in pounds sterling, to the






profit of all debtors.






    The third cause of variation, is from the great expence






exchangers are put to, in procuring the metals from other






countries, when they cannot be got at home: the consequence of






this shall be explained in a succeeding chapter.






    As all these causes are combined in the exchange upon bills






when they come to market, I think it is proper to analize them,






before the doctrine we are upon can be distinctly understood.






    I shall therefore conclude my chapter with this proposition.






    That the best method of determining exactly the true and






intrinsic value of the metals, coin, or money, in which the






balance due to or from a foreign nation is to be paid, is to






compare the respective value of fine bullion with the respective






denominations of the coin in the one and the other; and to state






the difference as the price paid for the exchange.













Chap. III













How to remove the Inconveniences which occur in paying Balances






with the Metals or Coin of a Nation













    The inconveniences which occur when balances are to be paid






in bullion or coin are these:






    First, the want of secure and ready transportation, from the






obstructions government throws in the way to prevent it.






    Secondly, The difficulty of procuring the metals abroad when






they are not to be found at home.






    When we speak here of balances to be paid from one country to






another, we understand that the general amount of the whole






payments to be made to the world, exceeds the sum of all that is






reciprocally due from it. So far as a balance due to one country






is compensated with a balance due by another, they may be






mutually discharged by bills of exchange, according to the






principles already laid down. All compensations being made by






bills drawn for reciprocal debts, we must here suppose a balance






due by the country whose interest we are considering. This, like






debts between private people, must either be paid in intrinsic






value, or by security for it; that is, by contracting a permanent






debt bearing interest. The first is the question here before us;






the second will be examined in the succeeding chapter.






    The first difficulty mentioned, to wit, the want of secure






and ready transportation of the metals, proceeds in a great






measure from the obstruction government throws in the way, to






prevent the exportation of them. To remove which difficulty, it






is proper to shew how far it is the interest of government to






obstruct, how far to accelerate the transportation of the metals.






    We have said that it is the advantage of every state, in






point of trade, to have balances paid with the least expence. If






then we suppose that it is either necessary or expedient that






this balance should be paid in the metals, government, in this






case, should facilitate by every method the sending them off in






the cheapest and securest way.






    But since governments do not generally follow this rule, we






must examine the reasons which engage them to prefer a contrary






conduct.






    The principal, the most general, and most rational objection






against the exportation of the metals, is, that when it is






permitted without restriction, it engages the people, when they






go to foreign markets for articles of importation, to run to the






coin, instead of carrying thither the product and manufactures of






the country. From which a consequence is drawn, that as long as






coin and bullion are fairly allowed to be exported, the rich






inhabitants will employ them for the purchase of foreign






commodities, to the hurt of domestic industry.






    This is an objection of great weight, relatively to the






situation of many nations. The Spaniards and Portuguese feel it






severely. Many individuals there are very rich; the numerous






classes of the people are either lazy or not properly bred to






industry. In this situation the alternative to government is very






disagreeable. Either the rich must be deprived of many enjoyments






with which their industrious neighbours alone can supply them,






until, by very slow degrees, the lowest classes of their






countrymen can be engaged to change their way of living, and be






inspired with a spirit of industry; or they must be allowed to






gratify the desires which riches create, at the expence of the






nation's treasure, and the improvement of their country.






    From this alternative we discover the principle which must






direct the conduct of a statesman under such circumstances, viz.






    To forbid the importation of every foreign manufacture






whatsoever; to submit to the hardships necessarily implied in the






circumstances of the nation; and to pay freely what balance may






be owing upon natural produce imported for the uses of






subsistence or manufacture.






    This is a plan more rational and more easily executed, than a






general prohibition to export the metals; because by good






regulations, you may prevent the importation of manufactures; but






it is hardly possible to prevent the exportation of the metals






necessary to pay for what you have bought from strangers, by the






permission of government: and on the other hand, suppose you do






effectually prevent the exportation of the metals, the






consequence will be, to put an end to all foreign trade even in






natural produce, which on many occasions may be necessary for the






subsistence of the people. What nation will trade with another






who can pay only by barter? All credit will likewise be cut off;






for who will exchange by bills, with a place which cannot pay,






either in their own currency, or with the metals, the debts which






they reciprocally owe?






    The maxim therefore, here, is to prevent as much as possible






the contracting of debts with strangers; but when they must be






contracted, to facilitate the payment of them.






    This reasoning is calculated to direct a statesman who finds






himself at the head of a rich luxurious nobility, and an idle or






ill-instructed common people, surrounded by industrious






neighbours, whose assistance may be necessary upon many






occasions, to provide subsistence, or the materials of






manufacture, for his people; and this while he is forming a






scheme for introducing industry at home, as a basis for






establishing afterwards a proper foreign commerce.






    But in this subject combinations are finite, and the smallest






change of circumstances throws the decision of a question on a






different principle.






    I will not therefore say, that in every case which can be






supposed, certain restrictions upon the exportation of bullion or






coin are contrary to good policy. This proposition I confine to






the flourishing trading nations of our own time.






    To set this matter in a fair light, and as an exercise upon






principles, I shall borrow two examples, one from history, and






another from a recent experiment made in France, in which a clog






upon the exportation of the metals and coin was very politically






laid on.






    We learn from the history of Henry VII of England, a






sagacious Prince, that he established very severe laws against






the exportation of bullion; and obliged the merchants who






imported foreign commodities into his dominions, to invest their






returns in the natural produce of England, which at that time






consisted principally in wool and in grain.






    The circumstances of the times in which that Prince lived,






must therefore be examined, before we can justly find fault with






this step of his political oeconomy.






    In Henry the VIIth's time, the foreign trade of England was






entirely in the hands of foreigners, and every elegant






manufacture almost came from abroad.






    Under such circumstances, is it not plain, that the






prohibition to export bullion and coin, was a compulsion only






concomitant with other regulations, to oblige the foreign






merchants, residing in his kingdom, to buy up the superfluity of






the English natural produce of wool and grain? Had not the King






taken these measures, the whole money of the nation would have






been exported; the superfluous natural produce of England would






have lain upon hand; the redundancy of which would have brought






the price of them below the value of the subsistence of those who






produced them; agriculture would have been abandoned; and the






nation would have been undone.






    I allow that nothing is so absurd as to permit the






consumption of foreign productions, and to forbid the exportation






of the price of them. I also allow that every restraint laid upon






exporting silver and gold, affects the consumer of foreign goods,






and obliges him to pay the dearer for them; but this additional






expence to the consumer, does not augment the mass of foreign






debts. The debt due abroad will constantly be paid with the same






quantity of coin, whether the exportation of it be allowed or






not; because the loss of those who pay the balance arises from






the risk of confiscation of the money they want to export against






law; or from the high exchange they are obliged to pay to those






who take this risk upon themselves. In both cases, the additional






expence they are put to remains in the country, and is repaid






them by the consumers; consequently, can never occasion one






farthing more to be exported. Prohibitions, therefore, upon the






exportation of specie, are not in every case so absurd as they






appear at first sight. It is very certain that nobody ever gives






money for nothing; consequently, a state may rest assured that






the proprietors of the specie, their subjects, will take






sufficient care not to make a present of it to foreigners. The






intention, therefore, of such prohibitions is not so much to






prevent the payment of what people owe, as to prevent that






payment from being made in coin or bullion; and also to






discourage the buying of such foreign commodities as must be paid






in specie, preferably to others which may be paid for with the






returns of home produce.






    When a statesman, therefore, finds the balance of trade, upon






the main, favourable to the country he governs, he need give






himself no trouble about the exportation of the specie, from this






single principle, to wit, that he is sure that what is exported






is not given for nothing; and that the favourable balance cannot






fail to bring it back again, together with an additional supply






But when the balance turns against him in the regular course of






business, not from a temporary cause, then he may lay restraints






upon the exportation of specie, as a concomitant restriction,






together with others, in order to diminish the general mass of






importations, and thereby to set the balance even.






    In a trading nation, I allow that no restriction of this kind






ought to be made general; because it then affects the useful as






well as the hurtful branches of importation: but in Henry's days,






the sale of corn and wool was sufficient to procure for England






all it wanted from abroad; and the interests of trade were not






sufficiently understood, to enable the state to act by any other






than the most general rules. Forbidding the exportation of coin






was found to promote the exportation of English productions, and






this was a sufficient reason for making the prohibition






peremptory. In this view of the matter, did not Henry judge well,






when he obliged the merchants who imported foreign goods, to






invest the price they received for them in English commodities?






Once more I must say it, he was not so much afraid of the






consequences of the money going out, as of the corn and wool






remaining at home: had he been sure of the exportation of these






articles to as good purpose another way, the prohibition would






have been absurd; but I am persuaded this was not the case.






    The example taken from France is this.






    After the fatal bankruptcy in 1720, by the blowing up of the






Missisippi, the trade of France languished from the effects of






the instability of their coin, until the year 1726, when it was






set upon that footing on which it has remained ever since.






    Upon that last general coinage, the same principles of






enriching the King by the operation directed the conduct of the






minister.






    The old specie was cried down, and proscribed in circulation:






but it was thought, that as it was the King's coin, he had a






liberty to set a price upon it, at a different rate from any






other bullion of the same fineness: and that he had also a right






to command the proprietors of it to bring it to the mint at his






own price.






    The consequence was, that those who could were very desirous






to send it to Holland, in order to draw back the full value of






it, in bills upon Paris.






    Under such circumstances, were not prohibitions upon the






exportation of this coin most consistent with the plan laid down?






We shall, in the next chapter, examine the consequences of this






operation upon the exchange of France.






    What has been said, will, I hope, suffice to explain some of






the principal motives which statesmen may have, when they lay






restrictions on the exportation of the metals, with a view to






favour the trade of their nation, or the interest of the






exchequer.






    But besides the interest of trade, there are other reasons






for laying prohibitions on the exportation of the national coin,






although that of bullion be left free under certain restrictions.






    As often as it happens, that the value of a nation's coin






remains at par with bullion of the same weight and fineness, this






coin, if exported, may be melted down. This is a loss; because it






puts the nation to the expence of coining more for the use of






circulation.






    When nations give coinage gratis, or when they allow the coin






of other nations the privilege of passing current under






denominations exactly proportioned to its intrinsic value, then






coin never can be worth more than any other bullion of the same






standard; consequently, will be exported or smuggled out whenever






there is a demand for it abroad.






    If, therefore, a nation do really desire to avoid an expence






at the mint, they must make it the interest of merchants to






export every other thing preferably to their own coin. This is






done by imposing a duty upon the coinage; and this will either






prevent the coins going out unnecessarily, or if it be necessary






to export it, the coin will return in the payments made to the






nation; because of its advanced value above any other bullion






which can be sent.






    The forbidding of the exportation of coin, implies a






restriction upon the exportation of bullion; because, unless the






bullion be examined at the custom house, and the stamps upon it






looked at, it may happen to be nothing but the nation's coin






melted down, with an intention to avoid the law. For this reason,






whoever brings bullion to be stamped, whether it be for






exportation or not, must declare that it has not been made of the






nation's coin. How slender a check are all such declarations! The






only one effectual is private interest; and as no man will take






his wig to stuff his chair, when he can get cheaper materials






equally good, so no man will melt down coin which bears an






advanced value, when he can procure any other bullion.






    On the whole, we may determine, that a flourishing commercial






state, which has, on the average of its trade, a balance coming






in from other countries, should lay it down as a general rule, to






facilitate the exportation of its coin, as well as of bullion:






and if a very particular circumstance should occur, which may






continue for a short time, it may then put a temporary stop to






it, and facilitate the payment of the balance by the means of






credit.






    I have enlarged so much upon the methods of removing the






first difficulty of paying a balance, with the coin or bullion






found in a nation, that what remains to be said upon the second






difficulty, to wit, the procuring them from other nations, need






not be long.






    Were the mint weights of all countries sufficiently






determinate; were the regulations concerning the standard of






bullion exactly complied with; and were the current market prices






of this important commodity, considered as a valuable piece of






intelligence every where, the bullion trade would be much easier






than it is.






    We have said, that when the reciprocal debts of two nations






are equal, there is no occasion for bullion to discharge them.






But trading nations are many; and from this it may happen, that






one who, upon the whole, is creditor to the world, may be debtor






to a place which is also creditor to the world; and in this case






bullion is necessary to pay the debt.






    If a man owe money to a person who has many creditors, the






person owing, may buy up a claim against him, and pay what he






owes in that way: but if the person to whom he owes the money be






indebted to nobody, then the debt must be paid with ready money.






Just so of nations. For instance, when bullion is demanded to be






exported to Holland, the English merchants, who are creditors on






Spain and Portugal, take from thence their returns in bullion,






for the sake of paying the balance to Holland, which is, upon the






whole, creditor to the world.






    But as it seldom happens, that he who deals with Holland is






the person who has credit in Spain or Portugal, he is obliged to






apply to Portugal merchants in order to procure bullion. They






again who trade thither, having profit on the returns of the






commodities they bring from thence, will expect the same profits






upon the bills they give to the man who wants to take his return






in bullion. This plainly raises the price of bullion in the






English market; because it is brought home in consequence of a






demand from England. On the other hand, when the demands of






England for Portuguese commodities is less than the value of what






Portugal owes her, the Portugal merchants in London are obliged






to take the balance in the metals. These come to the London






market, and are offered to sale to those who want them: then the






price of bullion falls; because the demand comes from the other






side.






    To go through all the operations which merchants employ to






abbreviate the process I have been describing, would, indeed,






better explain the practical part of exchange, than what I have






said; but I write not to instruct merchants, but to extract from






their complicated operations, the principles upon which they are






founded.













Chap. IV













How the Price of Exchange, in a prosperous trading Nation, may be






prevented from operating upon the whole Mass of reciprocal






Payments, instead of affecting the Balance only













    We have taken for granted, that the price of exchange is a






hurt to trade in general.






    In this chapter, we shall inquire more particularly than we






have done, in what this hurt consists. The point of view of every






man, whether he be a merchant or not, is first honestly, and as






far as law and fair dealing do permit, to consult his own private






interest; and in the second place, to promote that interest with






which his own is most closely connected.






    According to this rule, every merchant will endeavour to






manage his exchange business to the best advantage to himself. If






the balance be against his country, he will sell his bills on the






country creditor as dear as he can; that is, he will endeavour to






raise the price of exchange as high as he can against his






country, whatever hurt may thereby result to the general trade of






it; and in so doing, he does only what duty to himself requires;






because it is by minding his business only, that he can trade






upon equal terms with his neighbours, every one of whom will






avail themselves of the like fluctuations, when they happen to be






in their favour.






    From this I conclude, that since the loss upon high exchange






against a country, affects principally the cumulative interest of






the whole, relatively to other trading nations; it is the






business of the statesman, not of the merchants, to provide a






remedy against it.






    The whole class of merchants, no doubt, exchangers excepted,






would be very glad to find the course of exchange constantly at






par. This is also greatly the interest of the state because it is






from the balance in its favour, not from the profit made in






drawing that balance from the debtor, that the state is a gainer.






This must be explained.






    I am to shew how it happens, that a nation is benefited or






hurt by the net balance only, which it receives from, or pays to






her neighbours: and that the whole expence of paying or receiving






this balance, is not national, but particular to individuals at






home. consequently, it would be the interest of all states, that






balances both favourable and unfavourable, were paid by the






nation-debtor, at the least expence possible.






    The great difficulty in communicating one's thoughts upon






this subject with distinctness, proceeds from the ambiguity of






the terms necessary to express them. This may be avoided by






adopting the technical terms of merchants; but these are still






more difficult to be comprehended by any one who is not






conversant in commerce. I shall acquit myself of this difficult






task the best way I can.






    When we speak of a balance between two nations, we shall call






the nation who owes the balance the nation-debtor; the other to






whom it is owing, the nation-creditor.






    Balances imply reciprocal debts; consequently, reciprocal






debtors and creditors. To avoid, therefore, confusion in this






particular, we shall use four expressions, viz. the debtors to






the nation-creditor; the debtors to the nation-debtor; the






creditors of the nation-creditor; the creditors of the






nation-debtor.






    Let me suppose that Paris owes a balance to London, no matter






for what sum. The reciprocal debts between Paris and London are






all affected by the consequence of this balance: that is to say,






some pay or receive more than the real par; some pay or receive






less. To discover where the profit centers, we are now to inquire






who are those who receive more, who are those who receive less.






And as profit and loss are here only relative, that is to say,






the profit of the one is compensated by the loss of the other; we






must see whether upon the whole, the price of the exchange in






this case be favourable to England, to which, by the supposition,






the balance is due, and unfavourable to France, which is the






debtor.






    The question thus stated, let us examine the operations of






exchange at London and Paris, and the state of demand in both,






for money or bills.






    In the London market the demand will be for money in London






for bills on Paris; and he who demands, must pay the exchange;






consequently, the London merchants, creditors of the






nation-debtor, will pay the exchange; that is to say they will






sell their bills on Paris below par; and the London merchants,






debtors to the nation-debtor, will buy them, and gain the






exchange; that is, they will buy bills upon Paris below par.






    Now as this negotiation is carried on at London, I must






suppose it to take place amongst Englishmen; one part of whom






will gain exactly what the other loses; consequently England, in






this respect, neither gains or loses by the exchange paid in






London.






    Let us next examine the interest of the merchants, and the






interest of the nation's trade.






    The creditors of the nation-debtor, who have lost by the






exchange, are those who have exported English commodities to






France. Upon this profitable branch of commerce the exchange






occasions a loss, the consequence of which is, to discourage






exportation.






    The debtors to the nation-debtor, who have gained by the






exchange, are those who have imported French commodities to






England. Upon this hurtful branch of commerce, the exchange






occasions a profit; the consequence of which is, to encourage






importation.






    This is not all. The English merchants exporters, who have






lost, cannot draw back their loss upon the return of their trade;






because the return of their trade is the money due by France, the






balance included. Whereas the English merchants importers may






draw back their loss upon the return of their trade; because that






return is merchandize, which they can sell so much the dearer to






their own countrymen.






    If the balance be in favour of London, importers gain, as we






have seen; when it is otherwise, and when they are obliged to pay






the exchange, they indemnify themselves, by the sale of their






goods so much the dearer. High exchange, therefore, may hurt






exporters, but never can hurt importers.






    Let us next examine the operation of exchange at Paris.






    In the Paris market, the demand will be for bills upon London






for money in Paris; and he who demands must pay the exchange. The






debtors, therefore, to the nation-creditor, must pay the






exchange, and the creditors of the nation-creditor will receive






it; and as both are Frenchmen, the profit and loss to Paris






exactly balance one another.






    But the debtors of the nation-creditor are here the importers






of English goods; consequently, this trade, hurtful to France,






would be hurtful to the importer, could he not indemnify himself






by selling them so much the dearer to his countrymen.






    The creditors, again, of the nation-creditor, who gain the






exchange, are the exporters of French goods to England; so that






here the exportation meets with an encouragement from a balance






against the country.






    From the advantage found upon exchange in favour of






exporters, and the loss upon it to the prejudice of importers, in






the case of a wrong balance, it has been believed, that a wrong






balance produced, upon importations and exportations, effects






equal and contrary, which destroy one another, and thereby bring






the balance even.






    In answer to this, I have two short arguments to offer.






    The first is, that were the argument conclusive, it would






hold good in reversing the proposition; to wit, that the






consequence of a favourable balance would be to destroy the






difference also, and bring the balance even. This I never heard






alleged.






    My second argument is the stronger: that the enhancing of the






prices of importations will not so effectually discourage the






sale of them at home, as the enhancing the prices of exportations






will discourage the sale of them abroad; for the reasons I shall






give presently. But in the mean time,






    If the compensation be considered in relation only to the






merchants importers and exporters, there, indeed, I agree, that






their profit and loss upon the exchange is most exactly balanced;






because what the one party gains the other loses; and the country






loses the balance only, as has been said.






    The reciprocal debts thus transacted by bills of exchange, we






see that no profit can be made, nor loss incurred, either to






London, or Paris, by this operation.






    The profit to Frenchmen is compensated by the loss to






Frenchmen; the same may be said of the English merchants: but the






balance due after these operations are over, and the more remote






consequences of high exchange, affect the relative interest of






the two nations.






    This balance is generally sent by the country-debtor, either






to the country-creditor, or to their order in a third country, to






which the country-creditor is indebted.






    The transportation and insurance of this balance is an






expence to those who owe it, and the profit, if any there be on






this operation, naturally belongs to the exchangers of the same






nation, who conduct it. So whether exchange be paid upon bills






drawn, or expence be incurred in the sending away the balances,






no profit can accrue upon this to the nation-creditor, to the






detriment of the debtor: it must, therefore, do hurt to both,






relatively to nations where, upon the average of trade, exchange






is lower.






    I come now to the method of transporting balances in the






metals.






    We have seen how the creditors of the nation-debtor pay






exchange upon the sale of their bills on Paris, which owes the






balance. If by the operations of exchangers, this exchange should






rise, to their detriment, higher than the expence, trouble, and






insurance, upon bringing this balance from Paris, then they will






appoint some factor at Paris, to whose order they will draw bills






upon their debtors in that city; and as what the Paris-debtors






owe to London is stated in pounds sterling, the London-creditors






will value the pound sterling, according to the rate of exchange,






in their favour; and in their bills upon their Paris-debtor, they






will convert the sum into livres, including the exchange.






    By this operation, we see how the transportation of the






balance may become the business of the creditors of the






nation-debtor: which is a circumstance we have not as yet






attended to: a few words will explain it.






    When the creditors of the nation-debtor sell their bills,






they must pay the exchange, as has been said. When they draw






bills to the order of a friend in the place where the balance is






owing, they superadd the exchange. This their debtors pay: but






then they themselves must be at the trouble and expence of






bringing home the money.






    It is from this alternative which both parties have of either






sending what they owe to their creditors in bullion, or of






allowing them to draw for it at the additional expence of paying






the exchange, that a check is put to the extravagant profit of






exchangers: and from this circumstance arise all the delicate






operations of drawing and remitting.






    Into these we shall not inquire: the principle on which they






depend appears sufficiently plain, and this is the principal






object of our attention.






    I proceed now to consider how far those reciprocal profits






and losses, between merchants in the same country, affect the






trade of it in general.






    When the balance is favourable, we have said that the






exporters lose the exchange, and the importers gain it; and both






being citizens, the country would not be concerned in their






relative interests, were it not that these interests are






connected with that of the country, which reaps great benefit






from the trade of those who deal in exportations, and loss from






the other.






    If, therefore, exchange be found to hurt exportation, when






the balance is favourable, in this respect the country has an






interest in bringing it as low as possible. But as it may be






said, that since the return of an unfavourable balance hurts in






its turn the interests of importation, and favours that of






exportation, exchange thereby operates a national compensation: I






must, in this place, add one reJection more, in order to destroy






the strength of this argument.






    Were this proposition admitted, as I am sure it cannot, from






what we have already said, it would afford no argument against






doing what can be done, to render exchange as little hurtful as






possible to exportation, during the favourable balance. But next






as to the question itself of national compensation, I cannot






allow that even exporters and importers are thereby brought on a






level in point of trade: for this reason, that since it is






allowed, that when the balance of trade is favourable, the price






of exchange is a loss to the merchants exporters; this exchange






in proportion as it augments, must discourage manufacturers, who






must have regular, and even growing profits, according to the






increase of demand. These the merchant exporter cannot afford;






because he cannot draw back from his foreign correspondents, any






advance upon manufactures at home, arising from domestic






circumstances. But when upon an unfavourable balance, the






merchant importer is affected by the exchange against him; this






additional expence he can draw back. because he sells to those






who are affected by all domestic circumstances.






    Let us therefore determine, that it is the interest of a






state to disregard this compensation which is said to be given to






exportation during a wrong balance, which does so much harm; and






to avoid the discouragement given to it by a right balance, which






does so much good. The only way to compass these ends, is to keep






exchange as near to par as possible.






    Could reciprocal debts be always exchanged at par, and could






the expence of bringing home, and sending a balance abroad, be






defrayed by the state, I think it would prove a great advantage






to the trade of a nation. I do not pretend to say that, as






matters stand, the thing is practicable; but as this is a






question which relates to my subject, and seems both curious and






interesting, I shall here examine it.






    At first sight, this idea will appear chimerical; and some






readers may despise it too much, to be at the trouble to read






what may be said for it. I shall therefore set out by informing






them that the scheme has been tried, in a great kingdom in






Europe, under a great minister: I say it was attempted in France,






in the year 1726, under the administration of Cardinal Fleuri,






and produced its effect; although it was soon given up, for a






circumstance which, I think, never can occur in Great Britain.






    After the last general coinage in France, 1726, exchange






became so unfavourable to that kingdom, as to occasion a general






outcry. The Cardinal, to put a stop to the clamour, and to set






exchange to rights, as he thought, ordered Samuel Bernard, at






that time a man of great credit, to give bills on Holland at par,






to all the merchants; and in order to enable him to place funds






in Amsterdam, for the payment of his bills, the Cardinal supplied






this exchanger with sufficient quantities of the old coin, then






cried down, and paid for the exportation of it to Holland.






    Upon this, exchange on Holland came to par; and the






exchangers at Paris looked on the operation with amazement. The






minister, however, in a short time discovered, that by this he






was undoing with one hand, what he wanted to establish with the






other. He therefore stopped in his career, after having paid,






perhaps, ten times the balance due to Holland.






    By unfolding the combination of this operation, I shall be






better able to cast light on the question before us, than in any






other way.






    When the general coinage was made in France, by the arret of






the month of January 1726, all the old coin was cried down, and






ordered to be recoined. The mint price of fine gold per marc was






fixed at 536 livres 14 sols 6 deniers; that of the silver at 37






livres 1 sol 9 deniers. These were the prices at which the mint






paid for bullion, when offered to be coined. But the King, as if






he had a right upon the metal in the old coin, commanded it to be






delivered at the mint at no higher rate than 492 livres for the






marc of fine gold, and at 34 livres for the marc of fine silver:






and to compel the possessors of it to bring it in, all






exportation and melting down was made highly penal; the avenues






from France were beset with guards to prevent the going out; and






the melting pots were strictly watched. Upon this, the possessors






of the old coin, rather than sell it to the mint at so great an






undervalue, had recourse to exchangers for bills upon Holland for






it: and these being obliged to send it thither at a great expence






and risk, exacted a very high exchange, which, consequently,






affected the whole trade of France.






    Politicians persuaded the Cardinal, that exchange had got up






so high, not from the discredit cast on the old coin, but because






of the wrong balance of trade, and of the alteration which had






been made at that time upon the denomination of the new coin: and






that as soon as the balance against France was paid, exchange






would return to par. Upon this the Cardinal set Bernard to work,






but he soon discovered his mistake; and by arret of the 15th of






June the same year, raised the mint price of the old coin, and






then exchange became favourable.






    These are all facts mentioned by Dutot, and yet he never will






ascribe the rise of exchange in France to any other cause than to






the tampering with the denominations of their coin: an operation






which may rob one set of people in favour of another; but which






has very little effect upon exchange, when other circumstances do






not concur, as in the case before us.






    Now had the high exchange against France been owing to a






wrong balance upon her trade, is it not evident that the






Cardinal's operation would have succeeded, that all demands for






bills at Samuel Bernard's office would have been confined to the






exact extent of this balance; that the reciprocal debts would






have been negociated between the merchants at par; and,






consequently, that all expence upon exchange would have been






saved to individuals, at the small charge to government of






transporting the balance paid by the merchants at Paris, for






Samuel Bernard's bills?






    Were prosperous trading states, therefore conducted by






statesmen, intelligent, capable, and uninfluenced by motives of






private interest, they would make it a rule to be at the expence






of sending off, and bringing home all balances, without any






charge for exchange to the traders; but the consequence of either






neglect, or incapacity in the person at the helm, would then make






it too dangerous to attempt, at once, so great a change in the






present method of paying balances: but I never make allowances






for such defects in ministers, while I am deducing the principles






which ought to direct the conduct of a statesman.






    I shall next slightly point out the bad consequences which,






upon an unfavourable state of commerce, might result from such a






plan: and without recommending any thing to practice, leave the






reader to judge of the expediency.






    We see, that by a statesman's giving bills at par, on all






occasions, and being himself at the expence of transportation and






insurance, in bringing home and sending off all balances,






exchange would of itself come to par.






    The first consequence of this would be, the total






annihilation of the exchange business; and if, after this, any






interruption should happen by neglect in the statesman, trade






might suffer considerably.






    Another consequence is, that the most destructive trade would






go forward without a check, as long as merchants could pay the






par of the bills they demanded upon foreign parts: and this they






would constantly be enabled to do, while there was neither coin






or paper in circulation, as has been explained in treating banks






of circulation upon mortgage.






    The consequence of this again would be, to oblige the state






to pledge the revenue of the country to strangers, in proportion






to the balance owing, over and above the extent of the metals to






discharge it.






    Now the question is, and this I shall leave to the sagacity






of my reader to determine, whether, as matters stand, there be






any check proceeding from high exchange which can prevent the bad






consequences here set forth. I suspect there is none. We see the






most enormous sums lent by nations to nations; raising the






exchange against the lenders; turning it in favour of the






borrowers, but never preventing the loan from going forward. Does






not Great Britain, as well as France, owe amazing sums to other






nations, at the expence of paying the interest out of their






revenue? And have not all these sums been transacted by






exchangers, who have made great fortunes by the operation? Are






not the most unfavourable balances paid in the ordinary method?






Are there not, already, instruments in the hands of all nations,






sufficient for their undoing? How then can their ruin be






accelerated by this alteration in the mode only of performing the






same thing?






    But let it be observed, that our business, in this chapter,






is to search for methods to advance the prosperity of flourishing






nations, who have a balance owing to them; and here we have been






setting forth the bad consequences which result from them, to






others who are in decay. Every argument, therefore, drawn against






this scheme, in favour of the idle or prodigal, is an argument in






favour of it, with respect to the industrious and frugal. As all






nations are liable to alternate vicissitudes of prosperity and






adversity, the principles here laid down, require to be carefully






combined with domestic circumstances, before they be applied to






practice.






    It was with a view to this distinction, that, in the title of






this chapter, I pointed out the question there proposed, as being






relative to the state of it in a prosperous trading nation; and I






am not quite clear how far it might not be advantageous in every






case: but this question I shall not here enlarge upon. What has






been said, will, I hope, be sufficient to point out the






principles upon which the decision depends; and if any statesman






incline to try the consequences of it now and then, by an






experiment, nothing is so easy as to do it, without any






detriment. This is proved from the operation performed by the






French cardinal, on the occasion of a very unfavourable and high






exchange.













Chap. V













How, when other Expedients prove ineffectual for the discharging






of Balances, the same may be paid by the Means of Credit, without






the Intervention of Coin or Bullion; and who are those who ought






to conduct that Operation













    We have now applied the principles formerly laid down,






towards discovering the most proper expedients for removing or






palliating the three inconveniences to be struggled with in






regulating exchange. First, How to estimate the value of a






balance due: Secondly, How to pay it with the coin or bullion of






the country: and lastly, How to prevent the price of exchange






from affecting any thing more than the balance to be paid, after






all reciprocal debts have been compensated.






    It remains to inquire, what are the most proper methods to






acquit what a nation may owe, after it has done all it can to pay






the value of their balance in the other way.






    At first sight, it must appear evident that the only method






here is to give security, and pay interest for what cannot be






paid in any other value. This in the end is constantly what is






done by every nation; but as the ordinary methods of bringing it






about, are very perplexed, and are attended with expences which






raise exchange to a great height, and thereby prove a prodigious






discouragement to trade in general: it would be no small






advantage, could all this loss on exchange be thrown equally upon






every class within the state, instead of being thrown entirely






upon its commerce.






    As this is the expedient to be proposed, it will not be amiss






to observe, that foreign balances arise chiefly upon four






articles. First, The great importation and consumption of foreign






productions. Secondly, The payment of debts and interest due to






foreigners. Thirdly, The lending money to other nations. And,






Fourthly, The great expence of the state, or of individuals,






abroad.






    Could all the bad consequences arising from these four






causes, and the high exchange occasioned by them, be cast upon






that interest alone which occasions them, I should not propose to






lay the whole body of the nation under contribution for repairing






the loss.






    But if from the nature of the thing, as matters stand, the






whole be found to fall upon trade, without a possibility of






preventing it; in this case, I think it would be better for the






nation, in cumulo, to lend its assistance, and to share the






burden, than to allow it to fall upon that part of the body






politic from which the whole draws its vigour and prosperity.






    It cannot be denied, that when a heavy balance is due by a






nation, it has the effect of raising exchange upon every draught






or remittance. When bills are demanded to pay a foreign claim, it






cannot be determined from which of the four articles, just now






mentioned, the claim has arisen. Whether for national purposes or






not, the exchange is the same, and equally affects the whole






interest of trade.






    If this be a fair state of the case, I think we may determine






that such balances ought to be paid by the assistance and






intervention of a statesman's administration.






    The object is not so great as at first sight, it may appear.






We do not propose that the value of this balance should be






advanced by the state: by no means. They who owe the balance must






then, as at present, find a value for the bills they demand.






Neither would I propose such a plan for any nation who had, upon






the average of their trade, a balance against them; but if, on






the whole, the balance be favourable, I would not, for the sake






of saving a little trouble and expence, suffer the alternate






vibrations of exchange to disturb the uniformity of profits,






which uniformity tends so much to encourage every branch of






commerce.






    We have abundantly explained the fatal effect of a wrong






balance to banks which circulate paper; and we have shewn how






necessary it is that they should perform what we here recommend,






to be done by the state itself. There is therefore nothing new in






this proposal: it is merely carrying the consequences of the same






principle one step farther, and making it a branch of policy, for






government to be assisting to trade in the payment of balances,






where credit abroad is required; and we have proposed that this






assistance should be given out of the public money.






    The greatest, and indeed, I think, the only objection to this






scheme, is, that by it the condition of our foreign creditors,






will be bettered, for no value received from them. This I allow






will be the case when the balance is against England: but it will






be compensated to the creditors by the loss they will sustain






when the balance is in her favour. But supposing there should be






a benefit to foreign creditors, will not this circumstance raise






the confidence of all the world in the English funds? If, upon a






proposal to government to lower the rate of money by refunding






the debts which bear a higher interest than what money can be






procured for, the continent should pour her wealth into our






subscription, might we not then more readily expect a supply from






that quarter? Besides, is not all the interest due to foreign






creditors paid in bank paper? Is not this demandable in coin, and






will not this coin be exported, if credit be not found? Were the






bank of England to keep a subscription open, at all times, in






Amsterdam, for money to be borrowed there, on the payment of the






interest in that city, who doubts but loans might be procured at






much less expence than at present, when we are beating about for






credit every where, until by the return of a favourable balance






upon the trade of England, she shall be enabled to fill up the






void.






    I feel my own insufficiency to unfold the many intricacies






which such an operation must imply. I therefore shall not attempt






what, at any rate, I must leave imperfect. What has been said,






together with what has been thrown out on the same subject, in






treating of other matters, is sufficient to give a hint,






concerning the expediency of the plan in general. And as to the






objection which arises from the payments to the public creditors






abroad, I shall reserve the more ample discussion of it till I






come to consider the doctrine of public credit.













Part IV













Of Public Credit













Chap. I













    The principles which influence the doctrine of public credit






ar so few, and so plain, that it is surprising to see how






circumstances should possibly involve them in the obscurity into






which we find them plunged on many occasions.






    For the better clearing the way towards the main object, I






shall shew from experience, and from the progress of public






credit in some nations, that the true principles have been






overlooked, and so confounded with extraneous objects, as to be






entirely lost.






    The true method of decyphering, as it were, the complicated






operations of statesmen with respect to this branch of politics,






is to bring back to their native simplicity such plans of






administration, as, from the infinite perplexity of them, make






people believe, that the principles which influence this district






of the science lie so involved, as to require a peculiar force of






genius even to comprehend them.






    By proceeding in this plain track, and by keeping principles






constantly in view, the most perplexed systems of borrowing,






funding, stock-jobbing, coining and re-coining of money, changing






the weight, fineness, and denominations of specie, circulating






paper in conjunction with it, imposing upon mankind with bubbles






and bankruptcies, and calling them operations of public credit,






may be rendered intelligible to the most slender capacity.






    Many of these topics have been already explained, and






dismissed. This will enable us to contract the plan of what






remains in proportion to the objects it is to comprehend.






    Public credit we have defined to be, the confidence reposed






in a state, or body politic, borrowing money, on condition that






the capital shall not be demandable, but that a certain






proportional part of the sum shall be annually paid, either in






lieu of interest, or in extinction of part of the capital; for






the security of which payment, a permanent annual fund is






appropriated, with a liberty, however, to the state to free






itself, by repaying the whole, when nothing to the contrary is






stipulated.






    In this definition I have put in an alternative, of paying a






perpetual interest for the money borrowed, or of paying annually






a sum exceeding the interest; which excess is intended to






extinguish the capital in a certain number of years. In both






cases, the annual payment is called an annuity. When it is






exactly equal to the interest agreed on, it is called perpetual;






and determinate, when it is granted either for life, or for a






certain number of years.






    The solidity of this security is essential to the borrowing






upon the cheapest terms: let me suppose it to be as solid as






land-property, and as permanent as government itself: what will






the consequence be?






    If we suppose government to go on increasing, every year, the






sum of their debts upon perpetual annuities, and appropriating,






in proportion, every branch of revenue for the payment of them;






the consequence will be, in the first place, to transfer, in






favour of the creditors, the whole income of the state, of which






government will retain the administration. The farther






consequences of this revolution will furnish matter for a chapter






by itself.






    If the borrowings of a state be in proportion only to the






extinction of the old capitals, or of what I have called






determinate annuities, then the debts will not increase.






    When a statesman, therefore, establishes a system of public






credit, the first object which should fix his attention is to






calculate how far the constitution of the state, and its internal






circumstances, render it expedient to throw the revenue of it






into the hands of a moneyed interest. I say, this is the most






important object of his deliberation; because the solidity of his






credit depends upon it.






    If, all the interests of the state duly considered, that of






trade be found to predominate; less inconvenience will be found






in allowing the moneyed interest to swell: but in monarchies,






where the landed interest is commonly, and ought to be the most






powerful, it would be dangerous to erect so formidable a rival to






it. In political bodies every separate interest will consult its






own; and in the contest between those who will be made to pay,






and those who are to receive the taxes, under the denomination of






creditors, the security of public credit will become precarious.






    From this we may conclude, First, That in governments where






the swelling of a moneyed interest is found to threaten the






tranquillity of the state, care should be taken either to






establish a sinking fund, for paying off, in times of peace, what






may have been borrowed in times of war, or the plan of borrowing






upon determinate annuities must be established.






    Secondly, If natural cares be left to work their own effects,






without a systematical plan of borrowing, the consequence will be






a bankruptcy and a total failure of public credit, at least for






some time.






    Thirdly, If a state should find the mass of their debts to






amount to so great a sum as to be insupportable, they might have






recourse to a total, or partial abolition of them by an act of






power.






    Fourthly, If they allow their debts to swell without






limitation, and adhere to the faith of their engagements, the






whole property of the state will be in constant circulation, from






one class of men to another.






    Fifthly, If the debts contracted be the property of






foreigners, these will either remove into the country, where






their funds arise, or the property, that is, the dominium utile






of the country, will be transferred from the natives.






    These and many other combinations will arise from the






extension of public credit; and an examination into the most






natural consequences upon every supposition, will be the best way






to acquire a distinct idea of the subject in general. To pretend






to foretell any one certain chain of consequences, which may, in






fact, result from any particular case, is, I apprehend,






impossible; because every one of them will depend upon






circumstances totally unknown. These consequences, in our way of






examining matters of this kind, are all to be founded UpOn






supposition. To supply therefore, in some measure, this defect, I






shall first have recourse to examples of what has happened in the






hitherto infant state of public credit; and as to cases which






have not as yet taken place, we must have recourse to ingenuity,






and endeavour to form the most rational combinations we can.













Chap. II













Of the rise and Progress of Public Credit













    While the policy of States directed them to form treasures,






there was no occasion for public credit. This policy prevailed






until the rise of the Roman empire. Then all the treasures of the






world were plundered, and the nations were inslaved. On this






revolution, the exigencies of that great empire were supplied






from the annual tributes paid by conquered nations. Under good






reigns, this annual supply swelled the public treasure, until a






prodigal Emperor squandered it away; and took to rapine and






extortion, to fill up the void.






    Upon the total dissolution of the Roman empire, Europe was






overrun by barbarous nations, who, with as little industry as






ever, supported their power by the military services of the whole






people.






    After the establishment of the feudal kingdoms under the






chiefs who first laid the foundation of them, arose the Barons,






or principal vassals, who, in imitation of their chief, erected






small principalities, which by degrees grew independent.






    This distribution of power into many hands had the effect of






destroying all systematic plans of government. Princes were






obliged to act according to the perpetual fluctuation of






circumstances. until, by a revolution in their favour, the power






of the vassals was swallowed up, and confined within the limits






of a more regular authority.






    In proportion as this revolution took place among the nations






of Europe, the system of their government resumed a more






permanent form. Justice was administered with more uniformity;






and from this insensibly arose a body of laws, which, in some






countries, were called customs: in others, as in England, common






law. Wars then became less frequent; and the military services






not being necessary on all occasions, insensibly became converted






into taxes, proportioned to the exigencies of the time.






    During this period, the coin and precious metals of Europe






were in a great measure, lodged, in private coffers. If wars






brought them forth for a short time, they soon found their way






back again. Princes were generally poor; because they were






generally extravagant, and spent money as fast as they got it. In






proportion as industry and alienation increased, the coin came






abroad; the inhabitants became easy in their circumstances; the






state flourished, and acquired reputation. The riches and power






of a state began then to be estimated, as they ought to be, not






by their treasures locked up, but by what was found in






circulation; that is, by their industry. Venice, Genoa, and the






Hanstowns, set the example. The Jews, banished from France, on






account of their extortions in the time of the holy wars, fled,






as it is said, into Lombardy, and there invented the use of bills






of exchange, for drawing their riches from those countries to






which they durst not resort in order to bring them off. Interest






for money began to be considered as lawful in many cases:






merchants were protected by Princes, for the sake of the






consequences of trade and industry: and from such small






beginnings has this mighty engine of public credit sprung.






    While Princes mortgaged their lands and principalities, in






order to obtain a sum of money, they acted upon the principles of






private credit. This was the case in the more early times, before






government acquired that solidity which is necessary to establish






a firm confidence. In proportion as it drew toward a regular






system, the dawn of credit put on appearances analogous to the






solidity of the fund upon which it was established.






    The second step was to raise money upon a branch of taxes






assigned to the lender, for the reimbursement of his capital and






interest. We shall shew the consequences of this plan of credit






from some examples, which will fully point out all its






inconveniences.






    This plan of administration was attended with so much abuse,






and so much oppression, that statesmen began to despair of






carrying on public affairs by such expedients; and therefore






concluded that the only way to obtain money at the least expence,






was to raise it on the subject within the year, or upon what they






called short funds.






    At length public credit assumed its present form. Money was






borrowed upon determinate or perpetual annuities: a fund was






provided for this purpose: and the refunding of the capital was,






in many cases, left in the option of government, but never in the






option of the creditor.






    This is a short view of the progress of public credit. The






principles upon which it is built are so few, that were I to






confine myself to a bare deduction of them, little new or






interesting could be said. I shall therefore steer another






course: I shall collect the sentiments of some eminent






politicians, who have either written upon, or acted in the






administration of this branch of government; and by applying






principles as we go along, I shall be enabled to point out the






extraneous circumstances which are so apt to involve this subject






in obscurity. Had we not before our eyes the numberless examples






of this kind, it would hardly be possible to conceive how so






great confusion, and so many calamities, could have followed upon






the operations of public credit.













Chap. III













Of Anticipations, or borrowing Money upon Assignments to Taxes






for the Discharge of Principal and Interest; and of the






Sentiments of Dr Davenant on this Subject













    I have already observed, that by the cessation of the






constant wars, in which all Europe was engaged during the feudal






government of the barons, nations began to enjoy some sort of






tranquillity. Upon this the military services became insensibly






converted into taxes: and as Princes extended their jurisdictions






over the cities, which had been formerly more immediately under






the protection of the bishops who resided in them, taxes were






augmented. These impositions were very inconsiderable, with






respect to what they brought into the King's coffers. The policy






in raising them was bad; the frauds in collecting them were






great.






    These considerations engaged Princes to begin by contracting






debts, with a view, afterwards to pay them by temporary






assignments to the taxes imposed.






    From this again ensued the most terrible extortions on the






side of the tax-gatherers, so often complained of by those who






have written concerning the affairs of France, as we shall see in






the following chapter.






    Philip le bel, King of France, was the first who, in 1301,






admitted, with great policy, the inhabitants of cities to have a






seat in the states of the kingdom. He formed them into a distinct






body, and called them tiers etat, or the third state, after the






clergy and the nobility. His view was to facilitate thereby the






jurisdiction he wanted to establish over those cities, and to






engage them to consent to the imposition of taxes for carrying on






his wars in Flanders, and for opposing the ambitious views of






Boniface VIII. Accordingly, the people began to pay willingly,






when once they found that they had a vote in what concerned them.






    I take it for granted, that every tax, about that time, was






imposed for a particular purpose, and assigned either to






creditors, or to people who advanced money upon it: because we






are told that the first imposition granted by the states to a






King of France as a permanent branch of revenue, was an excise






upon spirituous liquors granted to Philip de Valois, in the year






1345; at which time, however, according to Mr d'Eon's Memoires






pour servir a l'Histoire generale des Finances, there were not






less than twenty two different taxes known in France, which he






enumerates as follows:






    Tailles, complaintes, charges, redevances, coutumes, peages,






travers, passages, centiemes, cinquantiemes, ôtes, chevauchées,






subventions, exactions, chevaleries, aides, mariages, toultes,






impositions, prisons, servitudes, and nouvellettes.






    That all these impositions must have been mere trifles, I






gather from a circumstance in the Political History of France,






mentioned by the author just cited, which being itself






exceedingly curious and tending greatly to confirm many things






which I have advanced concerning the small circulation in former






times, I shall here briefly relate it.






    In 1356, John, King of France, applied to the States for






50,000 livres, about 9165 l. sterling, to pay his army. The






States, besides several other taxes imposed to pay this sum,






granted him 8 deniers on the livre, or 3 1/3 per cent upon all






meat, drink, and merchandise, sold in France within the year;






that is to say, upon the whole alienations of France. The tax,






was levied, but fell far short of the sum required, and the






deficiency was made up by a poll-tax.






    Can any example be better calculated for forming a notion of






the circulation of France at that time?






    It may be here alleged that the prices of every thing were






then so very low, that no judgment can be formed concerning the






quantity of alienation from the smallness of the sum. This






objection is of no force, as I shall presently shew.






    We know from the records of the selling price of grain in






France, which was then remarkably cheap in proportion to the






years which followed and which had preceded, that in 1356, the






septier of wheat, or nearly 4 Winchester bushels, sold for 17






sols 8 deniers of the then currency, which was 12 livres to the






marc fine silver, and a French soldier's allowance for bread to






this day, is 3 septiers, or nearly 12 Winchester bushels a year.






Now let me suppose, that the whole 50,000 livres had been raised






by this imposition of 3 1/3 per cent or 1/30 of the total value






of the single article of corn sold at market, which was far from






being the case, and then compare this with the number of men who






could have been subsisted with all the corn sold in France at






that time.






    If 1/30 of the price were the tax, then by multiplying 50,000






livres by 30, we have the value of the corn sold; to wit,






1,500,000 livres: divide this sum by the value of what a man






consumes in a year, to wit, 3 septiers at 17 sols 8 deniers,






which make 2 livres 13 sols, and the quotient will be the number






of portions for a man, to wit, 566,037. Since, therefore, the






50,000 livres could not be raised in consequence of the tax, it






follows, that the whole alienation of France, at that time, fell






far below the value of as much wheat as would have fed 566,037






men.






    What a poor idea does this communicate of the state of Europe






so lately as 400 years ago! It would be in vain to seek for






examples to illustrate any principle of our complicated modern






oeconomy in the histories of those times: their taxes, their






credit, and their debts, resembled ours in nothing but the name.






    I shall now come nearer home, and give an account of the






ideas of public credit formed by Davenant, who flourished about






the time of the revolution in 1688, which I may take to be the






aera of public credit in England.






    No person at that time, whose writings I have seen, appears






to have so thoroughly understood these matters as Davenant. He






was a man of theory, as well as knowledge of facts: he had an






opportunity which, and he few people have, to be well instructed






in the one and the other; turned his talents to the best






advantage for promoting the interest of his country. He has






written many tracts on political subjects, which, when carefully






read and compared with what experience has since taught us, cast






great light upon many questions relative to the subject of this






inquiry.






    Davenant, like other great men of his time, was of opinion






that borrowing money upon what he calls short funds, was much






preferable to that upon perpetual interest; and he thought the






most adviseable plan of all, could it be accomplished, was to






raise the money wanted within the year.






    Men, at that time, had a terror upon them in contracting






debts for the public: they considered the nation as they would a






private man, whose interest is one, uncompounded, and relative to






himself alone: in this light, creditors appeared as formidable as






enemies; they were looked upon by ministers as such; and this






general opinion on one side, contributed, no doubt, to make the






monied people less interested in the distress of government, and






more ready to lay hold of every opportunity of improving such






occasions, for their own advantage.






    Government was in constant war with creditors: when ready






money failed in England, it had nothing to pay with but exchequer






tallies, upon the taxes imposed. these were much more easily






issued than acquitted. When the first year's amount of a tax was






engaged, people considered the security for what was to follow as






very precarious; consequently, the value of it diminished.






    This method, however, succeeded far better in paying off






debts already contracted, than in contracting new ones; and the






hardships put upon those who had already advanced money to






government, and who were paid by assignments upon taxes






previously engaged, made people very diffident afterwards, except






upon proper security. The limited form of the English government,






prevented the violent proceedings of ministers, with respect to






the public creditors, which were common in France; and this






circumstance contributed, no doubt, to establish the credit of






the former upon the better footing. But still the long






expectation of payment for the capital and interest, upon a






distant fund, made Davenant acknowledge that 700,000 l. in ready






money would at any time go farther than a million in tallies; and






yet he thought it was better for the state to borrow the million






upon a plan of discharging the debt in three or four years, than






to obtain the 700,000 l. at the expence of a perpetual interest






of 8 per cent.






    There were many more considerations which moved Davenant to






prefer what he calls short funds to perpetual interest.






    It was the general opinion in his time (not his own indeed,






for he endeavoured to shew the fallacy of it) that money borrowed






upon the anticipation of a fund, raised and appropriated for the






discharge of it, was not a debt upon the state; because it did






not diminish the former revenue. We have a remarkable instance of






the prevalence of this opinion, in the famous memorial presented






by M. Desmaretz to Philip Duke of Orleans, after the death of the






late King of France; wherein he advanced, that during seven






campaigns, from 1708 to the peace of Rastad, while he had been at






the head of the King's finances, he had not increased the public






debts by more than nine millions of livres capital: and yet when






he came into the administration, in 1708, the King's debts did






not amount to 700 millions; and we have seen, that at the time of






his death, they were upwards of 2000 millions. But Desmaretz did






not reckon the difference, which was no less than 1300 millions






as any debt at all; because he had settled it upon funds of his






own creation. This was so much the language of the times, that no






criticism was made upon it.






    It is remarkable, that Davenant, in giving an account of the






debts of England, during the period of which he writes, that is,






from the revolution down to the peace of Ryswick, hardly ever






takes notice of the sums paid for interest upon them. The minds






of men at that time were totally taken up with the payment of






capitals; and provided these could be discharged in a few years,






it was no matter, they thought, what they cost in the mean time.






    As long as nations at war observe the same policy in their






methods of raising money, the ways in which they proceed are of






the less importance: but when any one state makes an alteration,






by which more money is thrown into their hands than they could






formerly obtain; this circumstance obliges every other state to






adopt the same method. Thus while Princes made war with the






amount of their treasures and annual income, the balance of their






power depended on the balance of such resources: when they






anticipated their income on both sides, for a few years, the






balance was in proportion still: when, afterwards, they adopted






long funds and perpetual interest, the supplies increased; but






still the balance was determined as formerly.






    The usefulness, therefore, of an inquiry into the principles






of public credit, has not so much for its object to discover the






interest of states in adopting one mode of credit preferably to






another, as to discover the consequences of every one in






particular; and to point out the methods for making them






severally turn out to the best account not only for the state,






considered as a body politic by itself, but also for the






individuals which compose it.






    When so many different relations are taken in, the subject






becomes much more complex, and therefore the consequences which






can be guessed only at must be less determinate: but on the other






hand, it opens the mind, and suggests many hints which with time






may be improved for the good of society.






    People who barely relate political facts, afford only an






excercise to the memory: those who deduce principles, and trace a






chain of reasoning from them, give exercise to the understanding;






and as a small spark may raise a mighty flame, so a hint thrown






out by a slender genius may set all the great men of a nation on






a plan of general reformation and improvement.






    Let us now take a view of the state of public credit in






England, at the peace of Ryswick; in order to shew how Davenant






came to be so great an enemy to long funds, and more especially






to perpetual interest. We shall at the same time point out from






what causes proceeds the great change of sentiments at present.






    At the peace of Ryswick, the debts of England, according to






Davenant, in his fifth discourse upon the public revenues and






trade of England, stood at 17,552,544 l. sterling; call it 17






millions and a half, as we have no occasion to calculate with






exactness.






    Of this debt the capital of 3 1/2 millions was sunk, as he






calls it; because 1,300,000 l. was on lives at 14 per cent and






what was over to make up the 3 1/2 millions, was intended to






remain a perpetual burthen on the nation.






    For paying the interest of this sum, no less than 400,000 l.






a year was necessary, which makes on the whole above 11 per cent.






    But then it must be observed, that more than one third of the






sum was upon lives at 14 per cent: the debt due to the bank, of






which we have spoken in another place, was 1,200,000 l. for which






was paid 100,000 l. a year, including 4000 l. allowed for the






charge of management: the remaining million was upon lottery






tickets, bearing about 8 per cent the price at which the bank had






lent.






    The second branch of debts was near 11 millions, which, he






says, were in course of payment; because they were secured upon






branches of revenue engaged for discharging them. A part of this






class of debts was to be extinguished in the year 1700: and






whenever this was done, then a proportion of the appropriated






taxes, amounting yearly to above a million sterling, was






immediately to be taken off.






    The third class of debts were those not provided for at all;






which in the place referred to, he makes to amount to no more






than 3,200,000 l. but he afterwards finds his mistake, and that






they in fact amounted to above 5 millions and a half, which makes






the debts of England at the peace of Ryswick, to have been near






20 millions.






    Was it then any wonder, that a man who wished well to his






country, should prefer borrowing upon short funds at any expence






whatever in the mean time, rather than at perpetual interest,






when he found that parliaments could not be prevailed upon to






allow any tax to subsist one instant after the discharge of the






debts for the payment of which it had been appropriated?






    Besides, there was very little to be gained by borrowing upon






long funds and perpetual interest, as long as the lenders






considered their advantage to consist principally in getting






their capitals refunded.






    The plain matter of fact was, that trade at that time was






only beginning to take root in England, and demanded funds to






carry it on. The use of banks for turning property into money,






had not then been discovered. Circulation, consequently, was






confined to the coin; and profits on trade were very great. All






these circumstances rendered capitals of essential use; and the






consequence was, to raise interest to an excessive height.






    Compare this situation with the present. Were the capital of






140 millions sterling thrown by Great Britain, in a few years,






into the hands of the present creditors; were France, on the






other hand, to throw in as much, what trade could absorb it?






Capitals now are of value, in proportion only to the interest






they bring; and so long as the interest paid on public debts is






sufficient to keep circulation full, and no more, interest will






stand as it is: when this ceases to be the case, as in time of






war, we see interest begins to rise; and when, on the other hand,






the interest paid, proves more than sufficient for the uses of






circulation, as upon a return of peace, then, from the same






principles, interest must diminish.






    Davenant, like an able politician, who had the state of facts






before him, reasoned according to actual circumstances. Whatever






was borrowed on long funds, was charged on the standing revenue






of the state, which parliament was very unwilling to increase in






proportion to the charges laid upon it. This, of itself, was






argument sufficient with him to cast his view upon short






appropriations, or upon his favourite object, of raising money






within the year, to supply the exigencies of the state.






    But in this operation he found great difficulties. In his






treatise of ways and means, article excises, where he is






searching for expedients to provide money for the war, he plainly






shews a thorough knowledge of this imposition. It had taken place






in England as far back as the great civil war, and formed at the






revolution about 1/3 of all the revenue: but what is very






extraordinary, and which at present will hardly be credited, the






excise had at that time the effect of sinking the price of the






subject excised, instead of raising the price of what was






produced from it. Thus the excise upon malt, after the






revolution, had the effect of lowering the price of barley,






instead of raising the price of beer.






    This effect of excises Davenant saw; from which he, and since






him, many more have concluded, that all excises fall ultimately






upon the land.






    This circumstance, together with a feeling for the interest






of the great number of idle poor at that time, who must






constantly suffer by excises, engaged Davenant to propose having






recourse to the land-property and poll-taxes, for raising, within






the year, the sums required for carrying on the war.






    According to his proposal, there was to be no less than 3






millions raised by a land tax, besides half a million by a






quarterly poll, which made together, above 100,000 l. more than






all the permanent taxes of England put together.






    A proposal of this kind coming from Davenant, shews the






difference of situation between those times and the present. On






this subject more is to be learned by comparing facts, than by






all the reasoning in the world.






    We have seen how credit stood in England during the reign of






William III. It was then in its infancy, and was set upon the






principles of a free and limited authority, exercised by






ministers of state, at all times responsible to parliament at the






risk of their heads, in case of any open violation of the public






faith. This is the best of all securities against the bad






exercise of power.






    Whoever reads the admirable writings of Davenant, and






compares his ideas with what experience has since taught us,






concerning the nature of taxes and public credit, will plainly






discover that the great distress of England at that time,






proceeded from the following causes.






    The war they were engaged in, was far beyond their power to






SUppOrt, although they had the greatest part of Europe to assist






them.






    The bravery of the British nation was ill supported with






money, the sinews of war.






    The coin soon after the revolution fell into the greatest






disorder, which sent it away; no expedient was found to supply






its place for the uses of domestic circulation; and,






consequently, the fixed revenue could not be paid, nor industry






carried on.






    The people were unaccustomed to taxes, tunnage and poundage,






the branch with which they were best acquainted, and which they






bore with the least murmuring, because it was little felt by






individuals, together with the excise upon beer and ale, the






hearth money, the posthouse, and wine-licences, composed the






whole of the permanent revenue of the state, and amounted to






about one million and a half sterling: besides which, the






parliament had granted new customs (all to cease before 1690) to






the amount of about half a million more, upon wines, tobacco,






sugar, and French linnen. This was the state of the revenue at






the revolution.






    One would imagine that England, under so small a burthen,






might have been able to make the greatest efforts.






    Were we now to grapple with France, under such circumstances,






what sanguine hopes should we not form of success! The case






turned out widely different: the first benefit the nation






expected in consequence of their liberty restored, was an






abolition of the hearth money; a tax which raised over the whole






kingdom, 245,000 l. This was considered as an insupportable






burthen.






    Such sentiments and dispositions in the English nation, might






have been a sufficient indication of what was to be expected from






the war; the consequences of which had, before 1695, produced the






following changes in the revenue.






    The tunnage and poundage, which at the revolution produced






600,000 l. was by this time reduced to 286,687 l.






    The excise upon beer and ale, from 666,383 l. was reduced to






391,275 l.






    The hearth money was abolished.






    The post-house, from 65,000 l. was reduced to 63,517 l.






    The wine-licences, from 10,000 l. to 5000 l.






    The temporary customs which subsisted at the revolution, were






now expired, and had been either continued by new grants, or by






others of the same nature introduced in their stead. The former






had produced 415,472 l. the new produced 373,839 l.






    The last and most important grant of all, was an additional






excise upon beer and ale, which produced 450,000 l.






    The revenue at the revolution produced, clear of all charges,






2,001,855 l. sterling. A revenue established at pretty much the






same rate, and nearly on the same objects, with an addition of a






new excise, which produced 450,000 l. produced net in 1694, no






more than 1,570,318 l. so that, deducting the new excise, the old






revenue was diminished in its produce, no less than 1,081,527 l.






or above one half, in five years time.






    In a country like England, at that time, taxes were of little






use to the state, and were an excessive burthen on the people.






    What could they be paid out of? Not out of the value in the






hands of the people; because there was no way provided for






turning this value into money. The whole of the money coined






before the end of the war in 1697, did not amount to 8 1/2






millions. It was not to be expected that during the war, foreign






coin was to come in, except in consequence of borrowing; and we






may be very certain, that all that was borrowed, and a great part






of what had been coined at home, had gone out from the year 1695






to 1697. under these circumstances, the exchequer issued tallies






of wood, a notably expedient for facilitating circulation! And






the bank of England lent not one farthing upon mortgage. all that






was possible to be raised on the land and on the people, by






pound-rate, assessment, and poll-tax, was imposed.






    Now let us recall our principles concerning circulation,






alienation, and banking upon mortgage, and combine these with






what we have so frequently repeated, and I think demonstrated,






viz. that in proportion to the extent of alienation, and the






demands for money, a circulating equivalent should be provided,






so as to be ready at the hand of every person who has property to






pledge for it; and then decide whether it was any wonder that






credit in England should have been at so low an ebb at the peace






of Ryswick; that taxes should have diminished in their produce;






that interest should have risen to such an extravagant height;






that the people should have groaned under a load from which they






could not relieve themselves.






    Under such circumstances, England appears to me in the light






of a dumb man put to the torture in order to extort a confession.






    Were eight or nine millions sterling in coin, and a few






wooden sticks, the tallies, constantly sold at a great discount,






a circulating value sufficient to supply the exigencies of a






state which was spending annually at the rate of five or six






millions?






    The consequence of this total drain of money, was, that






people could neither consume exciseable commodities, or pay the






taxes laid upon their persons and solid property.






    The excises failed, because the body of the people, who paid






them, were interrupted in their industry, for want of money to






carry on alienation. Those who were liable to the arbitrary






impositions, such as the landlords, could not pay; because what






they had, their land, could not be given in payment.






    From what I have here laid together, we may determine, that






as alienations among individuals cannot exceed the proportion of






the circulating equivalent of a country, so a statesman when he






intends suddenly to augment the taxes of his people, without






interrupting their industry, which then becomes still more






necessary than ever, should augment the circulating equivalent in






proportion to the additional demand for it.






    This, according to my notions, cannot be so well compassed






as, 1. by establishing banks of circulation upon mortgage: 2. by






relieving those companies of the load of paying foreign balances






by giving bills at par, or at a small exchange: and 3. by






providing funds abroad for the payment of them, according to the






principles above deduced.






    Such expedients will work their effect, in a nation where the






public faith stands upon the solid security of an honest






parliament, and upon that responsibility which is fixed upon






those who are trusted with the exertions of the royal authority.






    I think I may illustrate this operation by a simile.






    A gentleman chooses to form a cascade of the water which






serves to turn his corn-mill; consequently, the mill stops; but






in its stead, he immediately erects another which turns with the






wind. Coin is the water, bank paper is the wind, and both are






equally well calculated for the use they are put to.













Chap. V













Of the Present State of Public Credit in Great Britain













    We have, in a preceeding chapter,given a general view of the






state of public credit in England, at the end of the last






century. In this, I shall briefly run through the most remarkable






revolutions, both in sentiments and events, which have succeeded






since that time.






    At the revolution the revenue of England was about two






million sterling, affected by two debts. The first was called the






bankers debt, contracted by Charles II and, by letters patent,






charged upon his hereditary excise, to the amount of upwards of






1,300,000 l. This debt was arbitrarily reduced to one half, in






the last years of King William, and put at 6 per cent perpetual






annuity, to commence no sooner than 1706. The other was a debt of






60,000 l. due to that Prince's servants, neglected to be paid by






his successor, and discharged after the revolution.






    At the peace of Ryswick, the national debt amounted to about






20 millions. The branches of taxes subsisting at the revolution,






and continued till then, produced no more than about 800,000 l.;






but by additional taxes laid on in the reign of King William, the






whole revenue extended to 3,355,499 l. of which above one million






was to cease before 1700, as has been said. This reduced the






revenue, at the beginning of Queen Anne's reign, to nearly what






it had been at the revolution: out of which if we deduct the






interest of the national debt then subsisting, and the expence of






the civil list, we shall discover the extent of the funds






prepared for engaging in the war with France; and then by






comparing the state of the nation at her accession, with what it






was at her death, we shall form a general notion of the progress






of credit at that period.






    The revenue of England at the accession of Queen Anne may be






stated at about - - - - - - - - - - -                 2,272,000













    The debts subsisting on the 31st of






December 1701, were - - - - 6,748,780













Upon which the annual interest






        was - - - - - - - - - 566,165













Queen Anne's civil list - - - 600,000













    Which two sums amounting to - - - - - -           1,166,165













    Being deducted from the revenue, there will






remain for the current service of the state - - - - - 1,105,835




















    What the exact amount of the revenue of England was at the






death of the Queen, I cannot justly say. But as it may be






comprehended under the three general branches of customs,






excises, and other inland duties, we may form a guess at it,






though imperfectly, I allow, from the number of articles in each.






    At her accession, the customs comprehended fifteen articles;






at her death, they amounted to thirty-seven: at her accession,






the excises comprehended ten articles; at her death, they






amounted to twenty-seven: at her accession, the other inland






duties comprehended eight articles; at her death, they amounted






to sixteen, including the land tax, then become in a manner






perpetual, although laid on from year to year.






    At her accession, the public debts amounted (as above) to






near seven millions, at her death they exceeded fifty millions.






    In fourteen years, from the revolution to her accession, the






money granted by parliament, partly raised on the subject, and






partly borrowed, or taken credit for, according to the custom of






the times, amounted to above fifty-five millions. During the 13






years of Queen Anne, the money granted by parliament raised on






the subject, or borrowed as above, amounted to upwards of 80






millions.






    By this general sketch I do not mean to enter into exact






details: facts must be sought for in books which treat of facts:






our chief object is to examine the principles upon which the






public credit was supported, let the exact sum of money raised be






what it will.






    The expences of the French war first engaged the nation to






revive those taxes which had been suppressed; and to impose many






others for a considerable number of years, in proportion to the






money borrowed upon them, according to the principles of the






former reign.






    In 1702, interest was so low, that government got money at 5






per cent. It continued so till 1704, when some loans began to be






made at 6 per cent and at this rate it stood during the war.






    But in 1706, the exigencies of government were far greater






than what all the money to be borrowed, or raised on the subject,






could supply. This opened a door to the abuse of paying the






growing deficiencies upon the taxes with exchequer bills,






chargeable on distant funds. These fell constantly to great






discount; and the unhappy servants of the state, who received






them in payment, were obliged to dispose of them to people who






could wait for an usurious reimbursement by parliament.






    When these exchequer bills had once got into the hands of the






monied people, they had interest with government to engage the






bank to circulate them at 6 per cent interest: but as the funds






upon which they were secured happened at that time, 1706, to be






engaged for discharging debts previously contracted, the bank,






during that interval, could receive no payment of this interest






of 6 per cent so the expedient fallen upon, was to pay the bank






compound interest for all the tallies and bills they were to






discount, until the funds appropriated should be relieved.






    This expedient, bad as it was, and burdensome to the state in






the highest degree, proved of infinite service, both in






establishing the credit of exchequer bills, and relieving those






who received payment in them.






    This operation was quite similar to those of banks of






circulation upon mortgage. The bank of England was here employed






in converting into money exchequer bills, secured upon the faith






of government. Banks upon mortgage convert into money the






property of individuals upon private security. Had, therefore,






banks upon mortgage been established in England at this time, all






those who had property would have got credits from them, and






would have been enabled thereby to pay their taxes, and carry on






their industry, without diminishing their consumption. The






exchequer would then have had no occasion to issue discredited






bills and tallies for making up deficiencies; because taxes would






have been productive, and the state would have been relieved of






this excessive burden of interest at 6 per cent accumulated






quarterly in favour of the bank.






    What extraordinary profit must have accrued to the bank by






this operation, every one must perceive. They were not here






procuring funds to lend at a great expence; all they did was to






augment the quantity of their paper upon government security;






which they knew well would remain current in the common circle of






payments within the country; and the public borrowings were






sufficient to furnish credit for the sums sent out of the






country. In this view we may conclude, that almost the whole






accumulated interest paid, became a pure profit to the bank, as






well as a great augmentation of the national debt.






    This operation of the bank in 1706, did not prevent






subsequent deficiencies, in the payment of the navy, army,






ordnance, and of many other articles. In 1710, they amounted to






above nine millions sterling. This was too great a sum to be






borrowed; and the bank durst not venture to discount more than






what domestic circulation could support: so that after this great






debt had circulated upon the discredited obligations which had






been issued for it, and in this way had fallen again into the






hands of monied people, at 30 and 40 per cent below par, the new






proprietors of it were all incorporated into one great company,






with a governor and directors, who got 6 per cent for the whole






capital, with an allowance of 8000 l. a year for charges of






management.






    Thus all the original creditors for these deficiencies lost






the discount; the monied people gained it, and the public paid






for all.






    When credit is in this languid state, every expence of






government must rise in proportion to the discredit of the paper






with which they pay, till at last the whole sum, with interest,






accumulation, and expence, falls upon the state, as if every






farthing of it had been frugally expended in ready money.






    This is a general view of the state of credit in Queen Anne's






reign.






    Government had not, as in the former war, the inconveniences






flowing from the disorder in the coin to combat with. These






contributed more than any other circumstance, to raise the






capital of the debts at the peace of Ryswick. Circulation, too,






was considerably augmented, in consequence of the increase of






taxes, public debts, and the operation of the bank in circulating






exchequer bills and tallies. Yet money was still scarce, in






comparison of what it night have been, had proper methods been






contrived to preserve it upon a level with the occasions for it.






    The incorporation, also, of nine millions capital in the






hands of a corporation, which afterwards was called the South Sea






Company, was an assistance to public credit, by increasing a






monied interest, the principal view of which was to fill the






government loans, on the lucrative conditions offered for them.






And last of all, the strictly adhering to the public faith of






engagements, without seeking, by acts of power, to indemnify the






state for the losses it had been obliged to incur, from the






circumstances of the times, laid the solid basis of national






credit for the future.






    Although the many taxes added to the former revenue, did not






increase it in any proportion to the load laid upon the subject






during this war, they served, however, as a good foundation for






improvement, as soon as the effects of peace restored them to






their full production. But the securities affecting these taxes






having become every year greater, government was obliged to






engage certain funds for thirty-two years to come, and sometimes






longer; and many branches of taxes, which formerly had been






granted for short terms, were then made perpetual. After the






peace of Utrecht, the expences of the state were greatly






diminished, and money began to regorge: so that in the year 1716,






the first foundation of the sinking fund was laid, by opening a






subscription for paying off about ten or eleven millions






sterling, at that time, charged upon several branches of taxes,






the produce of which amounted annually to 724,849 l. sterling.






    The proprietors of these debts were allowed to subscribe into






this new fund, at an interest of 5 per cent redeemable by






parliament: and in case the whole subscription should not fill at






that rate, the bank and South Sea company became bound to make it






up, upon receiving a like annuity in proportion to their






subscriptions.






    The bankers' debt, of which we have spoken, the only public






debt owing at the revolution, made part of those which were to be






subscribed for.






    The taxes which had been appropriated for the discharge of






those capitals, from temporary, were made perpetual; with a






clause added, that when the surplus of the fund, after payment of






the interest, had discharged the capitals of all the national






debt due the 25th of December in that year, the whole produce of






the fund itself should remain at the disposal of parliament.






    After this first operation in reducing the interest, the bank






complied with a reduction to 5 per cent of what was due to them;






and they began to circulate exchequer bills at a more moderate






interest than formerly.






    Public credit was now daily gaining ground. In 1719, the






South Sea company, the capital of which was then swelled to






eleven millions at 5 per cent with a sum of 9397 l. sterling for






the expence of management, enlarged their views; and finding






large profits to arise from so great a fund under one






administration, formed a project of acquiring a farther sum of






the public debts, which remained outstanding upon the original






funds appropriated for them.






    For this purpose they proposed to government to acquire,






first, The property of above 16 millions of redeemable debts,






bearing then 4 and 5 per cent interest; and to reduce the whole






to 4 per cent at midsummer 1727. Secondly, To acquire the






property of 794,000 l. of annuities upon lives, and for long






terms, as they should agree with the proprietors, at 5 per cent






upon the purchase-money, until 1727. and at 4 per cent






afterwards. Annuities were then valued at fourteen and twenty






years purchase, according to their length: they rose, however,






during the operations of the South Sea, to 25 and 30 years






purchase. Thirdly, They were to have a sum added to their former






allowance for the charge of management, in proportion to this






augmentation of their stock. Fourthly, That for the advantage






which might follow upon this agreement with government, the






company was to pay into the exchequer above seven millions






sterling, toward discharging other national debts outstanding.






And in the last place, they engaged to circulate a considerable






sum of exchequer bills, and to pay the interest of 2 pence per






cent per diem, which should grow upon them during seven






years.(1*)






    From the operations we have been describing, we perceive,






that the point of view in England, from the peace of Utrecht, has






always been, to reduce the interest of the national debt; but






never to leave in the hands of the creditors, any part of the






savings made, in order to diminish the capital. These savings






have constantly been thrown into a sinking fund supposed to be






intended for extinguishing the capital: and were it employed for






this purpose for a few years only, and not diverted to other






uses, I am persuaded the consequence would be, to reduce the






interest of money in England lower than ever perhaps it has been






seen in any nation. That interest may be reduced, by making money






regorge in the hands of the lenders, is, I think, an






uncontroverted principle: that by regorging in France, anno 1720,






it reduced interest to 2 per cent is a fact indisputable. I shall






not pretend to say positively, that the total appropriation of






the sinking fund, and an augmentation upon annual grants, to make






up the void, would in Great Britain work this effect in a few






years; but I think it is very probable that it would: and if the






domestic creditors, in any state, where debts, due to strangers,






are swelled to such a height as to exceed the whole profits made






upon trade, shall by their influence, and from a motive of






present advantage, obstruct a scheme of this nature; the






consequence will prove, in the first place, to discourage, and






then totally to extinguish commerce, and in a little time to






occasion an unavoidable bankruptcy; as shall be farther explained






in a succeeding chapter. I return to the South Sea company.






    The proposal of the South Sea company, mentioned above, was






accepted of, and ratified by act of parliament, 6 Geo. I. chap.






4th. But the disaster which befel credit, in consequence of the






ambitious views of those who were in the administration of that






company, prevented the nation from reaping all the advantages






which might have proceeded from it.






    The reign of K. George I though little disturbed by foreign






wars, produced not the smallest diminution upon the capital of






the public debts; and those which subsisted at the peace of






Utrecht, stood, at his death, at 50,354,953 l. The same taxes






subsisted; and every one almost was by this time made perpetual,






except indeed the land tax and malt duty, which to this day






continue to be annual grants.






    But alas! this apparent revenue, arising from a multitude of






taxes, was of no use towards defraying the smallest extraordinary






expence of government. Every article of it was engaged for debts;






and the operations for reducing the interest were calculated only






to produce a fund for discharging the capital. The civil list,






indeed, that is to say, the expence of civil government,






exclusive of army, navy, ordnance, and incidental articles, was






paid from the permanent taxes, and considered as a charge upon






them. But were not armies and navies then become as regular an






expence upon every state in Europe as judges and ambassadors?






Undoubtedly they were. Yet after the peace of Utrecht, in laying






down the plan which has constantly been followed ever since, for






defraying the regular expence of British government, these two






great and unavoidable expences were considered as contingent






only, and provided for by annual grants: and because armies, in






time of peace, in former reigns, had proved dangerous to liberty






from the abuse of power, they were still considered in the same






light, at a time when liberty and trade were continually






threatened from their armed enemies and rivals abroad.






    When the continuance of peace, in the reign of George the






First, had produced the effect of reducing interest, on many






occasions, to 3 per cent the sinking fund began to gather






strength. The land tax, from the year 1722, had not exceeded two






shillings in the pound; and the extraordinary expence of






government, according to the annual grants of the 13 years of his






reign, did not exceed 34,800,000 l. or 2,670,000 l. a year.






Public tranquillity was very little disturbed during the first






twelve years of the succeeding reign; and all the extraordinary






expence did not much exceed three millions per annum: yet this






expence, small as it was, compared with what it has been since,






was almost every year made out, by taking one million at least






from the sinking fund: and in the years of the least expence,






such as 1731 and 1732, the land tax was reduced to one shilling






in the pound, at the expence of taking two millions and a half






from the sinking fund.






    These steps of administration I neither censure, or approve






of. I must suppose every statesman to have good reasons for doing






what he does, unless I can discover that his motives are bad. May






not the landed interest, who composed the parliament, have






insisted upon such a diminution of their load? May not the






proprietors of the public debts have insisted on their side, that






no money out of the sinking fund should be thrown into their






hands, while the bank was making loans upon the land and malt






duties at 3 per cent? Might not the people have been averse to an






augmentation of taxes? When three such considerable interests






concur in a scheme, which in its ultimate, though distant






consequences, must end in the notable prejudice of perpetuating






the debts, although opportunities offer to diminish them, what






can government do? They must submit; and, which is worse, they






cannot well avow their reasons.






    Such combinations must occur, and frequently too, in every






state loaded with debts, where the body of the people, the






landlords and the creditors, find an advantage in the non-payment






of them. It is for this reason that I imagine, the best way to






obviate the bad consequences of so strong an influence in






parliament, would be, to appropriate the amount of all sinking






funds in such a manner, as to put it out of a nation's power to






misapply them, and by this to force them either to retrench their






extraordinary expences, or to impose taxes for defraying them.






    The second period of George IId's reign, was from the






breaking out of the Spanish war in 1739, to the peace of






Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748. During these ten years, (1748 being






included,) the extraordinary expence was, upon an average, very






near seven millions; and at the end of the year 1738, the public






debts amounted to 46,661,767 l. bearing 1,962,053 l. interest.






    The first expedient for borrowing money during this war, was






to continue the duty on salt for seven years; and to mortgage it






at once for 1,200,000 l. according to the old plan. To this was






added, the expedient of lotteries, and loans upon indeterminate






annuities, according to the current value of money.






    An additional excise upon spirituous liquors, brought in






wherewithal to compensate these additional sums of interest; and






the East India company, for lending one million at 3 per cent






upon this occasion, had their charter continued from 1766 to






1780. This operation I also consider as an anticipation; and as






it was to commence at the distance of 23 years from the time of






the grant, could not fail of being very burdensome to the nation,






however convenient it might be at that particular time.






    Were the India company now, 1766, to purchase the renewal of






their charter for 14 years, what a sum might be expected from it!






Yet the value given for the grant they then obtained did not






exceed 30,000 l. because the other annuities of 3 per cent. were






sold at that time for 97 l. or, in the language of the funds, at






3 l. premium for every 100 l. subscribed; and this so early in






the war as 1743.






    The practice of borrowing upon premiums had taken place in






Queen Anne's reign, and has of late years been very common. The






credit of Great Britain is so firmly established, that in






whatever way government inclines to borrow, the moneyed men are






willing to lend, provided the loan be made according to the rate






of interest at the time.






    To avoid therefore the establishment of funds at different






rates of interest, in proportion to the fluctuations of money,






the bargain is made at one determinate rate. Suppose, for an






example, 3 per cent. Then, according as money is found to rise






above this rate in the market, a premium is paid out of the money






subscribed; as in this case 3 l. was paid out of the 100 l.






subscribed; that is, the subscriber retained it, and obtained his






3 l. annuity, for the payment of 97 l. so this remained a 3 per






cent loan, instead of being, as it really was, at 3 9/97 per






cent. and was sold and transferred as every other 3 per cent






without occasioning any perplexity.






    As the war continued, interest rose, from the demand for






money, when the supplies became deficient.






    The year following, viz. 1744, this manifested itself, by the






conditions offered by government, which were. That, of two






millions to be borrowed at 3 per cent as before, upon the whole






sum, 1,500,000 l. should be formed into perpetual annuities, and






the remaining 500,000 l. into a lottery, consisting of 50,000






tickets, to be sold at 10 l. each. The original subscribers to






this loan subscribed therefore 10 l. for the ticket, and 30 l.






for the annuity, in all 40 l.; for which they were to receive 3






per cent. But the premium consisted in this; that every






subscriber for 10 tickets, that is, 400 l. of the total fund, had






an annuity for life given to him of 4 l. 10s.






    This made five thousand annuities on lives, of 4 l. 10s.






each, or 22,500 l. a year to be added to the interest of 3 per






cent. on the two millions, that is, to 60,000 l. a year of






perpetual annuities. So that the whole loan of two millions this






year cost government 82,500 l. of interest, of 4 1/8 per cent;






22,500 l. of which was to extinguish with the lives of the






subscribers.






    Now, if we suppose these life-annuities worth 20 years






purchase,(2*) this was the same thing as if government had given






a deduction of 90 l. out of the 400 l. subscribed; consequently






the remainder, which was 310 l. produced 12 l. This makes the






rate of interest upon the loan to have been 3.87 per cent. And as






government inclined that the loan should be made in this way, the






lenders were willing that it should be so; and the difference






between 3.87 per cent (the then rate of money) and 4 1/8






interest, which was paid by government, was a sinking fund, as it






were, for the gradual extinction of the capital of the lottery






for 300,000 l. during the lives of the annuitants.






    In 1746, perpetual or indeterminate annuities were






constituted at 4 per cent and the premium upon the ten lottery






tickets was raised to 9 l. life-annuity.






    It would be unnecessary to trace the various methods of






contriving the premiums given in the succeeding years of this






war. The principle upon which they were regulated was always to






proportion them to the rate of interest at the time; and the






motive was, I suppose, that by this method of borrowing, a part






at least of the debt would become extinguished with the lives of






the subscribers. There might perhaps be another, to wit, that by






swelling the capital, for value not received, there was an






appearance of borrowing at a lower rate of interest than what in






reality was the case. Thus in 1747, when 6,300,000 l. were






borrowed; instead of giving not quite 4 1/2 per cent. for this






sum, they gave 4 per cent. upon 6,930,000 l. which capital,






although money should return to 3 per cent was still to stand at






its full value; whereas, had 6,300,000 l. been borrowed at 4 1/2






per cent. there would have been a saving of 600,000 l. upon the






capital; and at the peace, the interest of 4 1/2 per cent would






equally have come down to 3 per cent with the other funds.






    During this first war of George the Second, the land tax was






constantly at 4s. in the pound; and new branches of customs,






excise, or other inland duties, were created in proportion to the






swelling of the national debts, which, on the 31st of December






1748, amounted to 78,293,313 l. sterling, bearing 3,003,325 l.






interest; and the sinking fund, or surplus of all permanent taxes






then imposed, after paying the civil list, and the interest upon






this capital, amounted to 1,060,948 l. sterling. During this war,






the debts were increased above what they were at the end of 1738,






by 31,631,346 l. sterling capital, and by 1,043,272 l. of






interest or annuities.






    The war was no sooner over, and the national expence






diminished, than money began to regorge in the hands of the






monied interest: an infallible consequence of such a violent






revolution, when extraneous circumstances, such as occurred after






the peace of 1763, do not prevent it.






    To profit of this conjuncture, government, early in 1749,






proposed that all the public creditors upon capitals bearing 4






per cent interest, redeemable by parliament, and amounting to






upwards of 57 millions, who should accept of 3 per cent from






December 1757, should have their debts made irredeemable until






that time; and in the interval should continue to have 4 per cent






till December 1750; and 3 1/2 per cent from thence, until the






total reduction to 3 per cent in December 1757.






    This bold undertaking had the desired effect. Many obstacles






were thrown in the way; but the regorging capitals in the hands






of many, made every one fear the reimbursement for himself; and






the credit of France was then so low, that very few chose its






funds as an outlet for their superfluous money.






    But an outlet, unfortunately, was not wanting at the end of






the last war in 1763, as we shall shew in its proper place.






    Here then is a notable instance of the effects of regorging






money. A small sum, when compared with a nation's debt, operates






upon the whole capital; as a small balance upon trade affects the






whole mass of reciprocal payments.






    The reimbursement of 57 millions offered by government, in






1749, was, to the conviction of all the world, an impracticable






scheme; but the stockholders seeing a large sum ready to be






subscribed, at the interest offered, and feeling the effects






which that regorging money must, in all events, have produced;






willingly, and wisely perhaps, consented to the offer made them.






Had they refused, and had the scheme proposed become abortive






thereby, perhaps the nation, from the disappointment, might have






been so far animated against the creditors, as to have consented






to be at the expence of defraying the service of the following






years, without encroaching upon the sinking fund. What effect






this would have produced upon the rate of interest, in that






conjuncture, no man can tell, nor will the real consequence of






such a measure be ever known, until the happy trial be made. That






it would have brought interest below 3 per cent in December 1757,






is, I think, evident: for as matters stood, had the creditors of






57 millions been able to hold out, I must do them the justice to






believe, they would not have accepted the proposal made to them;






and an addition of all the sinking fund thrown among them






annually, at a time they could not dispose of what they had, upon






better terms than those offered to them, would undoubtedly then,






as at all times, operate a very great national relief, in






bringing down the interest of money.






    During the tranquillity which continued from the peace of






Aix-la-Chapelle, in 1748, to the commencement of hostilities in






1755, the money expended for extraordinary services amounted on






an average to above four millions per annum. The expence of






government was then increased, by supporting the colonies, and by






several great and uncommon outgoings at home, for purposes






mentioned in the supplies of those years.






    A little before the breaking out of the last war, that is to






say, on the 5th of January 1755, the national funded debt was






reduced to 72,289,674 l. upon which was paid an annuity of






2,654,500 l. and the sinking fund amounted to 1,308,814 l. At the






end of 1763, the year of the peace, the funded debt amounted to






130,586,789 l. 10 s. besides above 9 millions not provided for.






So that at the end of last war the national debt exceeded 140






millions; besides the value of the annuities granted in 1757,






1761, and 1762. Hence it appears, that the war occasioned an






augmentation of upwards of 58,297,116 l. upon the funded national






debt;(3*) besides the difference between the unfunded debts at






the beginning and end of the war; and also the value of those






annuities.






    I shall, before I conclude this chapter, present a short






scheme of the state of the nation at that time: but first let us






take a view of the methods used to borrow so large a sum in the






short period of eight years.






    Until 1757, money was borrowed by government, at very little






more than 3 per cent but then a loan of 5 millions being






necessary, government consented to create annuities of 4 1/2 per






cent irredeemable for 24 years. By this expedient the monied






people eluded the operation of reducing the interest of this






fund, upon the return of peace. How far this expedient was to be






preferred to the former, of increasing the capital beyond the






money paid; or whether it would not have been still better to






have paid for the money wanted, according to the current rate of






interest in the market at the time, waiting until a peace might






afford a favourable opportunity of reducing it, I shall not take






upon me to determine.(4*)






    I have observed how rash it is for any one to censure acts of






administration, when the motives of a statesman's conduct are






unknown. This, however, I have sometimes ventured to do, in






speaking of things which happened many years ago; but we ought to






be more cautious as we come nearer to our own times, because not






having, as in the case before us, a course of experience to point






out the errors, we must entirely rely upon our own sagacity, and






reason from analogy only.






    During the last war, as in that preceding it, taxes were






increased in proportion to the interest of the money borrowed;






and new impositions were now laid on the articles of great






consumption, which produced abundantly. The new malt-duty of 3d.






per bushel, and the new beer-duty of 3s. per barrel, bring in net






into the exchequer near 820,000 l. per annum, and discharge the






interest of above 27 millions sterling, at 3 per cent. Such a sum






raised at the end of a war so very expensive, and at the very






time when the credit of France was totally fallen, must have






operated in the strongest manner, and did in fact operate more,






perhaps, than any other consideration, to put an end to that war,






the most glorious that Europe has beheld since the beginning of






this century, or perhaps in any age whatever: advantageous to






Great Britain, notwithstanding all the expence, provided that the






consequences happen to correspond to what may be reasonably






expected.






    I shall now set before my reader a short state of the taxes,






debts, and public funds of Great Britain, at this bright period






of her history.






    From the best authority I have been able to procure, the






revenue of the state, considered under the three general branches






of customs, excise, and other inland duties, which comprehend the






whole permanent income of this kingdom, was then as follows:













    Customs net into the exchequer, about             *2,000,000






    Excise in all its permanent branches net, about    4,600,000






    Other in land duties net                           1,000,000






    Land tax at 4s. in the pound                       2,000,000






    Annual malt tax net                                  613,000













    In all                                            10,213,000













    Let us next state the annual charges and appropriations






settled upon this fund.













    First then the civil list, to the






amount of                               800,000






    Secondly, The interest of about






131 millions of funded debts at different






rates of interest, about              4,500,000






    Thirdly, The interest of nine






millions not then provided for,






supposed to be at 4 per cent.           360,000













 In all of regular and permanent annual charge          5,660,000













    So there remains free, about                        4,553,000






    From which if we deduct the annual grants of land






and malt-taxes, which extend together, as above, to     2,613,000






    There will remain as the produce of the sinking






     fund(5*)                                           1,940,000













    In this state, nearly, stood the affairs of Great Britain






after the conclusion of the peace in 1763.






    It now only remains to offer some conjectures why, after the






conclusion of this peace, as after the peace of Aix-la-chapelle,






money was not found to regorge, so as to furnish an opportunity






of reducing the rate of interest upon all redeemable debts, and






by that to raise the amount of the sinking fund, and more firmly






to establish the national credit.






    After the fall of the credit of France toward the end of






1759, Great Britain had the command of all the money to be lent






in Europe; and accordingly amazing sums were borrowed in 1760,






1761, and 1762. Of the sums borrowed, a great part, no doubt, was






the property of strangers; but they, not being so well acquainted






with the affairs of this nation as the English themselves,






instead of subscribing to the loans, lent the money to our own






country people, who, in hopes of a great rise upon the return of






peace, filled the subscriptions with this borrowed money.






    The consequence was, that no sooner did the funds begin to






rise after the peace, than many creditors demanded their money of






those who had invested it in the public funds. This obliged the






latter to bring their stock to market, and this again had






naturally the effect of keeping the funds very low. Some, more






prudent than the rest, had borrowed upon a long term of






repayment: which had the effect of putting off still longer the






settlement of the funds in the hands of the real proprietors, and






of taking them out of those who only held them nominally.






    Besides this accidental cause of the low price of the funds,






other circumstances, no doubt, greatly contributed to produce the






same effect.






    How great soever the balance of trade, that is, of






exportations above importations, may have been of late in favour






of England, still the mighty sums drawn out by the foreign






creditors have certainly, upon the whole, prevented much money






from coming home on the general or grand balance of payments.






While this continues to be the case, it is impossible that much






money should regorge at home in the hands of the natives, and






until this shall happen, there can be no hope of seeing the 3 per






cents rise above par. But then the rise, small as it is, since






the peace, may encourage us to hope that this favourable change






is not far off: for had the profits of our trade been quite






unable to balance the loss upon our foreign debts, the funds






would undoubtedly still continue to fall, which is demonstrably






not the case from the circumstances of the loan in April 1766,






obtained by government, with the assistance of a lottery indeed,






at 3 per cent.(6*)






    Here then was an outlet provided for more money than all that






could regorge at home, viz. the payment of those foreign






creditors, to whom the stockholders were indebted. besides this,






the sale by government, of such tracts of land in the new






acquired islands in the West Indies, provided another; money was






even placed in the funds of France soon after the peace, until






the adventurers were checked by the operations of the King's






council, in reducing both capitals and interest upon them,






contrary to the original stipulations with the creditors. A lucky






circumstance for Great Britain, as it forces, in a manner, all






the money of the continent into the English funds, which equally






remain a debt upon the nation, whether high or low in the market.













Chap. VIII













Contingent Consequences of the Extension of Credit, and Increase






of Debts




















    I now proceed to inquire what be the consequences of this






might change produced upon the policy of industrious and trading






states from the establishment of credit, debts, and taxes.






    I have, from the very beginning of this inquiry, occasionally






taken notice of the influence which such a change must make upon






the spirit and manners of a people. The lower classes, who are






slow in forming combinations, do not soon comprehend the






necessary consequences of such revolutions. Even ministers have






been often at a loss to judge of the consequences which might






follow upon some steps of their own conduct relative thereto,






although taken upon mature deliberation.






    When public credit is employed for raising money upon a plan






of refunding the capital, either by uniform annual payments






exceeding the interest, or by funds established for sinking the






capital, no contingent consequences can happen, provided the plan






be executed: the debts contracted will be paid, and matters will






return to their former state.






    When public credit is employed for raising money upon payment






of a perpetual interest; or if, whatever be the plan laid down,






capitals should not happen to be discharged, but the debts should






swell continually; in this case, the contingent consequences are






many and various, far exceeding any man's sagacity to






investigate.






    If we judge of them from what past experience has taught us,






we may conclude, that, in one way or other, all debts contracted






will in time disappear, either by being paid, or by being






abolished: because it is not to be expected that posterity will






groan under such a load any longer than it is convenient; and






because in fact we see no very old public debts as yet






outstanding, where interest has been regularly paid out of a fund






which has remained in the possession of the state.






    This is a very rational conclusion from past experience; but






it is relative only to the circumstances of past times. While the






debtors are the masters, there is no difficulty of getting clear






of debts: but if the consequence of this new system should be to






make the creditors the masters, I suppose the case may be






different. Farther,






    In former times public debts were contracted between the






state and its own subjects; but at present we see that in such






loans, foreigners, even enemies, are invited to concur: and the






better to engage them to it, a total immunity is promised from






all taxes upon the interest to be paid by the borrowers.






    This circumstance has already drawn the attention of Princes,






in the discussion of their reciprocal concerns. We saw how, in






the treaty of Dresden, which took place after the King of






Prussia's invasion of Saxony in 1745, it was provided by the 6th






article, that all debts due by the bank of the Steuer to that






Prince's subjects, were to be paid, on presentation of their






contracts.






    We have not indeed as yet seen wars carried on for the






payment of debts; but the case may happen, and kingdom may be






carried off upon such pretensions, as well as private property.






What a chain of contingent consequences arises from this single






combination, were this a proper place to introduce them!






    But without going to the supposition of Princes or nations






becoming reciprocally engaged in debts, and thereby involving






such mighty interests in the support of public faith, we may






easily conceive, that a monied interest, of a long standing, may






have influence enough to produce a change upon the spirit and






manners of a people.






    Let me here take the example of Great Britain. Do we not see






how the spirit of that nation is totally bent upon the support of






public credit? And do we not see how absolutely their commercial






interest depends upon it? Can it be supposed, that every one has






combined all the consequences which may flow from the constant






swelling of their debts? Or, indeed is it possible to determine






what will be the consequences of them? This however we may






suppose at least, because we see the progress of it already, that






the interest of the creditors will daily gather strength, both in






parliament and without doors: and if from small beginnings it






have arrived at the pitch we now see, it is very natural to






conclude, that, in time, it may become stronger, and that at






last, the creditors of the nation may become the masters of it.






    When any one interest becomes too predominant, the prosperity






of the state stands upon a precarious footing. Every interest






should be encouraged, protected, and kept within due bounds. The






following speculations are intended for the application of






principles to new and unexperienced combinations; where natural






causes may work their direct and immediate effects, and thereby






prove prejudicial to the general welfare, unless they be foreseen






in some degree, and proper remedies be prepared against them.






    Europe was possessed by our ancestors free from taxes; our






fathers saw them imposed, and we now see how fast they become






mortgaged for our debts. We can as little judge of the extent of






our credit, as they could of the possibility of contributing so






large a fund for the support of it.






    As the plan of imposing taxes has been extended, we see the






public coffers every day receiving a vast flux of money, and like






the heart in the human body, throwing it out again into






circulation. Happy state, could it be lasting, and were this flux






and reflux preserved in a due proportion to all the uses for






which it is intended! But states have their vices, as well as






private people. Public opulence should be proportioned to public






exigences: but how often do we see ambition putting on the face






of public spirit, and animating the resentment of a nation, under






colour of providing for her security? Hence wars, from wars






expence: recourse is had to credit, money is borrowed, debts are






contracted, taxes are augmented; all this increases circulation,






which demands a supply of currency: this is procured by melting






down the solid property. These operations performed, the public






money is either sent abroad, or remains at home. If sent abroad,






more property must be melted down, in order to fill up the void.






If it remain at home, it will animate every branch of






circulation; and when the exigence, which required this






additional quantity of money, is over, what circulation finds






superfluous, will stagnate in the hands of the monied interest,






and will either form a fund for the filling of new loans to






government, or it will be laid out in the purchase of the






property formerly melted down, which produced it; and thereby






will be consolidated a-new.






    Every interest in a state must influence the government of






it, in proportion to its consequence and weight; and every






government must influence the spirit of the people who live under






it.






    Now, as we have seen how industry creates wealth; how wealth






and confidence create credit; how credit creates debts and taxes;






how these again occasion an augmentation of money, by the melting






down of property; and how this property becomes transferred to a






new set of men, once the monied interest, who afterwards acquire






the lands, and consolidate this quantity of money which is become






superfluous to circulation; does not this chain of consequences






represent a kind of circle, returning into itself? And is it not






plain, that without the intervention of this engine, namely the






money created in proportion to the demand for it, the chain would






be cut off, before it could reach the link from which it first






set out? Will not this conversion of the former monied interest






into a new landed interest, insensibly inspire the bulk of the






landlords with sentiments analogous to a monied interest? Is not






this evidently more and more the case every day in England? And






from this may we not prognosticate the solidity of public credit






in that nation?






    If on the other hand we find, as in France, industry in times






of peace drawing wealth from other nations, and thereby






increasing the coin, upon which alone credit is circulated






through the kingdom; and then foreign expence sending it away in






times of war; must not circulation keep pace with the coin, that






is to say, be circumscribed within the proportion of it?






    If the solidity and extent of the King's free revenue should






afford credit to borrow this coin; and if, without providing a






proportional supply of currency to fill up the void, the coin






borrowed be sent out of France; how can the ordinary circulation






be carried on?






    Let us here recal to mind what was said in the 22d chapter,






upon banks, where we distinguished voluntary circulation, which






is buying, from involuntary circulation, which is paying: we






there observed how paying must always take place of buying;






consequently, we may here determine that taxes must be paid






before buying, that is consumption, can go on. The deficiency






therefore of coin for circulation, will, first, proportionally






affect the trade, manufactures, and consumption of France, and






afterwards the revenue which arises from them. Is not this the






constant complaint in France, when war carries off their coin?






The remonstrances of all their parliaments are filled with it.






    In times of peace, the amount of what comes from the people






is greater than in time of war: but then there is coin sufficient






for all the payments; and when they are made to the royal






treasury, they immediately return into circulation, and no hurt






is felt.






    I insist the more upon this principle, and I introduce it in






so many different ways, and under such a variety of views,






because I take it to be one of the most important considerations






in the whole doctrine of credit, and one which I have never seen






suggested by any French or English writer upon this subject. Many






are the complaints for want of money; but no method have I ever






seen proposed for obtaining it from solid property; the easiest






and safest of all operations, when conducted with honesty, and






according to principles.






    As money therefore is the means of closing the chain of






consequences already mentioned, and forming it into a circle, as






has been said, we plainly see how, when it is wanting, the same






effects cannot be produced; and consequently the country of






France, where money is confined to the coin, will be very long of






adopting the sentiments of a monied interest; whether for its






profit or its loss, in the end, is not here the question.






    We have now traced the contingent consequences of public






credit as far as to shew how it may tend to influence the spirit






of a people, and make them adopt the sentiments of a monied






interest.






    The allurement of acquiring land-property is very great, no






doubt, especially to monied men. The ease and affluence of those,






on the other hand, who have their capitals in their pocket-books,






is very attracting to the eyes of many landlords, especially at a






time when they are paying the heavy taxes laid upon their






possessions.






    The firm establishment of public credit tends greatly to






introduce these reciprocal sentiments of good-will among the two






great classes of a people, and thereby to preserve a balance






between them. The monied interest wish to promote the prosperity






of the landlords; the landlords, the solidity of credit; and the






well-being of both depends upon the success of trade and






industry.






    Let us now suppose what is actually the case in Great






Britain, that from the swelling of public debts an enormous fund






of personal property is created. This is formed out of the income






of the whole nation; and as it has been purchased by those who






have lent money to the state, in common language it is included






in what we call the monied interest: it is however very distinct






from it, as will be understood from what is to follow.






    The capital of the public debts is the price which has been






paid for the annuities due to the creditors, and is now no more






money to them than land is money to the landlord. It may be






turned into money, no doubt; but so may land.






    The monied interest, comprehends, those only who have money,






not realized upon any fund, and who either employ it in the way






of trade, in the way of industry, in jobbing in land, in stock,






or in any way they please, so as to draw from it an annual






income. While it is fixed, that is, given for any permanent






value, it ceases to be money; when it is called in, it becomes






money again. Let stock, therefore, suffer ever so many






alienations from hand to hand, it still continues stock: it never






can become land, it never can become money, until it be paid off






by government. I hope this idea is so clear, as to be well






understood. Stock, therefore, I here consider as one great branch






of solid personal property; as far as the security of government






is solid and good; and as such, may be melted down into money by






banks, as well as any other thing.






    Now I have said that this fund is formed out of the income of






the whole nation; consequently by fund, here, I do not understand






the capital, which exists no more, but the interest which is






drawn for it: it is this interest, I say, which is paid from the






land, the money, the trade, the industry, &c. which forms one






great branch of the monied interest of England. From the land,






out of the amount of the taxes charged upon it; from the money,






trade, industry, &c. out of the amount of proportional taxes,






such as excises, customs, salt-tax, stamp-duties, and the like.






    The more the national debts increase, by the monied interest






realizing into this branch of solid property the funds, the more






the taxes must augment; and consequently, the more the






proprietors of the funds themselves must be affected by such






taxes, as well as the landlords.






    From this exposition of the matter, it may be concluded, that






as proportional taxes affect every man's income, according to his






consumption; the landlord, caeteris paribus, who pays a land tax,






as well as his proportion upon his consumption, is more hardly






dealt with than the proprietor of the other branch of solid






property, the funds, who pays his proportion only of the last.






    But the condition of the stockholder is not equally






favourable to that of the landlord, for two very plain reasons.






The first is, that the income of his stock cannot increase; that






of the land may. The second is, that the swelling of this great






capital of stock has the effect of sinking the interest upon it,






and consequently of diminishing the income of the stockholder:






and in proportion to this diminution, the value of land must






augment. Now I readily allow that the augmentation upon the value






of lands is no inducement to a landlord to turn them into money;






because he would then lose upon his money, what he gains upon the






additional price received. But it is a great advantage in another






respect, namely, that he thereby diminishes the interest he pays






upon his debts, if he have any; and if he have none, it enables






him to borrow at a lower rate for the future; and by improving






his lands with the money borrowed, he may augment his income much






beyond the proportion of the interest paid.






    It is therefore necessary, in imposing land taxes, rightly to






combine every circumstance; that the load of all impositions may






be equally distributed upon every class of a people who enjoys






superfluity, and upon no other. If, after a fair deduction of






principles, this shall appear a thing possible to be done, we may






expect to see statesmen engaged to depart from the old maxim of






grasping at what is readiest and nearest at hand, to wit, the






landed property, with a view to spare a class of people, which,






in a well regulated state, never can be made to feel the burden






of any proportional tax whatsoever; I mean the industrious poor.






    I now proceed in my inquiry into the nature and consequences






of the swelling of this great branch of property, the public






funds.






    As to the nature of it, we have said already, that it is






formed by realizing money into stock. When government borrows,






the lenders must be people who have money. If the loan be made at






home, the money is no sooner paid in, than it is spent; and as we






may suppose that it would not have been lent, had either the






lenders found it necessary for their current expence, or had they






found a more profitable way of realizing it than by lending it to






government, we consider it as having been in a state of






stagnation; but being lent to government, it is thrown into a new






channel of circulation.






    Farther, this money stagnating in the hands of the lender,






either proceeded from his income, which exceeded his expence, or






from the profits of his industry. In either case, the country is






neither poorer or richer, when considered in a cumulative view,






than if the same sum had been lent to private people at home.






    Let us next suppose the money to have been borrowed for the






exigence of a foreign war. In this case, if it be borrowed at






home and sent abroad, it must first be converted into the money






of the world, gold and silver, and then sent off, to the






diminution of this kind of property; or it must go abroad in the






money of the country, credit, to the diminution of the annual






income upon which the credit is established. As this last






operation may not be so clear, an example will explain it.






    Government borrows one million; it is paid in paper, and must






be sent to Holland. If at that time a balance be due by Holland






of one million, bills will readily be found for it. In this case,






the balance of trade is borrowed as it were by government, and






becomes converted into a capital of a million in the public






funds, the interest of which will remain at home, and continue to






be the property of the nation. But as the value of this balance






is sent to Holland and spent abroad, it is, upon the whole, to






the nation, as if no balance had been due to them. This I call a






lucrum cessans to the country.






    But suppose no balance to be due by Holland at the time the






million comes to be sent off, I say the consequence will be, to






alienate in favour of foreigners a part of the annual income,






proportional to the whole interest paid for the loan, whether it






has been subscribed for by foreigners, or by natives.






    If the subscription be filled by foreigners, the consequence






is evident: it is equally so in the other case, upon a little






reflection.






    Suppose then the million subscribed for, and paid in London.






Bills are sought for; none are found, I mean in the way of






reciprocal compensation, does not this sum immediately become a






balance against London? And as a country loses all such balances,






and the country to which they are due gains them, this million is






lost to England, and forms what I call a damnum emergens; that is






to say, her former property or income is so far diminished, or






comes to be transferred to strangers.






    From this we may conclude, that in all matters of public






borrowing, it is of no consequence whether the subscription be






filed by natives, or by foreigners, when the value of it is to be






sent abroad.






    Let us next examine the state of the question when the loan






is made in order to be spent at home, as is the case after a war,






when the unfunded debts come to be paid off.






    We have said that loans are filled by money stagnating, which






the owner desires to realize: if he cannot do better, he lends it






to government; if he can do better, he will not lend it.






    While the uses of domestic circulation absorb all the money






in the country, that is to say, when there are private persons






ready to borrow all the money to be lent, at this time government






cannot borrow at home; and if they did, by offering a high






interest for it, the borrowing would do harm to circulation;






because it would raise interest at home, or disappoint those who






would gladly borrow it, for little more than the interest offered






by government.






    Let us next suppose that after a war, when the unfunded debts






are either bearing a high interest, or selling at discount,






government shall find an advantage in opening a subscription,






which may be filled from abroad, at a lower rate than the then






actual value of money. Suppose, I say, the Dutch should be






willing to lend at 3 per cent while money in England stood at 4






per cent. I ask if, in this case, government ought to borrow from






Holland, at the expence of sending the interest out of the






country, rather than suffer such debts to sell at discount; or






continue paying a higher interest at home for what they owe?






    It is my opinion that still they ought to borrow abroad, for






the following reasons. That if the high interest at home proceed






from want of money, that is to say, from circulation not being






full enough, it is their interest to borrow, were it for nothing






else than to supply circulation; because unless this be full, all






industry must languish. But suppose it should be said that






circulation is full enough, that industry suffers no check from






that quarter, but that there being no superfluity of money,






interest stands 1 per cent higher than it would do were there






considerable stagnations. In this case also, I think it is their






interest to borrow, were it for no other reason than to produce






such stagnations.






    It is a general rule every where, that there is no having






enough without having a superfluity; at least there is no






certainty of one's having enough without finding a superfluity.






Borrowing abroad, therefore, in small sums, at such a time, will






produce stagnations at home, from which succeeding loans may be






filled, after circulation is sufficiently provided: and even in






case more should be borrowed from strangers than may be found






necessary; and that in consequence of this, too much money should






come to stagnate at home, after the demand of government is over;






the monied interest would then lend, in their turn, to other






states, where interest is higher; and the annual returns from






that quarter would more than compensate what must be sent away,






in consequence of the former borrowing.






    From these combinations, let us draw some conclusions.






    First, That the effect of public borrowing, or national debt,






is to augment the permanent income of the country, out of






stagnating money, and balances of trade.






    Secondly, That this income so created, may be either the






property of natives, or of strangers.






    Thirdly, That when money is found to regorge, in a country






where circulation is not diminishing, it may be supposed to






proceed from the coming in of a right balance of trade.






    Fourthly, If stagnations in one part be found to interrupt






circulation in another, public borrowing, for domestic purposes,






has the good effect of giving vent to the stagnation, and






throwing the money into a new channel of circulation.






    Fifthly, That the sum of interest paid by any nation to






strangers, shews the general balance due by the nation, after






deducting all the profits of their past trade from all the






expence of their foreign wars.






    But here it must be observed, that as on one hand we are






comprehending all that is paid to foreign creditors, on account






of the funds they have in England, for example, so on the other






hand, must be deducted from this, all the payments made to






Englishmen by other nations.






    Sixthly, From this last circumstance we discover that the






lending to other nations by private hands, produces the same






effect to a nation as if the state were actually paying off the






debts due to strangers. Consequently, when Moses permitted the






Jews to lend to strangers at interest, and forbade such loans






among themselves, his view was to establish a foreign tribute, as






it were, in favour of his own nation, instead of promoting luxury






at home.






    Seventhly, As the balance due to a nation upon her trade, is






found to compensate, pro tanto, the money she spends abroad, we






may from the same principle, conclude that so soon as she ceases






to expend money abroad, the balance of trade in her favour, if






not realized at home in some new improvement, will diminish, pro






tanto, the interest, or capitals due to strangers. This is






evident from the nature of balances, of which we have treated






already.






    Eighthly, The consequence, for example, of England's owing






large sums to strangers, will, from the same principle,






constantly prevent exchange from rising very high in her favour,






when the balance of her trade comes to be paid to her: because on






every such occasion, her foreign creditors will be glad to






disappoint exchangers, by furnishing bills for their interest, or






capitals, to those who owe the balance; the consequence of which






is plainly to diminish the foreign debts.(7*)






    This circumstance implies no loss to the nation which is






creditor in the balance of trade, and debtor upon the capitals;






because we have proved that the price of exchange never affects a






nation, but certain individuals only, who pay it to others of the






same nation.






    This is sufficient, I think, to point out in some degree the






nature of a national debt. I come next to examine the






consequences of its constant augmentation; when proper measures






are not taken, either to pay it off, or to circumscribe it within






certain bounds.






    In what is to follow, I shall throw all consideration of






capitals totally out of the question; and as to the amount of






taxes, it is quite indifferent whether the money proceeding from






them be in consequence of an improvement made upon those already






established, or from new impositions: such combinations will come






in more properly afterwards.






    If the interest paid upon the national debt of England, for






example, be found constantly to increase upon every new war, the






consequence will be, that more money must be raised on the






subject for the payment of it. The question then comes to be.






First, How far may debts extend? Secondly, How far may taxes be






carried? And Thirdly, What will be the consequence, supposing the






one and the other carried to the greatest height possible?






    I answer to the first, that abstracting from circumstances






which may disturb the gradual progress of this operation, before






it can arrive at the ne plus ultra, debts may be increased to the






full proportion of all that can be raised for the payment of the






interest. As to the second, How far taxes may be carried, I shall






not here anticipate the subject of the following book, any






farther than is necessary to resolve the question before us.






    Taxes, we have said, either affect income, or consumption.






The land-tax of England is now at 4 shillings in the pound, upon






a supposed value of the property affected by it, which is all






real and personal estates, the stock upon lands, and some few






other particulars excepted.






    This tax may be carried to the full value of all the real






estates in England. As for personal estates it never can affect






them proportionally; and this part of the statute of land-tax






which passes every year, and imposes 4 shillings in the pound on






personal estates, carries in it a mark of our former ignorance in






matters of taxation.






    The notion of actually imposing 20 shillings in the pound






upon the real value of all the land-rents of England, appears to






us perfectly ridiculous. I admit it to be so; and could I have






discovered any argument by which I could have limited the rising






of the land-tax to any precise number of shillings under twenty,






I should have stated this as the maximum rather than the other.






    The second branch of taxes comprehends those upon






consumptions, excises, and the like. The maximum as to this






branch must depend upon the interests of foreign trade; because






this is affected in a certain degree by the prices of domestic






industry. Other taxes have not this effect, as we shall shew in






its proper place.






    But as foreign trade on the other hand is not essential to






the support of the domestic industry, consumption, circulation,






&c. of any nation, as has been proved in the second book, but






merely to its increasing in wealth proportionally to other






nations; were foreign communications cut off entirely, I perceive






no limit to which I can confine the extent of proportional taxes.






Let me therefore suppose a term beyond which impositions of all






kinds must come to a stop, and then ask, in the third place, what






the consequence will be? I answer, that the state will then be in






possession of all that can be raised on the land, on the






consumption, industry and trade of the country; in short, of all






that can be called income, which it will administer for the






public creditors.






    When this comes to be the case, debts become extinguished of






course; because they come to be consolidated with the property: a






case which commonly happens when a creditor takes possession of






an estate for the payment of debts equal to its value.






    Government then may continue to administer for the creditors,






and either retain in its hand what is necessary for the public






expence of the year; or if it inclines to shew the same






indulgence for this new class of proprietors as for the former,






it may limit the retention to a sum equal only to the interest of






the money wanted; and in this way set out upon a new system of






borrowing, until the amount of taxes once more extending to the






amount of the public revenue be transferred to a new set of






creditors. This is the endless path referred to in the ninth






chapter of the second book, which, after a multitude of windings,






returns into itself.






    A state, I imagine, which would preserve its public faith






inviolable, until a period such as I have been supposing, would






run little risk of not finding credit for a new borrowing. The






prospect of a second revolution of the same kind with the first






would be very distant; and in matters of credit, which are






constantly exposed to risk, such events being out of the reach of






calculation, are never taken into any man's account who has money






to lend.






    The whole of this hypothesis is, I readily agree, destitute






of all probability; because of the infinite variety of






circumstances which may frustrate such a scheme. I introduced it






merely to shew where the constant mortgaging of a public revenue






may end; and to disprove the vulgar notion, that by contracting






debts beyond a certain sum, a trading nation which has a great






balance in its favour, must be involved in an unavoidable






bankruptcy. To say that a nation must become bankrupt to itself,






is a proposition which I think implies a contradiction.













Chap. IX













Of Bankruptcies













    In the last chapter we have been running through a chain of






consequences relative to the increase of public debts, which






appear as extravagant to us at present, as it would have appeared






to Davenant, to have supposed the debts of this nation to grow up






to their present height, without the risk of involving the nation






in a general bankruptcy.






    But these consequences are merely contingent. The present






debts may either be paid off, or the nation may be involved in a






general bankruptcy. In either case, the vast property in the






funds, this great article of permanent income, belonging to






natives and to foreigners, must wither and decay, and at last






disappear altogether.






    We may therefore conclude, that one of three events must






happen, viz. either First, Debts will swell to such a pitch as at






last to pay themselves: or, Secondly, The nation will be involved






in a bankruptcy.. or, Thirdly, They will be fairly paid off, or






at least circumscribed within reasonable bounds.






    The first supposition we have examined; the second we are now






to consider; the last will be the subject of the following






chapter, with which I shall conclude this book.






    I shall advance no argument to prove that the scheme of a






public bankruptcy is either lawful, honourable, or expedient, if






voluntarily gone into by a state; because I think it is






diametrically opposite to every principle of good government. It






is a maxim uncontroverted, that a contract ought to be binding






between the parties contracting, and that it ought to be






fulfilled in every article. If the public good be alleged as an






overruling principle, to which every other must give way, I






readily admit the justness of the exception. There is another of






equal force, the impossibility of performance. When such






arguments are used to engage a nation to commit a deliberate act






of bankruptcy, two things must be examined: the first, is the






interest which the public has in adopting the scheme: the second,






the consequences of it. What reasons a state may have for






breaking faith with her creditors, I shall consider afterwards;






but let us first enquire what might be the consequences of a






general and total bankruptcy in England; from which we may gather






what difference it would make, were it partial only; and by this






inquiry, we may be led to discover the proper method of breaking






faith, in case it should become unavoidable. This is what in






another place I called bringing credit decently to her grave;






when, after being overstretched, it can no longer be supported.






    A bankruptcy may take place in two ways: either as a






consequence of circumstances which cannot be prevented; or by a






deliberate act of government.






    Were the trade and industry of England to decay, the amount






of all the permanent taxes might so far diminish, as to prove






insufficient to pay the interest of the national debt, and defray






the expence of civil government. Were the people to be blown up






into a spirit of revolt against taxes, the same event would






probably happen. In either case, the natural and immediate






consequences of the bankruptcy would probably follow one another






in this manner:






    First, Every creditor of the state would become poorer in






proportion to the diminution of his income.






    Secondly, Consumption and the demand for work would diminish






in proportion to the part of that income withheld, which the






creditors annually expend for these purposes.






    Thirdly, Trade would directly suffer, in proportion to that






part of the said revenue yearly thrown into it by the public






creditors at present; and it would consequently suffer, in






proportion to the hurt resulting to private credit, from the






consequences of the bankruptcy.






    The creditors would then lose all, the trade of England would






be undone, and the multitudes who live in consequence of the






demand for their industry from the one and the other, would be






reduced to misery. These immediate effects would first manifest






themselves in the capital. The consequences would soon be felt






all over England: a diminution upon the consumption of the fruits






of the earth; a stagnation of that commerce which is carried on






between London and the country (which we have seen to be equal to






the amount of all the taxes, and to all the land-rents spent in






London) would soon throw every thing into confusion. But taxes






would be abolished: of that there is no doubt. Let a deliberate






bankruptcy take place without any abolition of them by law, they






would soon sink to nothing, from the utter impossibility there






would be found to pay them.






    A total bankruptcy, therefore, coming upon England, either






from a decay of her trade, or a disturbance in collecting the






public revenue would have the effect of plunging the nation into






utter ruin at home: what might be the consequences from abroad, I






leave to the reader's sagacity to determine.






    Let me now suppose a bankruptcy to take place from a






deliberate act of power, with a view of expediency.






    The difference between the two consists in this; that in the






first, all the consequences we have mentioned would follow one






upon another, without a possibility of preventing them: in the






other, a plan to prevent them might be concerted.






    Let me then suppose, that government shall find it expedient,






at any time, to use a spunge for the public debts; that they






shall fear to external bad consequences, either from the






resentment of those states who may be hurt by it, or from the






ambition of others who may profit by it; that they shall cooly






resolve to sacrifice the interest of all the creditors in favour






of the whole body; and that they shall deliberate upon the plan






to be followed, in order to bring about so great a revolution,






without essentially hurting any interest in the state, that of






the creditors alone excepted.






    In this case, I imagine, they would begin by ordering the






amount of all that is paid to the creditors, to be set apart as a






fund for the execution of the plan.






    They would purchase all over England, every article of






produce and manufacture which might remain upon hand for want of






a market: they would feed all those who would be forced to be






idle for want of employment: they would instantly put proper






employments into their hands; one week's delay in the execution






of this part of the plan would throw the manufacturing interest






into such confusion, as to be past all remedy: they would furnish






credit to all the merchants subsisting, in proportion to what






they had lost by the extinction of the funds: they would






establish offices every where, to supply the wants of those who






would be totally ruined, until by degrees they could re-establish






confidence, the parent of trade, the mother of industry. By such






precautions, properly taken, and properly executed, none would






suffer but the unhappy creditors and their families, who, from






great opulence, would be reduced to poverty.






    As far as human prudence is insufficient for going through so






great a detail all at once; so far would the effects of a general






bankruptcy add hurtful consequences to those which in every case






are unavoidable.






    Were a statesman endowed with the supernatural gift of






turning the minds of a nation at his will, and of foreseeing






every consequence before it happened, such a plan might be






executed. Another who, with the greatest capacity ever man was






endowed with, would, for expediency, not from necessity,






deliberately undertake a general bankruptcy, I should consider as






a madman.






    I should rather prefer to submit to the natural consequences






which might result from an accidental bankruptcy, than endeavour






to avoid them by a plan too complicated for human wisdom to






execute.






    Let us next suppose the scheme to be fairly executed from a






view of expediency, no matter how, and all inconveniences






prevented during the execution, what would be gained by it?






    If by the supposition all taxes be kept alive, for at least a






certain time, in order to prevent a total confusion, certainly no






body could gain during this period; even the state itself would






lose, because every branch of consumption would infallibly






diminish. But that time elapsed, and taxes reduced to the lowest,






who would be the gainers? We shall see when we come to the






doctrine of taxation, that a sudden abolition of taxes, in






consequence of a bankruptcy, would be advantageous to no body,






but to creditors upon mortgage, and to the idle: not to






landlords; because their incomes would diminish more than in the






proportion of the present land-tax, at least their improvements






would be interrupted, and their rents ill paid: not to the






manufacturing classes; because at present they pay no taxes, but






in proportion to their idleness or extravagance, as shall be






proved: the monied interest, not secured on land, would I suppose






be extinguished; trade and credit at an end. The gains then would






be confined to those who have money secured upon land, where the






capital is demandable. In such a situation, the interest of money






would rise beyond all bounds; and a debt which might have been






considered as a trifle before, might then carry off an estate.






The idle also who live peaceably upon a very moderate income






would find a great advantage from the fall of prices for want of






consumption, and from the distress of the industrious; but the






indigent poor, who are supported from voluntary charity, would






suffer: all the great establishments for labour and industry, in






public workhouses and hospitals, would fall to the ground: the






numbers of poor who are there maintained at present would come






upon a society, which is beginning to lose those tender feelings






of compassion, which in countries of idleness, are more or less






prevalent in proportion as misery is more or less familiarly






before them.






    To say all in one word, a total bankruptcy, and abolition of






taxes, would bring this nation back to the situation it was in






before taxes and debts were known.






    Does any body imagine that our present situation is not






analogous to our present policy, and that it is possible that






independently of the same circumstances we should long continue






to enjoy the advantages we feel? No: were we in the same






situation as formerly, we should feel as our fathers felt. They






had as good understandings to improve their circumstances as we






have; but they had to do with an idle. we with an industrious






common people. Trade and credit have been long at work to effect






this great revolution: the operation is not as yet compleated,






and a total bankruptcy now, would destroy every good effect of it






for a long time.






    Were taxes made to cease, the large sums which proceed from






them would disappear entirely. Money would not, as some imagine,






become equally distributed among those who now pay the taxes, and






so proportionally increase every man's income. The reason is






plain: the money paid for taxes, circulates; because it is






demanded by the public, and is spent by it. Were taxes






suppressed, people having less occasion for money than formerly,






would circulate less in proportion. It is the necessity of paying






taxes, which creates this money for the payment of them; and when






this method of creating is not contrived, the taxes cannot be






paid, as has been often said. Now it is this great flux of money






from taxes which animates the trade of England: take them out of






the circle, what becomes of the whole?






    To suppose, therefore, so great a revolution in the






circulation of a country, as that produced by the cessation of






taxes; and to suppose no interruption from it upon the state of






industry, and the employment of the people of this nation, is a






proposition I must reject, as being contrary to all principles;






and to this among the rest, that it would be a most sudden, and a






most violent revolution; which throughout the whole course of






this inquiry, we have found to involve inconveniences beyond the






power of any theory to point out or to remedy.






    Upon the whole we may conclude, that the fatal consequences






of a bankruptcy would be many; and that the good resulting from a






total abolition of taxes would be confined to two objects. First,






A relief to those who pay them upon their possessions, or






persons. Secondly, A diminution of prices in favour of the idle






at home, and of trade abroad: great objects, no doubt, could they






be obtained at less expence than the consequences of a total






failure of public credit and domestic industry. Perhaps when we






come to examine the Principles of taxation, we shall find that






taxes do not raise prices so much as is generally believed; and






those principles which influence the application of public money,






will point out better expedients than a bankruptcy for compassing






the great national objects which we have just now mentioned.






    But let us suppose a case, which may possibly happen, as






matters seem to go on. Suppose, I say, that by continuing to






carry on long and expensive wars, the sum of interest paid to






strangers should exceed all that the nation can gain by her






trade. In this case, there must be a general balance of payments






against her every year, which very soon would manifest itself by






the most fatal consequences.






    The bank of England would be the first to feel them, by the






departure of all the coin and precious metals. Trade would feel






them next, and then indeed they would become universal.






    In such a situation, I fairly acknowledge, that I cannot






discover any expedient to avoid a bankruptcy. Engaging the






foreign creditors to become citizens, by the allurements of the






greatest privileges, and bills of naturalization, are vain






speculations. Unless some resource, hidden from me, should, upon






such an occasion, open itself, in the deep recesses of future






events, I believe the nation would soon be driven upon the fatal






rock of bankruptcy. The idea of a nation's becoming bankrupt to






itself, I have always looked upon as a contradiction; but that it






may become bankrupt to the rest of the world, is quite consistent






with reason and common sense.






    I shall not take upon me to suggest what mode of bankruptcy






would in such a case be the best; a total, or a partial one. The






partial, I am afraid, would, in England, work effects almost as






hurtful as the other. But if ever the case should happen, the






only way will be, to watch over every symptom of the approaching






catastrophe, and to improve circumstances to the best advantage.






    I cannot omit inserting in this place the opinion of a most






sagacious and most intelligent foreign merchant, most consolatory






to Great Britain, with respect to the debts she owes to






foreigners.






    The late Mr Megens, who lived many years in England, composed






a treatise in German, which Mr Horsley translated in 1752, under






the title of the Universal Merchant. In the 31st Section of this






work is the following passage:






    'And although it cannot be denied, that for as much as






foreigners are become great creditors in the public debts of






England, a great sum of interest must be annually made good to






them. Yet if it appear that the private people abroad, are more






indebted to the private people here, than such interest amounts






to; the nation has no prejudicial draught upon it, on account of






such debt; and that the general balance of trade is highly in






favor of England.'






    Few people, I am persuaded, have any such idea as this laid






down by Mr Megens. Happy, for Great Britain, could it be






verified!






    Of what infinite consequence is it then for a British






statesman to inquire into the amount of debts owing to strangers,






and into the state of the balance of trade? In speaking of






exchange, I threw out many things concerning the idea of putting






that branch of business into the hands of the bank, in






conjunction with the exchequer. Were the state brought into the






dilemma of either submitting to this gradual decline of trade,






from a cause which could not be removed; or of being pushed to






the necessity of leaping into the terrible gulph of a deliberate






bankruptcy; in such a dilemma, I say, what infinite advantages






might not be drawn from the management of exchange?






    I have heard it said, that the debt owing to strangers was a






great advantage to England; because it drew people to that market






where their funds are settled. I allow all the force any one can






give to this proposition: But alas! what would it avail, whenever






England becomes incapable to furnish goods equivalent to all her






imports from abroad, added to all she owes to her foreign






creditors?






    I am very far from supposing the present situation of England






to forebode the approach of any such disaster; but it is good to






represent to one's self some determinate object, by which we may






judge of our situation in times to come.






    Debts have increased far beyond the imagination of every






mortal. Great men have uttered prophecies, which have proved






false, concerning the consequences of a debt of one hundred






millions. From this most people conclude, that they will go on






until some unforeseen accident shall dash the fabric to pieces. I






have been pretending to shew how they may go on in a perpetual






chain. But alas! one fatal circumstance was there omitted; and






now that it has been taken in, I think it serves as a datum, to






resolve the most important problem of this science, viz. How to






determine the exact extent of public credit. The solution of






which is, That it is not necessary that public credit should ever






fail, from any augmentation of debts whatever, due to natives;






and that it must fail, so soon as the nation becomes totally






unable either to export commodities equal to all their imports






and foreign debts, or to pay off a proportional part of their






capital, sufficient to turn the balance to the right side.






    From this proposition two corollaries may be drawn.






    First, That the most important object in paying off debts, is






to get quit of those due to strangers.






    Secondly, That whatever circumstance has a tendency towards






diminishing the burden of foreign debts, should be encouraged.






    If it be said, that whenever our foreign debts exceed the






balance of our trade, the best way would be to break faith with






strangers, and keep it with the subjects of the state: I answer,






that were the thing possible, which I apprehend it is not, the






consequence might prove equally hurtful.






    The greatest of all the inconveniences proceeding from a






bankruptcy, is the ruin of industry, and the stop put to






circulation. Can it then be supposed, that a country might






execute so glaring a scheme of treachery to all her neighbours,






and still continue her correspondence with them in the open way






of trade? Certainly not. Were all foreign trade to be stopt at






once, what a revolution would it occasion! The circulation of






foreign trade, in the city of London only, exceeds perhaps the






amount of all the taxes. A stop put to this would occasion such a






stagnation, as would ruin the nation as much as if the bankruptcy






were to become universal. I do not here pretend minutely to trace






consequences, which are finite: all that can be done, is to






suggest hints, which every one may pursue, in proportion to the






extent of his combinations.






    The intention of touching upon this subject at all, is to






shew, that the expedient of a spunge, which is frequently talked






of as a remedy against the consequence of debts, is, perhaps,






more dangerous than any thing which can be apprehended from them.






The reason is, that the spunge implies a more sudden bankruptcy






than any one brought on in a gradual way, by natural causes.






    Were natural and irresistible causes totally to cut off all






profit upon the trade of Britain, one cannot say how far the






other nations of Europe might not find it their interest to






assist us, provided we did our utmost to preserve our good faith






to them. And as I think I have made it sufficiently evident that






nothing can be gained by openly violating public faith, the best






resolution a nation can take, is to adhere to it to the last






extremity, and to banish from their thoughts every idea which may






be repugnant to it.













Chap. X













Methods of contracting and paying off public Debts













    We are now to collect together, in one view, the several






methods of contracting and paying off the debts of a nation. Such






methods may be deduced, either from principles, or from what






practice has pointed out.






    The foundation upon which public credit is built, is the






existence of a sure and sufficient fund for performing the






engagements contracted.






    When, in the early times of public credit, the repayment of






the capital was an express condition of the loan, a much more






extensive public fund was necessary than at present, when no more






is required than the payment of the interest. As such funds never






can be formed but from taxes, or general contributions from the






people, the greater they are, the larger must the contribution






be. Whenever therefore there is occasion to contact debt, the






chief object of a statesman's care should be, to model the spirit






of his people so as to dispose them to concur in the proper






resolutions to render the plan proposed as easy as possible in






the execution.






    In the first place, the body of the people must be made






sensible that the consequence of contacting debts must imply a






diminution upon the income of some individuals; but that the






fewer the obstacles thrown in the way of the loan are, the less






will this diminution be.






    In the second place, he must gain the confidence of his






people, so far as to impress them with a firm belief that he will






consult their good, and nothing else, in what he undertakes.






    And in the last place, he must gain the confidence of those






from whom he is to borrow; and convince them that all covenants






between the public and them will be religiously performed.






    In a limited and free government, these three requisites are






essential to the firm establishment of public credit.






    Where the power of the statesman is unlimited, he may






substitute his authority over the people who are to pay, instead






of confidence; but with respect to those who are to lend, he will






find no room for any such substitution: confidence here is the






only expedient.






    All therefore that is required of the statesman with respect






to the people, is to enable them to do what he requires of them.






    For this purpose he must establish credit with them, for






finding the contributions he is to exact of them; because they






will have as much occasion for credit, in paying what is demanded






of them by authority, as he himself has in paying what he is






obliged to pay, in consequence of his engagements.






    If this general plan be not followed, the consequence will






be, that the produce of taxes will fail on one hand, and public






credit on the other.






    If all this operation cannot be previously concerted, the






plan of borrowing must be circumscribed to funds previously






established.






    When money is borrowed before the fund be prepared, every






obstacle which occurs in establishing it, becomes a drawback upon






the confidence of those who lend, and renders the conditions less






favourable to the state which borrows.






    In the contract of loan, the first article to be agreed upon






is the rate of interest. We have, in the beginning of this book,






examined the causes of its rise and fall; and have in general






determined, that when the demand is for borrowing, interest






rises; when for lending, interest falls.






    As the object of the borrower is to have interest low, the






statesman who intends to borrow, must use all possible means to






increase the quantity of money in circulation.






    But if coin alone be used as money, and if this coin be sent






out of the country, when borrowed, and if what is sent away






cannot be replaced at will, the scheme of augmenting money






becomes impracticable: it will daily become more scarce, more






difficult to procure, and interest must rise higher every day.






Symbolical or paper money, that is credit, must then be






established at home, upon the firmest basis: this will enable






every one to pay what he owes; consequently, the taxes will be






paid, the creditors will receive what is due to them regularly,






money will every year augment in proportion as debts are






contracted; and if borrowing do not augment beyond this






proportion, interest will not rise; and if borrowing should fall






below this proportion, interest will sink.






    Is not this whole doctrine verified in the strongest manner






by the operation of the Missisippi? At the death of the late King






of France, money had disappeared. Some years before, he had, for






seven millions in coin, engaged his kingdom for thirty-two






millions; upon a distant fund indeed, but still it became a debt






to be paid. Paper money had not been introduced three years, when






interest fell to 2 per cent. The paper indeed was actually a






bubble; but we have shewn that it became so from bad management






only.






    By the augmentation of money, capitals cease to be so






valuable. By the melting down of property, the very capital,






though in the hands of the state, may be turned into money by the






creditor, whenever he has occasion for it; in the same way as the






coin which is buried in the vaults of the town-house of






Amsterdam, is constantly performing all the uses of circulation.






    The method, therefore, of borrowing money to the best






advantage, is previously to establish a fund of credit, arising






from annual taxes; to provide the people who are to pay them,






with credit or money in proportion to their property or industry;






and to prevent the latter from ever failing for want of the






medium, money, for caring it on.






    If in time of peace interest shall stand high, relatively to






other states with which you are at war, throw as much money as






possible into the hands of your creditors, in payment of the






debts already contracted; because the more you throw in there,






the more you will draw out, if you have occasion to borrow more;






and if you have no occasion to borrow more, the lower you will






reduce the rate of interest, by augmenting the fund of money to






be lent.






    From these principles I conclude, that every nation which






sets out by contracting debts with its own citizens, must begin






by borrowing upon condition of repaying the capital in a short






term of years. This is also the best method to engage the people






to contribute largely without murmuring. The reason is, that when






taxes begin to be imposed, the mass of circulation becomes






proportionally augmented; and the paying back of considerable






sums to the creditors, prevents, on the one hand, the debts from






increasing so fast, and supplies circulation and facilitates new






borrowings on the other. While this plan of augmenting






circulation is carrying on, the statesman must prevent his






expence abroad from diminishing circulation proportionally at






home. This is to be accomplished by opening loans for foreign






expence in foreign countries, and by paying the interest only of






such loans, with the greatest punctuality.






    The difficulty of performing this, is no argument against it.






It must either be done, or credit will be hurt; because without






obtaining credit abroad, it is impossible to defray any expence






incurred abroad, beyond what the metals of your country and the






exports from it can pay: that is, in other words, beyond the






quantity of metals exported, and general balance in your favour






upon all reciprocal payments with the world.






    If it be said, that nations never pay the interest of their






debts any where but at home, I answer, that it is so much the






worse for them; because wherever the debts or interest is to be






paid, the lender always states his account as if the payment were






made in his own house. All the expence to him of sending his






money to the place of subscription, and of drawing back his






returns, are compared with the interest offered by the borrower;






and if upon the whole the lender find his account in the bargain,






he subscribes; otherwise not. Since therefore the money borrowed






must in this case be sent abroad, it is an advantage for the






borrower to be under an obligation to provide a method of sending






it; and by this means he will borrow cheaper than he can do, when






he refunds to every lender all his expence and trouble in getting






his interest remitted to him.






    I am now deducing principles, and therefore shall not enter






into a discussion of the many objections which occur against this






plan, from foreign considerations; such as the facility it might






procure to a statesman in defrauding his foreign creditors, and






several others which might be formed: all I say is, that this is






a cheaper and more systematical way of borrowing, and it has this






good effect, that it constantly points out the state of the






external debt, from which alone a bankruptcy is to be feared.






    Were a favourable balance to return after an expensive war,






the payment of this foreign debt would be the consequence then,






as much as now when the payment is made at home, and rather more






so; because who ever owed a balance (to England, I suppose) would






then pay his debts at London, with money due by England, payable






at Antwerp, for example; consequently, he would remit at






discount; and when he remitted in favour of an Englishman, the






debts might be considered as discharged upon the foreign fund,






and stated a-new upon the funds payable in London. Could the






payment of the interest of the public debts be rendered






susceptible of such transfers upon all occasions, it would, I






imagine, have a remarkable effect in favour of public credit.






    This thought suggested itself, while I was considering the






situation of a country where borrowing is in its infancy; and it






occurred as an expedient for preventing foreign expence from






draining the country of the money necessary for circulation at






home. This, in every combination of circumstances, is the most






important object of a statesman's care, while he is engaged in






wars abroad.






    Now whether the money of a country be paper or coin, it is






equally taken out of circulation, by every foreign payment. When






it is coin, it goes out of the country, as well as out of






circulation: when it is paper, it does not go out of the country,






certainly, but by coming upon the debtor in it for payment, it is






equally taken out of circulation; and what the debtor gives for






it (viz. a bill of exchange upon another country) goes out of the






country. And unless this bill of exchange can be paid with value






exported in merchandize, it will remain a debt upon the country,






contracted in favour of some other nation.






    This I hope will be sufficient to recall to mind what has






been so fully explained in the 13th chapter upon banks; where the






same question was stated with regard to the payments Scotland was






obliged to make to England, towards the end of the last war. The






same principles operate in the case before us, and may be applied






to every circumstance of it; with this difference only, that here






the statesman's interest is supposed to be more closely connected






with that of his banks than was the case during the distress in






Scotland: because if he do not support them by a systematical






chain of conduct, he will drain the fund of circulation by his






remittances; his credit will fail; his taxes will no more be






paid; and his people will be oppressed. But if he pursue his plan






systematically, circulation will be kept full; his credit will be






supported; his taxes will be paid; his people will be easy:






because no check will be put either to their industry or






consumption for want of money; a great part of the solid property






will be melted down into money; whatever part of this money is






lent to the state will be, by that operation, consolidated into a






new species of property, the public funds; and if, after the






borrowing scheme is over (that is, when peace is restored)






circulation should be contracted, a part of the money will then






stagnate in the hands of individuals, and will, in their favour,






be realized in that part of the solid property which was formerly






melted down in order to produce it. That is, lands will be sold






by the former proprietors, and will be acquired by those who have






money not realized in stock; and for which money, circulation has






no farther demand. This is the reason why, at the end of every






war which has run the nation in debt, lands have constantly risen






in their value, even when considerable quantities of them have






been offered to sale.






    If it be said that the stock-holders are those whom we






commonly see buying the lands, and not those who have sums not






realized:






    I shall, in answer, observe, that the stock-holders cannot






buy lands unless they sell their stock, to those who have money






not realized; so it is still the money not realized which is






employed in buying every article of solid property: and even






after this operation, the same money will still remain in






circulation as before; because it is impossible to realize even






paper money itself, except when the creditor in it becomes






proprietor of the property upon which it is secured; and if the






money be coin, it is plain that this cannot be realized any






farther than it is by nature. When therefore we say, that a man






realizes his money, we do not mean any thing farther, than that






he gives his money to another in exchange for solid property.






Thus when an estate is bought in a country where banks upon






mortgage are established, a part of the price is commonly taken






out of circulation altogether; because in consequence of the






price paid, the bank is refunded what it had melted down of the






land sold; consequently, this paper becomes consolidated a-new,






as it were, with the lands which are relieved of the mortgage.






    But when lands are sold in a country where there is no paper,






the price remains in circulation as before; and if the quantity






of coin in circulation should exceed the uses for it, a case






which seldom happens in these days, it would be exported, and






realized abroad.






    When this complicated and systematical scheme of credit is






not established, the fallible consequence is, that money






disappears: consequently, interest rises. The taxes formerly






imposed cannot be paid: consequently, it is in vain to seek to






augment them; because in proportion as they are augmented, they






become less productive. If money be borrowed upon remote funds,






engaged for other debts previously contracted, and if public






faith be at all events to be preserved, the consequence must then






be, that the public will be eat up by usurers.






    This was the case in England during the wars of Queen Anne.






    So early as 1706, government, as has been said, began to






borrow at 6 per cent upon funds already engaged. What was the






consequence? The exchequer having no money to pay the interest as






it fell due, paid with tallies; these fell to great discount, and






had they remained long in that discredited situation, lending






would have stopt, or interest would have risen, as in France, so






high as to lose the name of interest altogether. This was the






case, in the example above cited, when seven millions ready






money, borrowed by the late king of France, became a debt of






thirty-two millions on the state.






    Upon the occasion above mentioned, government availed






themselves of the bank of England, as I say every private citizen






should have a power to do, on every occasion, when his credit is






good, though money should fail him. They engaged the bank to






discount all tallies issued for the interest of debts; that is,






in other words, to turn those sticks into money: but as public






credit was so low that money could not be found to discharge even






the interest of the advance made by the bank, the government






consented, that all advances of that kind should bear compound






interest quarterly, at 6 per cent. What a monstrous profit to the






bank! what a charge upon the state! Had a bank of circulation






upon mortgages been established at that time, money would have






come in at a moderate simple interest to individuals, who would






have availed themselves of them, for the payment of all public






burdens. Instead of which, industry was made to, suffer the






public money did not come in; taxation stopt; expences went on,






and deficiencies were paid by the public at this monstrous






charge.






    On the other hand, had it not been for the assistance the






bank then gave the state, in circulating those exchequer tallies,






bills, &c. it is very certain that credit would have failed as






totally in England as it had done in France in 1708, when






Desmaretz undertook the finances. This minister had no bank to






avail himself of, and accordingly he run France in debt at the






rate of two hundred millions of livres per annum, during seven






campaigns; of which, I am persuaded, he did not receive one half,






or near it, in effective value.






    What I have said will, I hope, be sufficient to shew that the






only way for any state to borrow, is previously to provide a fund






for making good what is agreed upon with the lenders; and that






all expedients to supply the want of it will in the end bring






great expence upon the people, either by involving them in an






excessive burden of debts, in case public engagements should be






held sacred, as has constantly been the case in Great Britain; or






by driving the state to a bankruptcy, as was the case in France






upon the death of the late King. I call it a bankruptcy, because






all that was owing was not paid. A man who pays no more than 19s.






11 3/4d. in the pound, is a bankrupt, as well as he who cannot






pay one farthing.






    I come next to the methods of paying off debts when already






contracted.






    Public debts may be divided into two classes, redeemable and






irredeemable. Redeemable debts may be paid off in several ways,






which we shall briefly enumerate before we compare their several






advantages.






    First then, such debts may be paid off at once, by refunding






to the creditors the whole capital, with all arrears of interest.






    Secondly, They may be paid off yearly, according to a certain






rule to determine the preference, and order of payment: for this






purpose, a determinate sum must be set apart as a sinking fund






for discharging the capital and interest.






    Thirdly, They may be paid off cumulatively and proportionally






every year, by incorporating the sinking fund into the money






appropriated for discharging the interest, and by placing all






that is paid beyond the interest, as payment in part of the






capital.






    Fourthly, They may be paid in one sense, as shall be farther






explained by reducing the interest upon the capitals, without






diminishing them.






    Fifthly, They may be paid off by converting them into






annuities for lives.






    Sixthly, And lastly, they may be paid off below the value of






the capitals, by the means of lotteries; where the state may gain






what the creditors choose to lose from a desire of gaming.






    To one or other of these methods, may be reduced all the fair






and honest expedients which a state may employ to get rid of its






debts, without any breach of public faith, or without proceeding






to the extremity of prescribing conditions of payment, which the






creditors are forced to accept against their will.






    As for the irredeemable debts, I apprehend, that, without






consent of the creditors, no change upon the condition of loan






can justly be made.






    I shall next point out the advantages and disadvantages of






the several methods of discharging debts, as they may affect the






separate, or cumulative interest of a state.






    Were large debts which have subsisted for a long time to be






paid off all at once, it would occasion a sudden and a violent






revolution, which is always attended with inconveniences.






    Were, for example, the proprietors of lands to consent to






sell off a part of their estates for the payment of the public






debts, the quantity of land brought to market, would sink the






price of it very considerably; from which would arise a great






detriment to landlords. I shall not here inquire from whence such






a sum of money could come; that it may be produced is very






possible, from what happened in France in the year 1720.






    Could a treasure be brought from India (let me suppose)






sufficient at once to discharge the debts of Great Britain,






circulation would become so glutted with money, that interest






would fall to nothing. This would be a temporary loss to all the






former creditors, until they had time to lend to the other states






of Europe; who would, in consequence of this circumstance, sink






the rate of interest upon their own debts. Something like this






was the consequence of paying off all the debts of France with






bank notes in 1720, upon which interest fell, as we have observed






above, to 2 per cent.






    When, in the second place, debts are paid off partially every






year, according to a certain rule, it is expedient to have the






capitals reduced into shares of a determinate value, as is the






practice in France, that they may be drawn out as in a lottery.






The lots drawn may then be paid, and no detriment will follow to






any particular creditor, more than to another. because if by






being paid there be either profit or loss to the creditor, it






will affect the value of the whole stock in proportion. If, upon






the establishment of such a plan, the stock be found to rise, it






will be a proof that either the interest formerly paid was below






the common rate, or that the credit of the state was looked upon






as precarious: if it should sink, contrary conclusions may safely






be drawn.






    This is a common method of paying off debts in France, where






funds are more commonly divided into shares than in Great






Britain.






    In 1759, the King opened a subscription for seventy-two






millions of livres upon the general farms: this sum was divided






into seventy-two thousand actions, bearing 5 per cent and it was






stipulated, that upon the renewal of the farms in 1762, twelve






thousand actions should be drawn by lot, and paid off monthly; so






that in six months the whole debt was to be discharged. The third






method of applying what is annually paid above the interest, in






extinction of the capital, is the measure proposed by Cardinal de






Richlieu for discharging the debts of Frances. only the Cardinal






went to work in a very arbitrary way, both in determining the






interest, and in fixing a value upon the capital, equally






detrimental to the creditors.






    To apply this to an example. Had England at the time






government first established a sinking fund, arising out of the






savings which were made upon reducing the rate of interest, from






time to time, continued to pay to the creditors the same annual






sums as formerly; and thereby applied what was paid beyond the






interest, to the payment of the capital, there could not have






been any misapplication of the sinking fund; and the debts by






this time would have been greatly diminished. Whereas by applying






the sinking fund to the service of the year, for the ease of the






people and advantage to the creditors, the consequences may prove






exceedingly inconvenient.






    The fourth method of reducing debts is that adopted by Great






Britain, viz. by reducing the interest paid upon them. From this






we discover the reason why taxes, even in time of war, are seldom






augmented in this kingdom much above the proportion of the






interest of the money borrowed.






    We have, in the second chapter of the first book, boldly






declared this to be against principles, and the authors of such a






scheme were there stigmatized as men of no foresight: we now see






how much people may be mistaken in their conclusions in political






matters, when they are formed upon too narrow combinations.






    Were capitals intended ever to be paid, no doubt the






conclusion would be just; but if it be resolved, that capitals






shall never be considered as the object of attention, and that






the interest alone shall be looked upon as the real burden, then






all payment of capitals is unnecessary, except so far as by






paying a part of them, it may serve to reduce the interest upon






the rest, by making money regorge in the market beyond the uses






found for it.






    This plan cannot be carried on while a nation is engaged in






an expensive war, which absorbs all the money to be lent: but it






becomes the object of a statesman's care, after peace is






restored, and when trade begins to bring in a balance upon






exportations.






    We have seen how this balance tends every year to diminish






the capitals due to strangers, and to keep money at home. Then is






the time to extend taxation beyond the uses found for money to






pay the interest. Two or three millions extraordinary, raised at






the close of a war, and thrown into the hands of the creditors of






Great Britain, in extinction of their capitals, would soon engage






them to cry for mercy. They would find no outlet but France for






such sums; and it is precisely after a war, that France is busy






in playing off the arbitrary operations on her debts, which






reduces her credit too low for any one to trust her with money.






Let peace continue for a tract of years, confidence will there






advance apace, and then it will become more difficult to make






money regorge in England.






    To say that taxes are already beyond all bounds, is, in other






words, to say the nation is no more in a state of defence:






because, should Britain be again involved in an unavoidable war,






the consequence will be, either to render more taxes






indispensable, or to oblige the nation to submit to any terms






demanded by her enemies.






    If it be therefore true, that taxes may still be augmented,






the most proper time for augmenting them, is, at the very close






of a war; because then every circumstance favours the scheme, as






we shall now explain.






    We have said above, and experience proves the truth of it,






that at the end of a war circulation becomes too full for






domestic uses; and that the superfluity of money is realized upon






property. This is the consequence of a sudden stop in national






expence. Were taxes at such a time augmented, part of this






regorging money would find a vent by the augmentation upon






domestic circulation which taxes would occasion; which






augmentation would circulate into the exchequer, instead of






becoming consolidated with property, as has been said, and coming






into the hands of government, would be poured into those of the






creditors, in payment of part of their capitals. There it would






regorge anew; because it is observed, in general, that those who






have property in the funds are not apt to squander money when






unexpectedly thrown into their hands; on the contrary, they are






commonly found to live very much within their income.(8*)






    But suppose it should not immediately regorge, it would then






increase expence and consumption; consequently, would advance






industry, and render every branch of excise more productive. In






every supposition we can make, public opulence would be






augmented: money would regorge at last; and then the creditors






would come with their application to government to suspend the






reimbursement of capitals, and to accept, in lieu of that, a






diminution upon the interest.






    This is the golden opportunity for diminishing the public






burden occasioned by debts; and this method of compassing so






desirable an end, is far preferable to that of compelling






creditors to submit to a diminution, by offering a sudden






reimbursement, which was put in practice in Britain in the year






1749, as has been observed. Had the public waited with patience






one year longer, and then thrown in a few millions more than they






did into the hands of the creditors, the proposal of reducing the






interest would have come from the other quarter; which in all






bargains with creditors is of the greatest consequence to the






debtor.






    The sum of interest thus diminished, upon an obligation to






suspend the reimbursements of capitals for a limited time, three






questions will naturally occur: 1. Whether the taxes should be






diminished in proportion: or 2. If they should be allowed to






subsist with a view to apply the overplus of them to national






purposes: or 3. Whether it may not be most adviseable to turn






such a part of the debts into annuities for lives, as may absorb






the saving upon the former interest paid. The first two questions






I reserve for the following book, where they will be fully






examined; the last is the fifth expedient already proposed for






acquitting the public debts. As the nature of it is abundantly






evident, I shall repeat only what I formerly observed, namely,






that this method of establishing a sinking fund, has the






advantage of being less exposed to misapplications than any






other.






    The last expedient of paying off capitals, below the original






value, by the means of lotteries, should take place only after






the interest of money is brought so low as to cut off any near






prospect of reducing it still farther.






    I shall not pretend to guess at the lowest point to which the






rate of interest may be brought, by the expedients of increasing






money at will, by the means of banks upon mortgage. I have in the






seventh chapter of the first part of this book, thrown out a hint






of a land-bank, which opens a very wide field of speculation; but






in this place, it would be unnecessary to enlarge upon that






subject.






    Let me suppose the rate of interest brought lower in Britain






than any where else, it will nevertheless be subject to






periodical risings, on many occasions.






    Upon every such emergency, capitals will sink in the market






below par.






    It is then only that a state can have recourse to this last






expedient of opening lotteries, and taking in subscriptions at






the market price of the funds subscribed into them. And although






the annuities to be paid upon the lottery fund be regulated by






the rate of interest at the time, and consequently above the






standard of the other debts; yet the same methods of reducing it






afterwards will constantly produce their effects, and thereby






diminish the capital by degrees.






    In like manner, in time of war, when the public funds fall






greatly in their price, government may open new subscriptions,






and receive payment for them in their own paper at the market






price, allowing a small premium in the rate of interest. If the






creditors willingly subscribe upon these conditions, no violation






of public faith can be alleged. By this operation, the capitals






will be diminished, and the advanced rate of interest paid during






the war, will return upon the peace to where it was: then the new






subscriptions may be paid off, or subscribed for again at a lower






rate than before.






    Suppose it then resolved, that in time of war, the nation's






creditors should be allowed, at certain times, to subscribe their






capitals in books opened at the bank for that purpose, one






quarter per cent. above the selling price. Would not this have






the good effect of supporting the price of stocks on one hand,






and of reducing the capital of the national debt upon the other?






Example:






    Let me suppose that in time of war, the 3 per cents. sell at






74 3/4, might not government receive them at 75, and constitute






the new subscription at 4 per cent? What interest could any one






have not to subscribe, who at such a time intends to sell his






stock? His 3 per cent sold to government at 75, and turned into a






4 per cent. would afterwards, when sold in the market, produce






1/4 per cent more than if it had not been subscribed into the new






fund.






    Perhaps in Change Alley, where calculation is carried to the






utmost pitch of refinement, even this eventual advantage to






government might sink the value of the new 4 per cents. Let this






be allowed. The answer is, that when people compute with such






nicety, and comprehend in their calculations every circumstance






the most minute, it is, I think, the interest of a state (whose






views should extend far beyond the period of human life) to grant






a premium upon such subscriptions more than sufficient to






indenmify the subscribers, according to the most rigid






calculation concerning their present advantage.






    The smallest profit to be discovered by the nicest pen will






engage the monied man to subscribe; consequently, the capitals of






debts may be diminished, at a loss to the public almost






imperceptible. And for this imperceptible loss in the mean time,






the greatest national advantage may be obtained at a distant






period.






    It is now full time to close this book, which has swelled far






beyond its due proportion. The subject of credit and debts is so






connected with many questions relating to taxes, and to the






application of their amount, that the unity of the subject would






have suffered little in blending them together. But as I find it






to be a great relief to the memory to interpose, now and then, a






pause; and as taxes were intended to be treated of by themselves,






according to the plan I at first proposed, I shall make no






alteration in it.






    At the end of the first and second books, I subjoined a






chapter of recapitulation; in the third book, this was supplied






by a very full table of contents; here, because of the intimate






connection of the subject of this and the following book, I shall






refer the reader to the end of the volume, for a full






recapitulation of both.













NOTES:













1. After the long and particular account I have given of the






Missisippi, I shall not enter into a like detail concerning a






scheme which proceeded upon the very same principles; to wit, the






artifically raising the value of a stock, by promising dividends,






out of funds which were nowise proportioned to them.






    I shall therefore, in a very few words, first compare some of






the operations of the South Sea scheme with those of the






Missisippi; and in doing it, point out the principal differences






between them. 






    The great profits upon the Missisippi were expected from the






interest paid by government for the great loan, from the farms of






the revenue, and from the profits upon their trade. 






    Those of the South Sea were, at setting out, first, The






profits upon their trade: secondly, The allowance made them by






government for the expence of management: thirdly, The difference






of receiving 5 per cent for the money they laid out in purchasing






the public debts, when money was at 4 per cent as it was when the






scheme was set on foot: and fourthly, The surplus money






subscribed into the stock above par, in consequence of the






artifices used to enhance the value of it.






    The seven millions they were to pay to the state, seemingly






for no value received were a sort of compensation for receiving






the 5 per cent for 7 years, at a time when money was worth no






more than 4 per cent. 






    These advantages raised, at first, the value of the original






stock of eleven millions. The consequence was, that the






proprietors of the 16 millions of the redeemable debts, which






were to be bought in, when they came to subscribe their capitals






into the new stock, transacted them at a proportional discount;






which discount, being good against the government in favour of






the company, served to discharge proportionally the seven






millions the company was to pay. This gave an additional value to






the stock; and so it rose, greatly indeed above this proportion.






Then the company promised a dividend of 10 per cent for one half






year, upon their capital, at midsummer 1720; this dividend was to






be paid in stock, which was constantly rising in its value; but






no information was ever given to the public concerning the funds






which were to produce this dividend; so every one concluded that






there were hidden treasures in the hands of the company which






enabled it to promise such large dividends. Accordingly, stock






rose from 300 per cent to 375; then to 400, and at last to 1000






per cent; and in proportion as it rose, the wealth of the former






subscribers augmented from the surplus above par, paid by the






latter, and those who subscribed last, bore all the loss upon the






blowing up of the scheme. 






    But one great difference between the South Sea and






Missisippi, was this: That in France there was abundance of money






in the hands of the public, for purchasing the actions, at the






exorbitant price to which they rose; but in England there was






not: consequently, in France, the rate of interest fell to 2 per






cent and in England, the great demand for money to borrow, raised






it beyond all bounds. 






    Those who subscribed in money, paid down no more than 10 per






cent at subscribing; but became bound to pay up the remainder.






But when the stock tumbled, people were better pleased to lose






the 10 per cent they had paid, than to pay up the remaining 90






per cent according to the terms at subscribing. Those indeed who






subscribed their former capitals at a vast discount, did not






labour under the same inconvenience for want of money; but this






discount became as real a loss to them, as the cash subscribed






became a loss to the money subscribers, the moment that those who






were in the secret, and who, by the most infamous chain of






artifices, had blown up the public frenzy, began to realize and






sell out, and that the whole was discovered to be a cheat. So






that upon the whole, the English scheme had intrinsically a much






worse foundation than the French. The first blew up from an






absolute necessity, and for want of any bottom at all; the last






from misconduct, and rather from folly than knavery. I return to






an account of the scheme. 






    The original capital of the South Sea company, was 11,750,000






l. The redeemable debts which the proprietors of this capital






afterwards proposed to purchase, amounted to 16,750,000 l.; and






the value of the irredeemable, or what were called the absolute






terms, was computed at 15,058,000 l. together 31,808,000 l.






sterling. 






    The proprietors of this original capital of 11,750,000 l.






consulted their own advantage only, in purchasing in this large






sum of debts, which were to be converted into additional stock;






and therefore sounded very high the great advantages of such a






transformation of them; first, From the profits of the trade,






which they were to enjoy exclusively. And, secondly, From the






great addition to their wealth, from the constant rising in the






price of their stock. They carried their views to nothing less






than obtaining a majority in the house of commons, by the weight






of their wealth, and of becoming the absolute rulers of the






nation. 






    The public being from the beginning intoxicated with such






ideas, subscriptions for stock were opened at 200 per cent above






par; and some of the proprietors of the 31,808,000 l. subscribed






at first their capitals at a proportional discount; that is, they






made over a debt of 100 l. for 33 1/3 in South Sea stock; and






successively the subscription rose to 1000 per cent. These






immense profits being incorporated into the gains of the general






stock, were proportionally shared by the subscribers themselves,






who became proprietors; and the higher the stock rose, the more






these gains augmented. This influenced the infatuation; and the






dividends augmenting in proportion to the price of subscription,






there appeared no end of the rising of the stock. 






    The first dividend offered, as has been said, was 10 per cent






half-yearly in stock; this was afterwards converted into no less






than 30 per cent in money, for that half-year: and when stock






rose to 1000, a dividend of no less than 50 per cent per annum,






in money, was promised for twelve years to come. 






    Had stock risen to 2000 per cent the dividend could have as






easily been carried to 100 per cent per annum, as it had been to






50 per cent when at 1000.






    But whence was this dividend to be paid? The company and the






directors took good care never to give to the public any light as






to this particular.






    To prevent, therefore, such abuses in the rising of the South






Sea, it ought to have been provided by parliament, that in taking






in subscriptions, and offering dividends, the directors should,






on the one hand, have informed the public, first, Of the money






owing to them by government, secondly, Of the money gained by the






subscriptions above par. And thirdly, Of the profits upon their






trade. And, on the other hand, of the debts due by them; and of






the nett balance upon their books, in their favour. 






    This would have been fair dealing. But to pretend the






necessity of secrecy, in a point where a nation is interested,






was in itself a mere pretext; and had it been otherwise, it might






have been answered, that a company which is obliged to have






recourse to such secrets, ought to be prevented from dealing with






those who were to remain ignorant of them, however deeply






interested. 













2. This may seem a high valuation, and is, in fact, far beyond






what any of those annuities sold for: but as the interest of






money cannot be estimated, for a constancy, at more than 3 per






cent and that probably the best lives were chosen, the value to






government of such annuities may well be estimated at 20 years






purchase. By De Moivre's tables, annuities for the most






favourable ages, interest being at 3 per cent are valued at 19.87






years purchase; and his valuations are generally allowed not to






be too high. 













3. The annuities of 1757, are estimated, by the author of the






Consideration on Trade and Finances, at 472,500 l. or at 14






years' purchase; and the annuities of 1761, 1762, at 6,826,875 l.






or at 27 1/2 years' purchase. But this valuation seems too low.













4. This question has been determined in the affirmative, in a






pamphlet ascribed to Mr G. Grenville, entitled, The Present State






of the Nation, an. 1768: page 12 in the note.













5. I find that the sinking fund is now estimated at 2,100,000 l.






by the author of the Considerations on Trade, etc. above cited. I






am also informed that the net produce of the customs exceeds






2,200,000 l. considerably: but 4,600,000 l. is rather the gross






than the net produce of the permanent duties of excise; that is,






of all the excise duties, excepting the annual malt-duty. It must






also be observed, that the annuities payable to the national






creditors amounted, the 5th January 1764, to more than 4,720,000






l. But on the other hand, the interest of the unfunded 9 millions






is rated too high, as appears from the author above quoted. I






cannot pretend to give exact details. The general sketch here






stated is sufficient for my purpose. 






6. The loan of 1766, was 1,500,000 l. at 3 per cent. Every






subscriber for 100 l. had an annuity of 3 per cent on 60 l. and 4






lottery tickets, valued to them by government at 10 l. each, in






all 100 l. The prizes and blanks in the lottery amount to 600,000






l. and bear 3 per cent paid by government. The annuities amount






to 900,000 l. and bear also 3 per cent. The number of tickets are






60,000. Hence at 10 l. each, they amount to 600,000 l.






    The advantage government reaps by this way of borrowing, is,






that the desire of gaming, raises the lottery tickets above their






value, when thrown into the hands of the public; and this






advanced value being a profit to those who receive them in part






of their subscription, this profit they share with government.






Example. In April 1766, when government borrowed 1,500,000 l. at






3 per cent, the 3 per cents were at 89: consequently, the






difference between 89 and 100, which is 11 l. must have been






supposed to be the sum which the subscribers, from the propensity






of people to game, had a reasonable, or rather a certain






expectation of gaining upon the sale of 4 lottery tickets, that






is, 2 l. 15s. upon every one. 






    To know therefore the real par of a lottery ticket, you must






proceed thus: it costs the subscribers 10 l. for which they






receive from government 3 per cent. This 10 l. as 3 per cents






stood at 89, is worth at that rate no more than 8 l. 18s. Add to






this sum what the public must pay for the liberty to play, which






we have stated above at 2 l. 15s. and you have the exact par of a






lottery ticket at 11 l. 13s. 






    Whatever they sell at above 11 l. 13s. is profit to the






subscribers, whatever they sell below 11 l. 13s. is a loss to






them. 






    This profit though small in appearance, is greatly increased






from another circumstance, viz. 






    That the subscribers may sell their subscriptions at a time






when they have really advanced but a small part of it. The first






payment is commonly of 15 per cent on their subscription: when






they sell, they make this profit upon the whole capital. Suppose






then 15 per cent paid in: if the profit upon selling be no more






than 1 per cent upon the capital, that 1 per cent turns out no






less than 6 2/3 per cent upon the money they have advanced. Thus






a person who is possessed of 1500 l. only, may subscribe for






10,000 l. in this loan: he pays in his 1500 l. and receives his






subscription; when he sells, he sells 10,000 l. subscription,






upon which he gains 1 per cent, 1 per cent. of 10,000 l. is 100






l. so (in one month suppose) he gains by this means 100 l. for






the use of 1500 l. But as a counterbalance for this profit, he






runs the risk of the falling of the subscription, which involves






him in a proportional loss if he sells out; or in the






inconvenience of advancing more money than he had to employ in






that way, in case he should prefer keeping his subscription for a






longer time, in hopes of a rise in the public funds. By this mode






of borrowing, government profits by the disposition of the people






to game. But this propensity has its bounds, and at present it is






found by experience not to exceed 60,000 lottery tickets, or






60,000 l. Were, therefore, a subscription of 3 millions taken in






upon the same plan with the present of 1,500,000 l. the regorging






number of tickets would so glut the market, that the whole would






fall below the par of their supposed value.













7. We must always carefully avoid confounding the grand balance






of payments with the balance between importation and exportation,






which I consider as the balance of trade.













8. Experience shews, that when the debts of a nation have come to






a height, the public creditors become people of great






consequence, upon account of the ease and affluence of their






circumstances. They are not exposed to the many hidden expences






incident to land proprietors. They are a class in the state but






lately known; the capital of their wealth is hidden; and opinions






concerning their rank, and the figure they ought to make, are as






yet unformed. Whereas the family of a land proprietor is known;






his expence may surpass that of his predecessors without much






observation; but if it should fall below it, he commonly sinks in






the estimation of his neighbours, who seldom put circumstances






together which can only be guessed at. An heir to a landed






estate, is bred up from his infancy with the notion of living






like his father: the son of a monied man has commonly very






different sentiments; and even when any of this class takes a






turn to expence, the lustre of it is all displayed round his own






body; that is, in his own house, and in his own family: no






country seats, hounds, horses, servants in every quarter, family






interest to keep up, little economy in spending. In a word, every






one feels better than I can describe that landed men commonly






exceed, and monied men commonly live within their income. 












