<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <TITLE>index</TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<UL>

<CENTER><B><I><FONT FACE="Times New Roman,Times"><FONT SIZE=+3>&nbsp;</FONT></FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT FACE="Times New Roman,Times"><FONT SIZE=+3>Essay on

the Nature of Commerce in General</FONT></FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>&nbsp;</FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>by <FONT FACE="Times New Roman,Times">Richard

Cantillon</FONT></FONT></B></CENTER>

</UL>



<HR WIDTH="100%">

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><FONT SIZE=+2><A HREF="essay1.txt">Part&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; One</A></FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+2>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+2><A HREF="essay2.txt">Part&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Two</A></FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+2>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+2><A HREF="essay3.txt">Part&nbsp;&nbsp; Three</A></FONT></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>



<HR WIDTH="100%">

</BODY>

</HTML>



ublic,



and do not relate to the large paper copies in the hands of some



of the author's friends.







3. Readers are persons employed to correct the press at the



printing office.







4. Slips are long pieces of paper on which sufficient matter is



printed to form, when divided, from two to four pages of text.







5. Chapter 31.







Chapter 22







On the Causes and Consequences of Large Factories







    263. On examining the analysis which has been given in



chapter XIX of the operations in the art of pin-making, it will



be observed, that ten individuals are employed in it, and also



that the time occupied in executing the several processes is very



different. In order, however, to render more simple the reasoning



which follows, it will be convenient to suppose that each of the



seven processes there described requires an equal quantity of



time. This being supposed, it is at once apparent, that, to



conduct an establishment for pin-making most profitably, the



number of persons employed must be a multiple of ten. For if a



person with small means has only sufficient capital to enable him



to employ half that number of persons, they cannot each of them



constantly adhere to the execution of the same process; and if a



manufacturer employs any number not a multiple of ten, a similar



result must ensue with respect to some portion of them. The same



reflection constantly presents itself on examining any



well-arranged factory. In that of Mr Mordan, the patentee of the



ever-pointed pencils, one room is devoted to some of the



processes by which steel pens are manufactured. Six fly-presses



are here constantly at work; in the first a sheet of thin steel



is brought by the workman under the die which at each blow cuts



out a flat piece of the metal, having the form intended for the



pen. Two other workmen are employed in placing these flat pieces



under two other prs charged, but also the profit on that duty, which



the paper-maker requires for the use of additional capital; and



also the profit to the publisher and bookseller on the increased



price of the volume.



    261. The estimated charge for advertisements is, in the



present case, about the usual allowance for such a volume; and,



as it is considered that advertisements in newspapers are the



most effectual, where the smallest pays a duty of 3s. 6d., nearly



one half of the charge of advertising is a tax.



    262. It appears then, that, to an expenditure of *224



necessary to produce the present volume, *42 are added in the



shape of a direct tax. Whether the profits arising from such a



mode of manufacturing will justify such a rate of taxation, can



only be estimated when the returns from the volume are



considered, a subject that will be discussed in a subsequent



chapter.(5*) It is at present sufficient to observe, that the tax



on advertisements is an impolitic tax when contrasted with that



upon paper, and on other materials employed. The object of all



advertisements is, by making known articles for sale, to procure



for them a better price, if the sale is to be by auction; or a



larger extent of sale if by retail dealers. Now the more any



article is known, the more quickly it is discovered whether it



contributes to the comfort or advantage of the public; and the



more quickly its consumption is assured if it be found valuable.



It would appear, then, that every tax on communicating



information respecting articles which are the subjects of



taxation in another shape, is one which must reduce the amount



that would have been raised, had no impediment been placed in the



way of making known to the public their qualities and their



price.







NOTES:







1. These facts are taken from Crawford's Indian Archipelago.







2. These charges refer to the edition prepared for the ps

principally upon the humour and fashion of living of the prince,

the lords, and the owner: if these are fond of drink, vines must

be cultivated; if they are fond of silks, mulberry-trees must be

planted and silkworms raised, and moreover part of the land must

be employed to support those needed for these labours; if they

delight in horses, pasture is needed, and so on.

     If however we suppose that the land belongs to no one in

particular, it is not easy to conceive how a society of men can

be formed there: we see, for example, in the village commons a

limited fixed to the number of animals that each of the commoners

may put upon them; and if the land were left to the first

occupier in a new conquest or discovery of a country it would

always be necessary to fall back upon a law to settle ownership

in order to establish a society, whether the law rested upon

force or upon policy.





Chapter Three



Of Villages



     To whatever cultivation land is put, whether pasture, corn,

vines, etc. the farmers or labourers who carry on the work must

live near at hand; otherwise the time taken in going to their

fields and returning to their houses would take up too much of

the day. Hence the necessity for villages established in all the

country and cultivated land, where there must also be enough

farriers and wheelwrights for the instruments, ploughs, and carts

which are needed; especially when the village is at a distance

from the towns. The size of a village is naturally proportioned

in number of inhabitants to what the land dependent on it

requires for daily work, and to the artisans who find enough

employment there in the service of the farmers and labourers: but

these artisans are not quite so necessary in the neighbourhood of

towns to which the labourers can resort without much loss of

time.

     If one or more of the owners of the land dependent on the

village reside there the number of inhabitants will be greater in

proportion to the domestic servants and artisans drawn thither,

and the inns which will be established there for the convenience

of the domestic servants and workmen who are maintained by the

landlords.

     If the lands are only proper for maintaining sheep, as in

the sandy districts and moorlands, the villages will be fewer and

smaller since only a few shepherds are required on the land.

     If the lands only produce woods in sandy soils where there

is no grass for beasts, and if they are distant from towns and

rivers which makes the timber useless for consumption as one sees

in many cases in Germany, there will be only so many houses and

villages as are needed to gather acorns and feed pigs in season:

but if the lands are altogether barren there will be neither

villages nor inhabitants.





Chapter Four



Of Market Towns



     There are some villages where markets have been established

by the interest of some proprietor or gentleman at court. These

markets, held once or twice a week, encourage several little

undertakers and merchants to set themselves up there. They buy in

the market the products brought from the surrounding villages in

order to carry them to the large towns for sale. In the large

towns they exchange them for iron, salt, sugar and other

merchandise which they sell on market days to the villagers. Many

small artisans also, like locksmiths, cabinet makers and others,

settle down for the service of the villagers who have none in

their villages, and at length these villages become market towns.

A market town being placed in the centre of the villages, and at

length these villages become market towns. A market town being

placed in the centre of the villages whose people come to market,

it is more natural and easy that the villagers should bring their

products thither for sale on market days and buy the articles

they need, than that the merchants and factors should transport

them to the villages in exchange for their products. (1) For the

merchants to go round the villages would unnecessarily increase

the cost of carriage. (2) The merchants would perhaps be obliged

to go to several villages before finding the quality and quantity

of produce which they wished to buy. (3) The villagers would

generally be in their fields when the merchants arrived and not

knowing what produce these needed would have nothing prepared and

fit for sale. (4) It would be almost impossible to fix the price

of the produce and the merchandise in the villages, between the

merchants and the villagers. In one village the merchant would

refuse the price asked for produce, hoping to find it cheaper in

another village, and the villager would refuse the price offered

for his merchandise in the hope that another merchant would come

along and take it on better terms.

     All these difficulties are avoided when the villagers come

to town on market days to sell their produce and to buy the

things they need. Prices are fixed by the proportion between the

produce exposed for sale and the money offered for it; this takes

place in the same spot, under the eyes of all the villagers of

different villages and of the merchants or undertakers of the

town. When the price has been settled between a few the others

follow without difficulty and so the market place of the day is

determined. The peasant goes back to his village and resumes his

work.

     The size of the market town is naturally proportioned to the

number of farmers and labourers needed to cultivate the lands

dependent on it, and to the number of artisans and small

merchants that the villages bordering on the market town employ

with their assistants and horses, and finally to the number of

persons whom the landowners resident there support.

     When the villages belonging to a market town (i.e. whose

people ordinarily bring their produce to market there) are

considerable and have a large output the market town will become

considerable and large in proportion; but when the neighbouring

villages have little produce the market town also is poor and

insignificant.





Chapter Five



Of Cities



     The landlords who have only small estates usually reside in

market towns and villages near their land and farmers. The

transport of the produce they derive from them into distant

cities would not enable them to live comfortably there. But the

landlords who have several large estates have the means to go and

live at a distance from them to enjoy agreeable society with

other landowners and gentlemen of the same condition.

     If a prince or nobleman who has received large grants of

land on the conquest or discovery of a country fixes his

residence in some pleasant spot, and several other noblemen come

to live there to be within reach of seeing each other frequently

and enjoying agreeable society, this place will become a city.

Great houses will be built there for the noblemen in question,

and an infinity of others for the merchants, artisans, and people

of all sorts of professions whom the residence of these noblemen

will attract thither. For the service of these noblemen, bakers,

butchers, brewers, wine merchants, manufacturers of all kinds,

will be needed. These will build houses in the locality or will

rent houses built by others. There is no great nobleman whose

expense upon his house, his retinue and servants, does not

maintain merchants and artisans of all kinds, as may be seen from

the detailed calculations which I have caused to be made in the

supplement of this essay.

     As all these artisans and undertakers serve each other as

well as the nobility it is overlooked that the upkeep of them all

falls ultimately on the nobles and landowners. It is not

perceived that all the little houses in a city such as we have

described depend upon and subsist at the expense of the great

houses. It will, however, be shown later that all the classes and

inhabitants of a state live at the expense of the proprietors of

land. The city in question will increase still further if the

king or the government establish in it law courts to which the

people of the market towns and villages of the province must have

recourse. An increase of undertakers and artisans of every sort

will be needed for the service of the legal officials and

lawyers.

     If in this same city workshops and manufactories be set up

apart from home consumption for export and sale abroad, the city

will be large in proportion to the workmen and artisans who live

there at the expense of the foreigner.

     But if we put aside these considerations so as not to

complicate our subject, we may say that the assemblage of several

rich landowners living together in the same place suffices to

form what is called a city, and that many cities in Europe, in

the interior of the country, owe the number of their inhabitants

to this assemblage: in which case the size of a city is naturally

proportioned to the number of landlords who live there, or rather

to the produce of the land which belongs to them after deduction

of the cost of carriage to those whose land is the furthest

removed, and the part which they are obliged to furnish to the

king or the government, which is usually consumed in the capital.





Chapter Six



Of Capital Cities



     A capital city is formed in the same way as a provincial

city with this difference that the largest landowners in all the

state reside in the capital, that the king or supreme government

is fixed in it and spends there the government revenue, that the

supreme courts of justice are fixed there, that it is the centre

of the fashions which all the provinces take for a model, that

the landowners who reside in the provinces do not fail to come

occasionally to pass some time in the capital and to send their

children thither to be polished. Thus all the lands in the state

contribute more or less to maintain those who dwell in the

capital.

     If a sovereign quits a city to take up his abode in another

the nobility will not fail to follow him and to make its

residence with him in the new city which will become great and

important at the expense of the first. We have seen quite a

recent example of this in the city of Petersburg to the

disadvantage of Moscow, and one sees many old cities which were

important fall into ruin and others spring from their ashes.

Great cities are usually built on the seacoast or on the banks of

large rivers for the convenience of transport; because water

carriage of the produce and merchandise necessary for the

subsistence and comfort of the inhabitants is much cheaper than

carriages and land transport.





Chapter Seven



The Labour of the Husbandman is of less Value than that of the

Handicrafts Man



     A labourer's son at seven or twelve years of age begins to

help his father either in keeping the flocks, digging the ground,

or in other sorts of country labour which require no art or

skill.

     If his father puts him to a trade he loses his assistance

during the time of his apprenticeship and is necessitated to

clothe him and to pay the expenses of his apprenticeship for some

years. The son is thus an expense to this father and his labour

brings in no advantage till the end of some years. The [working]

life of man is estimated but at 10 or 12 years, and as several

are lost in learning a trade most of which in England require

seven years of apprenticeship, a husbandman would never be

willing to have a trade taught to his son if the mechanics did

not earn more than the husbandmen.

    Those who employ artisans or craftsmen must needs therefore

pay for their labour at a higher rate than for that of a

husbandman or common labourer; and their labour will necessarily

be dear in proportion to the time lost in learning the trade and

the cost and risk incurred in becoming proficient.

     The craftsmen themselves do not make all their children

learn their own mystery: there would be too many of them for the

needs of a city or a state; many would not find enough work; the

work, however, is naturally better paid than that of husbandmen.





Chapter Eight



Some Handicrafts Men earn more, others less, according to the

different Cases and Circumstances



     Supposing two tailors make all the cloths of a village, one

may have more customers than the other, whether from his mode of

attracting business, or because he works better or more durably

than the other, or follows the fashions better in the cut of the

garments.

     If one dies, the other finding himself more pressed with

work will be able to raise the price of his labour, giving some

customers a preference in point of expedition to others, till the

villagers find it to their advantage to have their cloths made in

another village, town or city losing the time spent in going and

returning, or till some other tailor comes to live in their

village and to share in the business of it.

     The crafts which require the most time in training or most

ingenuity and industry must necessarily be the best paid. A

skillful cabinet maker must receive a higher price for his work

than an ordinary carpenter, and a good watchmaker more than a

farrier.

     The arts and crafts which are accompanied by risks and

dangers like those of founders, mariners, silver miners, etc.

ought to be paid in proportion to the risks. When over and above

the dangers skill is needed they ought to be paid still more,

e.g. pilots, divers, engineers, etc. When capacity and

trustworthiness are needed the labour is paid still more highly,

as in the case of jewellers, bookkeepers, cashiers and others.

     By these examples and a hundred others drawn from ordinary

experience it is easily seen that the difference of price paid

for daily work is based upon natural and obvious reasons.





Chapter Nine



The Number of Labourers, Handicraftsmen and others, who work in a

State is naturally proportioned to the Demand for them



     If all the labourers in a village breed up several sons to

the same work there will be too many labourers to cultivate the

lands belonging to the village, and the surplus adults must go to

seek a livelihood elsewhere, which they generally do in cities:

if some remain with their fathers, as they will not all find

sufficient employment they will live in great poverty and will

not marry for lack of means to bring up children, or if they

marry, the children who come will soon die of starvation with

their parents, as we see every day in France.

     Therefore if the village continue in the same situation as

regards employment, and derives its living from cultivating the

same portion of land, it will not increase in population in a

thousand years.

     The women and girls of this village can, it is true, when

they are not working in the fields, busy themselves in spinning,

knitting or other work which can be sold in the cities; but this

rarely suffices to bring up the extra children, who leave the

village to seek their fortune elsewhere.

     The same may be said of the tradesmen of a village. If a

tailor makes all the cloths there and breeds up three sons to the

same trade, as there is but work enough for one successor to him

the two others must go to seek their livelihood elsewhere: if

they do not find enough employment in the neighbouring town they

must go further afield or change their occupations to get a

living and become lackeys, soldiers, sailors, etc.

     By the same process of reasoning it is easy to conceive that

the labourers, handicraftsmen and others who gain their living by

work, must proportion themselves in number to the employment and

demand for them in market towns and cities.

     But if four tailors are enough to make all the cloths for a

town and a fifth arrives he may attract some custom at the

expense of the other four; so if the work is divided between the

five tailors neither of them will have enough employment, and

each one will live more poorly.

     It often happens that labourers and handicraftsmen have not

enough employment when there are too many of them to share the

business. It happens also that they are deprived of work by

accidents and by variations in demand, or that they are

overburdened with work according to circumstances. Be that as it

may, when they have no work they quit the villages, towns or

cities where they live in such numbers that those who remain are

always proportioned to the employment which suffices to maintain

them; when there is a continuous increase of work there is gain

to be made and enough others arrive to share in it.

     From this it is easy to understand that the Charity Schools

in England and the proposals in France to increase the number of

handicraftsmen, are useless. If the King of France sent 100,000

of his subjects at his expense into Holland to learn seafaring,

they would be of no use on their return if no more vessels were

sent to sea than before. It is true that it would be a great

advantage to a state to teach its subjects to produce the

manufactures which are customarily drawn from abroad, and all the

other articles bought there, but I am considering only at present

a state in relation to itself.

     As the handicraftsmen earn more than the labourers they are

better able to bring up their children to crafts; and there will

never be a lack of craftsmen in a state when there is enough work

for their constant employment.





Chapter Ten



The Price and Instrinsic Value of a Thing in general is the

measure of the Land and Labour which enter into its Production



     One acre of land produces more corn or feeds more sheep than

another. The work of one man is dearer than that of another, as I

have already explained, according to the superior skill and

occurrences of the times. If two acres of land are of equal

goodness, one will feed as many sheep and produce as much wool as

the other, supposing the labour to be the same, and the wool

produced by one acre will be the same, and the wool produced by

one acre will sell at the same price as that produced by the

other.

     If the wool of the one acre is made into a suit of coarse

cloth and the wool of the other into a suit of fine cloth, as the

latter will require more work and dearer workmanship it will be

sometimes ten times dearer, though both contain the same quantity

and quality of wool. The quantity of the produce of the land and

the quantity as well as the quality of the labour, will of

necessity enter into the price.

     A pound of flax wrought into fine Brussels lace requires the

labour of 14 persons for a year or of one person for 14 years, as

may be seen from a calculation of the different processes in the

supplement, where we also see that the price obtained for the

lace suffices to pay for the maintenance of one person for 14

years as well as the profits of all the undertakers and merchants

concerned.

     The fine steel spring which regulates an English watch is

generally sold at a price which makes the proportion of material

to labour, or of steel to spring, one to one million so that in

this case labour makes up nearly all the value of the spring. See

the calculation in the supplement.

     On the other hand the price of the hay in a field, on the

spot, or a wood which it is proposed to cut down, is fixed by the

matter or produce of the land, according to its goodness.

     The price of a pitcher of Seine water is nothing, because

there is an immense supply which does not dry up; but in the

streets of Paris people give a sol for it -- the price or measure

of the labour of the water carrier.

     By these examples and inductions it will, I think, be

understood that the price or intrinsic value of a thing is the

measure of the quantity of land and of labour entering into its

production, having regard to the fertility or produce of the land

and to the quality of the labour.

     But it often happens that many things which have actually

this intrinsic value are not sold in the market according to that

value: that will depend on the humours and fancies of men and on

their consumption.

     If a gentleman cuts canals and erects terraces in his

garden, their intrinsic value will be proportionable to the land

and labour; but the price in reality will not always follow this

proportion. If he offers to sell the garden possibly no one will

give him half the expense he has incurred. It is also possible

that if several persons desire it he may be given double the

intrinsic value, that is twice the value of the land and the

expense he has incurred.

     If the farmers in a state sow more corn than usual, much

more than is needed for the year's consumption, the real and

intrinsic value of the corn will correspond to the land and

labour which enter into its production; but as there is too great

an abundance of it and there are more sellers than buyers the

market price of the corn will necessarily fall below the

intrinsic price of value. If on the contrary the farmers sow less

corn than is needed for consumption there will be more buyers

than sellers and the market price of corn will rise above its

intrinsic value.

     There is never a variation in intrinsic values, but the

impossibility of proportioning the production of merchandise and

produce in a state to their consumption causes a daily variation,

and a perpetual ebb and flow in market prices. However in well

organized societies the market prices of articles whose

consumption is tolerably constant and uniform do not vary much

from the intrinsic value; and when there are no years of too

scanty or too abundant production the magistrates of the city are

able to fix the market prices of many things, like bread and

meat, without any on having cause to complain.

     Land is the matter and labour the form of all produce and

merchandise, and as those who labour must subsist on the produce

of the land it seems that some relation might be found between

the value of labour and that of the produce of the land: this

will form the subject of the next chapter.





Chapter Eleven



Of the Par or Relation between the Value of Land and Labour



     It does not appear that Providence has given the right of

the possession of land to one man preferably to another: the most

ancient titles are founded on violence and conquest. The lands of

Mexico now belong to the Spaniards and those at Jerusalem to the

Turks. But howsoever people come to the property and possession

of land we have already observed that it always falls into the

hands of a few in proportion to the total inhabitants.

     If the proprietor of a great estate keeps it in his own

hands he will employ slaves or free men to work upon it. If he

has many slaves he must have overseers to keep them at work: he

must likewise have slave craftsmen to supply the needs and

conveniencies of life for himself and his workers, and must have

trades taught to others in order to carry on the work.

     In this economy he must allow his labouring slaves their

subsistence and wherewithal to bring up their children. The

overseers must allow advantages proportionable to the confidence

and authority which he gives them. The slaves who have been

taught a craft must be maintained without any return during the

time of their apprenticeship and the artisan slaves and their

overseers who should be competent in the crafts must have a

better subsistence than the labouring slaves, etc. since the loss

of an artisan would be greater than that of a labourer and more

care must be taken of him having regard to the expense of

training another to take his place.

     On this assumption the labour of an adult slave of the

lowest class is worth at least as much as the quantity of land

which the proprietor is obliged to allot for his food and

necessaries and also to double the land which serves to breed a

child up till he is of age fit for labour, seeing half the

children that are born die before the age of 17, according to the

calculations and observations of the celebrated Dr. Halley. So

that two children must be reared up to keep one of them til

working age and it would seem that even this would not be enough

to ensure a continuance of labour since adult men die at all

ages.

     It is true that the one half of the children who die before

17 die faster in the first years after birth than in the

following, since a good third of those who are born die in their

first year. This seems to diminish the cost of raising a child to

working age, but as the mothers lose much time in nursing their

children in illness and infancy and the daughters even when grown

up are not the equals of the males in work and barely earn their

living, it seems that to keep one of two children to manhood or

working age as much land must be employed as for the subsistence

of an adult salve, whether the proprietor raises them himself in

his house or has the children raised there or that the father

brings them up in a house or hamlet apart. Thus I conclude that

the daily labour of the meanest slave corresponds in value to

double the produce of the land required to maintain him, whether

the proprietor give it him for his subsistence and that of his

family or provides him and his family subsistence in his own

house. It does not admit of exact calculation, and exactitude is

not very necessary; it suffices to be near enough to the truth.

     If the proprietor employ the labour of vassals or free

peasants he will probably maintain them upon a better foot than

slaves according to the custom of the place he lives in, yet in

this case also the labour of a free labourer ought to correspond

in value to double the produce of land needed for his

maintenance. But it will always be more profitable to the

proprietor to keep slaves than to keep free peasants, because

when he has brought up a number too large for his requirements he

can sell the surplus slaves as he does his cattle and obtain for

them a price proportionable to what he has spent in rearing them

to manhood or working age, except in cases of old age or

infirmity.

     In the same way on may appraise the labour of slave

craftsmen at twice the produce of the land which they consume.

Overseers likewise, allowing for the favours and privileges given

to them above those who work under them.

     When the artisans or labourers have their double portion at

their own disposal they employ one part of it for their own

upkeep if they are married and the other for their children. If

they are unmarried they set aside a little of their double

portion to enable them to marry and to make a little store for

housekeeping; but most of them will consume the double portion

for their own maintenance.

     For example the married labourer will content himself with

bread, cheese, vegetables, etc., will rarely eat meat, will drink

little win or beer, and will have only old and shabby clothes

which he will wear as long as he can. The surplus of his double

portion he will employ in raising and keeping his children, while

the unmarried labourer will eat meat as often as he can, will

treat himself to new clothes, etc. and employ his double portion

on his own requirements. Thus he will consume twice as much

personally of the produce of the land as the married man.

     I do not here take into account the expense of the wife. I

suppose that her labour barely suffices to pay for her own

living, and when one sees a large number of little children in

one of these poor families I suppose that charitable persons

contribute somewhat to their maintenance, otherwise the parents

must deprive themselves of some of their necessaries to provide a

living for their children.

     For the better understanding of this it is to be observed

that a poor labourer may maintain himself, at the lowest

computation, upon the produce of an acre and a half of land if he

lives on bread and vegetables, wears hempen garments, wooden

shoes, etc., while if he can allow himself wine, meat, woollen

clothes, etc. he may without drunkenness or gluttony or excess of

any kind consume the produce of four to ten acres of land of

ordinary goodness, such as most of the land in Europe taking part

with another. I have caused some figures to be drawn up which

will be found in the supplement, to determine the amount of land

of which one man can consume the produce under each head of food,

clothing, and other necessaries of life in a single year,

according to the mode of living in Europe where the peasants of

divers countries are often nourished and maintained very

differently.

      For this reason I have not determined to how much land the

labour of the meanest peasant corresponds in value when I laid

down that it is worth double the produce of the land which serves

to maintain him: because this varies according to the mode of

living in different countries. In some provinces of France the

peasant keeps himself on the produce of one acre and a half of

land and the value of his labour may be reckoned equal to the

product of three acres. But in the county of Middlesex the

peasant usually spends the produce of 5 to 8 acres of land and

his labour may be valued at twice as much as this.

     In the country of the Iroquois where the inhabitants do not

plough the land and live entirely by hunting, the meanest hunter

may consume the produce of 50 acres of land since it probably

requires so much to support the animals he eats in one year,

especially as these savages have not the industry to grow grass

by cutting down the trees but leave everything to nature. The

labour of this hunter may then be reckoned equal in value to the

product of 100 acres of land. In the southern provinces of China

the land yields rice up to three crops in one year and a hundred

times as much as is sown, owing to the great care which they have

of agriculture and the fertility of the soil which is never

fallow. The peasants who work there almost naked live only on

rice and drink only rice water, and it appears that one acre will

support there more than ten peasants. It is not surprising,

therefore, that the population is prodigious in number. In any

case it seems from these examples that nature is altogether

indifferent whether that earth produce grass, trees, or grain, or

maintains a large or small number of vegetables, animals, or men.

      Farmers in Europe seem to correspond to overseers of

labouring slaves in other countries, and the master tradesmen who

employ several journeymen to the overseers of artisan slaves.

These masters know pretty well how much work a jouneyman artisan

can do in a day in each craft, and often pay them in proportion

to the work they do, so that the journeymen work for their own

interest as hard as they can without further inspection.

      As the farmers and masters of crafts in Europe are all

undertakers working at a risk, some get rich and gain more than a

double subsistence, others are ruined and become bankrupt, as

will be explained more in detail in treating of undertakers; but

the majority support themselves and their families from day to

day, and their labour or superintendence may be valued at about

thrice the produce of the land which serves for their

maintenance.

     Evidently these farmers and master craftsmen, if they

superintend the labour of ten labourers or journeymen, would be

equally capable of superintending the labour of twenty, according

to the size of their farms or the number of their customers, and

this renders uncertain the value of their labour or

superintendence.

     By these examples and others which might be added in the

same sense, it is seen that the value of the day's work has a

relation to the produce of the soil, and that the intrinsic value

of any thing may be measured by the quantity of land used in its

production and the quantity of labour which enters into it, in

other words by the quantity of land of which the produce is

allotted to those who have worked upon it; and as all the land

belongs to the prince and the landowners all things which have

this intrinsic value have it only at their expense.

     The money or coin which finds the proportion of values in

exchange is the most certain measure for judging of the par

between land and labour and the relation of one to the other in

different countries where this par varies according to the

greater or less produce of the land allotted to those who labour.

     If, for example, one man earn an ounce of silver every day

by his work, and another in the same place earn only half an

ounce, one can conclude that the first has as much again of the

produce of the land to dispose of as the second.

     Sir William Petty, in a little manuscript of the year 1685,

considers this par, or equation between land and labour, as the

most important consideration in political arithmetic, but the

research which he has made into it in passing is fanciful and

remote from natural laws, because he has attached himself not to

causes and principles but only to effects, as Mr Locke, Mr

Davenant and all the other English authors who have written on

this subject have done after him.





Chapter Twelve



All Classes and Individuals in a State subsist or are enriched at

the Expense of the Proprietors of Land



     There are none but the prince and the proprietors of land

who live independent; all other classes and inhabitants are hired

or are undertakers. The proof and detail of this will be

developed in the next chapter.

     If the prince and proprietors of land close their estates

and will not suffer them to be cultivated it is clear that there

would be neither food nor rayment for any of the inhabitants;

consequently all the individuals are supported not only by the

produce of the land which is cultivated for the benefit of the

owners but also at the expense of these same owners from whose

property they derive all that they have.

     The farmers have generally two thirds of the produce of the

land, one for their costs and the support of their assistants,

the other for the profit of their undertaking: on these two

thirds the farmer provides generally directly or indirectly

subsistence for all those who live in the country, and also

mechanics or undertakers in the city in respect of the

merchandise of the city consumed in the country.

     The proprietor has usually one third of the produce of his

land and on this third he maintains all the mechanics and others

whom he employs in the city as well, frequently, as the carriers

who bring the produce of the country to the city.

     It is generally calculated that one half of the inhabitants

of a kingdom subsist and make their abode in cities, and the

other half live in the country; on this supposition the farmer

who has two thirds or four sixth of the produce of the land, pays

either directly or indirectly one sixth to the citizens in

exchange for the merchandise which he takes from them. This sixth

with the one third or two sixths which the proprietor spends in

the city makes three sixths or one half of the produce of the

land. This calculation is only to convey a general idea of the

proportion; but in fact, if half of the inhabitants live in the

cities they consume more than half of the land's produce, as they

live better than those who reside in the country and spend more

of the produce of the land being all mechanics or dependents of

the proprietors and consequently better maintained than the

assistants and dependents of the farmers.

     But let this matter be how it will, if we examine the means

by which an inhabitant is supported it will always appear in

returning back to the fountain head, that these means arise from

the land of the proprietor either in the two thirds reserved by

the farmer, or the one third which remains to the landlord.

     If a proprietor had only the amount of land which he lets

out to one farmer the farmer would get a better living out of it

than himself; but the nobles and large landowners in the cities

have sometimes several hundreds of farmers and are themselves

very few in number in proportion to all the inhabitants of a

state.

     True there are often in the cities several undertakers and

mechanics who live by foreign trade, and therefore at the expense

of foreign landowners: but at present I am considering only a

state in regard to its own produce and industry, not to

complicate my argument by accidental circumstances.

     The land belongs to the proprietors but would be useless to

them if it were not cultivated. The more labour is expended on

it, other things being equal, the more it produces; and the more

its products are worked up, other things being equal, the more

value they have as merchandise. Hence the proprietors have need

of the inhabitants as these have of the proprietors; but in this

economy it is for the proprietors, who have the disposition and

the direction of the landed capital, to give the most

advantageous turn and movement to the whole. Also everything in a

state depends on the fancy, methods, and fashions of life of the

proprietors of land in especial, as I will endeavour to make

clear later in this essay.

     It is need and necessity which enable farmers, mechanics of

every kind, merchants, officers, soldiers, sailors, domestic

servants and all the other classes who work or are employed in

the state, to exist. All these working people serve not only the

prince and the landowners but each other, so that there are many

of them who do not work directly for the landowners, and so it is

not seen that they subsist on the capital of these proprietors

and live at their expense. As for those who exercise professions

which are not essential, like dancers, actors, painters,

musicians, etc. they are only supported in the state for pleasure

or for ornament, and their number is always very small in

proportion to the other inhabitants.





Chapter Thirteen



The circulation and exchange of goods and merchandise as well as

their production are carried on in Europe by Undertakers, and at

a risk



     The farmer is an undertaker who promises to pay to the

landowner, for his farm or land, a fixed sum of money (generally

supposed to be equal in value to the third of the produce)

without assurance of the profit he will derive from this

enterprise. He employs part of the land to feed flocks, produce

corn, wine, hay, etc. according to his judgment without being

able to foresee which of these will pay best. The price of these

products will depend partly on the weather, partly on the demand;

if corn is abundant relatively to consumption it will be dirt

cheap, if there is scarcity it will be dear. Who can foresee the

increase or reduction of expense which may come about in the

families? And yet the price of the farmer's produce depends

naturally upon these unforeseen circumstances, and consequently

he conducts the enterprise of his farm at an uncertainty.

     The city consumes more than half the farmer's produce. He

carries it to market there or sells it in the market of the

nearest town, or perhaps a few individuals set up as carriers

themselves. These bind themselves to pay the farmer a fixed price

for his produce, that of the market price of  the day, to get in

the city an uncertain price which should however defray the cost

of carriage and leave them a profit. But the daily variation in

the price of produce in the city, though not considerable, makes

their profit uncertain.

     The undertaker or merchant who carries the products of the

country to the city cannot stay there to sell retail as they are

consumed. No city family will burden itself with the purchase all

at once of the produce it may need, each family being susceptible

of increase or decrease in number and in consumption or at least

varying in the choice of produce it will consume. Wine is almost

the only article of consumption stocked in a family. In any case

the majority of citizens who live from day to day and yet are the

largest consumers cannot lay in a stock of country produce.

     For this reason many people set up in a city as merchants or

undertakers, to buy the country produce from those who bring it

or to order it to be brought on their account. They pay a certain

price following that of the place where they purchase it, to

resell wholesale or retail at an uncertain price.

     Such undertakers are the wholesalers in woo and corn,

bakers, butchers, manufacturers and merchants of all kinds who

buy country produce and materials to work them up and resell them

gradually as the inhabitants require them.

     These undertakers can never know how great will be the

demand in their city, nor how long their customers will buy of

them since their rivals will try all sorts of means to attract

customers from them. All this causes so much uncertainty among

these undertakers that every day one sees some of them become

bankrupt.

     The manufacturer who has bought wool from the merchant or

direct from the farmer cannot foretell the profit he will make in

selling his cloths and stuffs to the merchant tailor. If the

latter have not a reasonable sale he will not load himself with

the cloths and stuffs of the manufacturer, especially if those

stuffs cease to be in the fashion.

     The draper is an undertaker who buys cloths and stuffs from

the manufacturer at a certain price to sell them again at an

uncertain price, because he cannot foresee the extent of the

demand. He can of course fix a price and stand out against

selling unless he gets it, but if his customers leave him to buy

cheaper from another, he will be eaten up by expenses while

waiting to sell at the price he demands, and that will ruin him

as soon as or sooner than if he sold without profit.

     Shopkeepers and retailers of every kind are undertakers who

buy at a certain price and sell in their shops or the markets at

an uncertain price. What encourages and maintains these

undertakers in a state is that the consumers who are their

customers prefer paying a little more to get what they want ready

to hand in small quantities rather than lay in a stock and that

most of them have not the means to lay in such a stock by buying

at first hand.

     All these undertakers become consumers and customers one in

regard to the other, the draper of the wine merchant and vice

versa. They proportion themselves in a state to the customers or

consumption. If there are too many hatters in a city or in a

street for the number of people who buy hats there, some who are

least patronised must become bankrupt: if they be too few it will

be a profitable undertaking which will encourage new hatters to

open shops there and so it is that the undertakers of all kinds

adjust themselves to risks in a state.

     All the other undertakers like those who take charge of

mines, theatres, building, etc., the merchants by sea and land,

etc., cook-shop keepers, pastry cooks, innkeepers, etc. as well

as the undertakers of their own labour who need no capital to

establish themselves, like journeymen artisans, coppersmiths,

needlewomen, chimney sweeps, water carriers, live at uncertainty

and proportion themselves to their customers. Master craftsmen

like shoemakers, tailors, carpenters, wigmakers, etc. who employ

journeymen according to the work they have, live at the same

uncertainty since their customers may foresake them from one day

to another: the undertakers of their own labour in art and

science, like painters, physicians, lawyers, etc. live in the

like uncertainty. If one attorney or barristers earn 5000 pounds

sterling yearly in the service of his clients or in his practice

and another earn only 500 they may be considered as having so

much uncertain wages from those who employ them.

     It may perhaps be urged that undertakers seek to snatch all

they can in their calling and to get the better of their

customers, but this is outside my subject.

     By all these inductions and many others which might be made

in a topic relating to all the inhabitants of a state, it may be

laid down that expect the prince and the proprietors of land, all

the inhabitants of a state are dependent; that they can be

divided into two classes, undertakers and hired people; and that

all the undertakers are as it were on unfixed wages and the

others on wages fixed so long as they receive them though their

functions and ranks may be very unequal. The general who has his

pay, the courtier his pension and the domestic servant who has

wages all fall into this last class. All the rest are

undertakers, whether they set up with a capital to conduct their

enterprise, or are undertakers of their own labour without

capital, and they may be regarded as living at uncertainty; the

beggars even and the robbers are undertakers of this class.

Finally all the inhabitants of a state derive their living and

their advantages from the property of the landowners and are

dependent.

     It is true, however, that if some person on high wages or

some large undertaker has saved capital or wealth, that is if he

have stores of corn, wool, copper, gold, silver or some produce

or merchandise in constant use or vent in a state, having an

intrinsic or a real value, he may be justly considered

independent so far as this capital goes. He may dispose of it to

acquire a mortgage, and interest from land and from public loans

secured upon land: he may live still better than the small

landowners and even buy the property of some of them.

     But produce and merchandise, even gold and silver, are much

more subject to accident and loss than the ownership of land; and

however one may have gained or saved them they are always derived

from the land of actual proprietors either by gain or by saving

of the wages destined for one's subsistence.

     The number of proprietors of money in a large state is often

considerable enough; and though the value of all the money which

circulates in the state barely exceeds the ninth or tenth part of

the value of the produce drawn from the soil yet, as the

proprietors of money lend considerable amounts for which they

receive interest either by mortgage or the produce and

merchandise of the state, the sums due to them usually exceed all

the money in the state, and they often become so powerful a body

that they could in certain cases rival the proprietors of lands

if these last were not often equally proprietors of money, and if

the owners of large sums of money did not always seek to become

landowners themselves.

     It is nevertheless always true that all the sums gained or

saved have been drawn from the land of the actual proprietors;

but as many of these ruin themselves daily in a state and the

others who acquire the property of their land take their place,

the independence given by the ownership of land applies only to

those who keep the possession of it; and as all land has always

that it is from their property that all the inhabitants of the

state derive their living and all their wealth. If these

proprietors confined themselves to living on their rents it would

be beyond question, and in that case it would be much more

difficult for the other inhabitants to enrich themselves at their

expense.

     I will then lay it down as a principle that the proprietors

of land alone are naturally independent in a state: that all the

other classes are dependent whether undertakers or hired, and

that all the exchange and circulation of the state is conducted

by the medium of these undertakers.





Chapter Fourteen



The Fancies, the Fashions, and the Modes of Living of the Prince,

and especially of the Landowners, determine the use to which Land

is put in a State and cause the variations in the Market price of

all things



      If the owner of a large estate (which I wish to consider

here as if there were no other in the world) has it cultivated

himself he will follow his fancy in the use of which he will put

it. (1) He will necessarily use part of it for corn to feed the

labourers, mechanics and overseers who work for him, another part

to feed the cattle, sheep and other animals necessary for their

clothing and food or other commodities according to the way in

which he wishes to maintain them. (2) He will turn part of the

land into parks, gardens, fruit trees or vines as he feels

inclined and into meadows for the horses he will use for his

pleasure, etc.

     Let us now suppose that to avoid so much care and trouble he

makes a bargain with the overseers of the labourers, gives them

farms or pieces of land and leaves to them the responsibility for

maintaining in the usual manner all the labourers they supervise,

so that the overseers, now become farmers or undertakers, give

the labourers for working on the land or farm another third of 

the produce for their food, clothing and other requirements, such

as they had when the owner employed them; suppose further that

the owner makes a bargain with the overseers of the mechanics for

the food and other things that he gave them, that he makes the

overseers become master craftsmen, fixes a common measure, like

silver, to settle the price at which the farmers will supply them

with wood and they will supply him with cloth, and that the

prices are such as to give the master craftsmen the same

advantages and enjoyments as they had when overseers, and the

journeymen mechanics will be settled by the day or by the piece:

the merchandise which they have made, hats, stockings, shoes,

clothes, etc. will be sold to the landowner, the farmers, the

labourers, and the other mechanics reciprocally at a price which

leaves to all of them the same advantages as before; and the

farmers will sell, at a proportionate price, their produce and

raw material.

     It will then come to pass that the overseers become

undertakers, will be the absolute masters of those who work under

them, and will have more care and satisfaction in working on

their own account. We suppose than that after this change all the

people on this large estate live just as they did before, and so

all the portions and farms of this great estate will be put to

the same use as it formerly was.

     For if some of the farmers sowed more corn than usual they

must feed fewer sheep, and have less wool and mutton to sell.

Then there will be too much corn and too little wool for the

consumption of the inhabitants. Wool will therefore be dear,

which will force the inhabitants to wear their clothes longer

than usual, and there will be too much corn and a surplus for the

next year. As we suppose that the landowner has stipulated for

the payment in silver of the third of the produce of the farm to

be paid to him, the farmers who have too much corn and too little

wool, will not be able to pay him his rent. If he excuses them

they will take care the next year to have less corn and more

wool, for farmers always take care to use their land for the

production of those things which they think will fetch the best

price at market. If, however, next year they have too much wool

and too little corn for the demand, they will not fail to change

from year to year the use of the land till they arrive at

proportioning their production pretty well to the consumption of

the inhabitants. So a farmer who has arrived at about the

proportion of consumption will have part of his farm in grass,

for hay, another for corn, wool and so on, and he will not change

his plan unless he sees some considerable change in the demand;

but in this example we have supposed that all the people live in

the same way as when the landowner cultivated the land for

himself, and consequently the farmers will employ the land for

the same purposes as before.

     The owner, who has at his disposal the third of the produce

of the land, is the principal agent in the changes which may

occur in demand. Labourers and mechanics who live from day to day

change their mode of living only from necessity. If a few

farmers, master craftsmen or other undertakers in easy

circumstances vary their expense and compensation they always

take as their model the lords and owners of the land. They

imitate them in their clothing, meals, and mode of life. If the

landowners please to wear fine linen, silk, or lace, the demand

for these merchandises will be greater than that of the

proprietors for themselves.

     If a lord or owner who has let out all his lands to farm,

take the fancy to change considerably his mode of living; if for

instance he decreases the number of his domestic servants and

increases the number of his horses: not only will his servants be

forced to leave the estate in question but also a proportionate

number of artisans and of labourers who worked to maintain them.

The portion of land which was used to maintain these inhabitants

will be laid down to grass for the new horses, and if all

landowners in the state did the like they would soon increase the

number of horses and diminish the number of men.

    When a landowner has dismissed a great number of domestic

servants, and increased the number of his horses, there will be

too much corn for the needs of the inhabitants, and so the corn

will be cheap and the hay dear. In consequence the farmers will

increase their grass land and diminish their corn to proportion

it to the demand. In this way the fancies or fashions of

landowners determine the use of the land and bring about the

variations of demand which cause the variations of market prices.

If all the landowners of a state cultivated their own estates

they would use them to produce what they want; and as the

variations of demand are chiefly caused by their mode of living

the prices which they offer in the market decide the farmers to

all the changes which they make in the employment and use of the

land.

     I do not consider here the variations in market prices which

may arise from the good or bad harvest of the year, or the

extraordinary consumption which may occur from foreign troops or

other accidents, so as not to complicate my subject, considering

only a state in its natural and uniform condition.





Chapter Fifteen



The Increase and Decrease of the Number of People in a State

chiefly depend on the taste, the fashions, and the modes of

living of the proprietors of land



     Experience shows that trees, plants and other vegetables can

be increased to any quantity which the extent of ground laid out

for them can support.

     The same experience shows that all kinds of the animal

creation are to be multiplied to any quantity which the land

allotted to them can support. Horses, cattle, sheep can easily be

multiplied up to the number that the land will support. The

fields which serve for this support may be improved by irrigation

as in Milan. Hay may be saved and cattle fed in sheds and raised

in larger numbers than if they were left in the fields. Sheep may

be fed on turnips, as in England, by which means an acre of land

will go further for their nourishment than if it were pasture. In

a word, we can multiply all sorts of animals in such numbers as

we wish to maintain even to infinity if we could find lands to

infinity to to nourish them; and the multiplication of animals

has no other bounds than the greater or less means allotted for

their subsistence. It is not to be doubted that if all land were

devoted to the simple sustenance of man the race would increase

up to the number that the land would support in the manner to be

explained.

     There is no country where population is carried to a greater

height than in China. The common people are supported by rice and

rice water; they work almost naked and in the southern provinces

they have three plentiful harvests of rice yearly, thanks to

their great attention to agriculture. The land is never fallow

and yields a hundredfold every year. Those who are clothed have

generally clothing of cotton, which needs so little land for its

production that an acre of land, it seems, is capable of

producing a quantity full sufficient for the clothing of five

hundred grown up persons. The Chinese by the principles of their

religion are obliged to marry, and bring up as many children as

their means of subsistence will afford. They look upon it as a

crime to lay land out in pleasure gardens or parks, defrauding

the public of maintenance. They carry travellers in sedan chairs,

and save the work of horses upon all tasks which can be performed

by men. Their number is incredible if the relation of voyages is

to be depended upon, yet they are forced to destroy many of their

children in the cradle when they apprehend themselves not to be

able to bring them up, keeping only the number they are able to

support. By hard and indefatigable labour they draw from the

rivers an extraordinary quantity of fish and from the land all

that is possible.

     Nevertheless when bad years come they starve in thousands in

spite of the care of the emperor who stores rice for such

contingencies. Numerous then as the people of China are, they are

necessarily proportioned to their means of living and do not

exceed the number the country can support according to their

standard of life; and on this footing a single acre of land will

support many of them.

     On the other hand there is no country where the increase of

population is more limited than among the savages in the interior

parts of America. They neglect agriculture, live in woods, and on

the wild beasts they find there. As their forests destroy the

sweetness and substance of the earth there is little pasture for

animals, and since an Indian eats several animals in a year, 50

or 100 acres supply only enough food for a single Indian.

     A small tribe of these Indians will have 40 square leagues

for its hunting ground. The wage regular and bitter wars over

these boundaries, and always proportion their numbers to their

means of support from the chase.

     The European cultivate the land and draw corn from it for

their subsistence. The wool and draw corn from it for their

subsistence. The wool of their sheep provides them with clothing.

Wheat is the grain on which most of them are fed, but some

peasants make their bread of rye, and in the north of barley and

oats. The food of the peasants and the people is not the same in

all countries of Europe, and land is often different in quality

and fertility.

     Most of the land in Flanders and part of that in Lombardy

yields 18 to 20 fold without lying idle; the Campagna of Naples

yields still more. There are a few properties in France, Spain,

England and Germany which yield the same amount. Cicero tells us

that the land of Sicily in his time yielded tenfold, and the

elder Pliny says that the Leontine lands in Sicily yielded a

hundred fold, those of Babylon a hundred and fifty, and some

African lands a good deal more.

     Today land in Europe yields on the average six times what is

sown, so that five times the seed remains for the consumption of

the people. Land usually rests one year in three, producing wheat

the first year and barley the second.

     In the supplement will be found estimates of the amount of

land required for the support of a man according to the different

assumptions of his manner of living.

     It will be seen that a man who lives on bread, garlic and

roots, wears only hempen garments, coarse linen, wooden shoes,

and drinks only water, like many peasants in the south of France,

can live on the produce of an acre and a half of land of medium

goodness, yielding a sixfold harvest and resting once in 3 years.

On the other hand a grown-up man who wears leather shoes,

stockings, woollen cloth, who lives in a house and has a change

of linen, a bed, chairs, table, and other necessaries, drinks

moderately of beer or wine, eats every day meat, butter, cheese,

bread, vegetables, etc. sufficiently and yet moderately needs for

all that the produce of 4 to 5 acres of land of medium quality.

It is true that in these estimates nothing is allowed for the

food of horses except for the plough and carriage of produce for

ten miles.

     History records that the first Romans each maintained his

family on two journaux of land, equal to one Paris acre and 330

square feet or thereabouts. They were almost naked, had no wine

or oil, lay in the straw, and had hardly any comforts, but as

they cultivated intensely the land, which is fairly good around

Rome, they drew from it plenty of corn and of vegetables.

     If the proprietors of land had at heart the increase of

population, if they encouraged the peasants to marry young and

bring up children by promising to provide them with subsistence,

devoting their land entirely to that purpose, they would

doubtless increase the population up to the point which the land

could support, according to the produce they allotted for each

person whether an acre and a half or four to five acres a head.

     But if instead of that the prince, or the proprietors of

land, cause the land to be used for other purposes than the

upkeep of the people: if by the prices they offer in the market

for produce and merchandise they determine the farmers to employ

the land for other purposes than the maintenance of man (for we

have seen that the prices they offer in the market and their

consumption determine the use made of the land just as if they

cultivated it themselves) the people will necessarily diminish in

number. Some will be forced to leave the country for lack of

employment, others not seeing the necessary means of raising

children, will not marry or will only marry late, after having

put aside somewhat for the support of the household.

     If the proprietors of land who live in the country go to

reside in the cities far away from their land, horses must be fed

for the transport into the city both of their food and that of

all the domestic servants, mechanics and others whom their

residence in the city attracts thither.

     The carriage of wine from Burgundy to Paris often costs more

than the wine itself costs in Burgundy; and consequently the land

employed for the upkeep of the cart horses and those who look

after them is more considerable than the land which produces the

wine and supports those who have taken part in its production.

The more horses there are in a state the less food will remain

for the people. The upkeep of carriage horses, hunters, or

chargers, often takes three or four acres of land.

     But when the nobility and proprietors of land draw from

foreign manufactures their cloths, silks, laces, etc. and pay for

them by sending to the foreigner their native produce they

diminish extraordinary the food of the people and increase that

of foreigners who often become enemies of the state.

     If a proprietor or nobleman in Poland, to whom his farmers

pay yearly a rent equal to about one third of the produce of his

land, pleases to use the cloths, linens, etc. of Holland, he will

pay for these mechandises one half of the rent he receives and

perhaps use the other half for the subsistence of his family on

other products and rough manufactures of Poland: but half his

rent, on our supposition, corresponds to the sixth part of the

produce of his land, and this sixth part will be carried away by

the Dutch to whom the farmers of Poland will deliver it in corn,

wool, hemp and other produce. Here is then a sixth part of the

land of Poland withdrawn from its people, to say nothing of the

feeding of the cart horses, carriage horses and chargers in

Poland, maintained by the manner of living of the nobility there.

Further if out of the two thirds of the produce of the land

allotted to the farmers there last imitating their masters

consume foreign manufactures which they will also pay foreigners

for in raw produce of Poland, there will be a good third of the

produce of the land in Poland abstracted from the food of the

people, and, what is worse, mostly sent to the foreigner and

often serving to support the enemies of the state. If the

proprietors of land and the nobility in Poland would consume only

the manufactures of their own state, bad as they might be at the

outset, they would soon become better, and would keep a great

number of their own people to work there, instead of giving this

advantage to foreigners: and if all states had the like care not

to be the dupes of other states in matters of commerce, each

state would be considerable only in proportion to its produce and

the industry of its people.

     If the ladies of Paris are pleased to wear Brussels lace,

and if France pays for this lace with Champagne wine, the product

of a single acre of flax must be paid for with the product of

16,000 acres of land under vines, if my calculations are correct.

This will be more fully explained elsewhere and the figures are

shown in the supplement. Suffice to say here that in this

transaction a great amount of produce of the land is withdrawn

from the subsistence of the French, and that all the produce sent

abroad, unless an equally considerable amount of produce be

brought back in exchange, tends to diminish the number of people

in the state.

     When I said that the proprietors of land might multiply the

population as far as the land would support them, I assumed that

most men desire nothing better than to marry if they are set in a

position to keep their families in the same style as they are

content to live themselves. That is, if a man is satisfied with

the produce of an acre and a half of land he will marry if the is

sure of having enough to keep his family in the same way. But if

he is only satisfied with the produce of five to ten acres he

will be in on hurry to marry unless he thinks he can bring up his

family in the same manner.

     In Europe the children of the nobility are brought up in

affluence; and as the largest share of the property is usually

given to the eldest sons, the younger sons are in no hurry to

marry. They usually live as bachelors, either in the army or in

the cloisters, but will seldom be fond unwilling to marry if they

are offered heiresses and fortunes, or the means of supporting a

family on the footing which they have in view and without which

they would consider themselves to make their children wretched.

     In the lower classes of the state also there are men who

from pride and from reasons similar to those of the nobility,

prefer to live in celibacy and to spend on themselves the little

that they have rather than settle down in family life. But most

of them would gladly set up a family if they could count upon

keeping it up as they would wish: they would consider themselves

to do an injustice to their children if they brought them up to

fall into a lower class than themselves. Only a few men in a

state avoid marriage from sheer flightiness. All the lower orders

wish to live and bring up children who can live like themselves.

When labourers and mechanics do not marry it is because they wait

till they save something to enable them to set up a household or

to find some young woman who brings a little capital for that

purpose, since they see every day others like them who for lack

of such precaution start housekeeping and fall into the most

frightful poverty, being obliged to deprive themselves of their

own food to nourish their children.

     From the observations of Mr Halley, at Breslaw in Silesia,

it is found that of all the females capable of child bearing,

from 16 to 45 years of age, not one in six actually bears a child

every year, while, says Mr Halley, there ought to be at least 4

or 6 who should have children every year, without including those

who are barren or have still births. The reason why four women

out of six do not bear children every year is that they cannot

marry because of the discouragements and difficulties in their

way. A young woman takes care not to become a mother if she is

not married; she cannot marry unless she finds a man who is ready

to run the risk of it. Most of the people in a state are hired or

are undertakers; most are dependent and live in uncertainty

whether they will find by their labour or their undertakings the

means of supporting their household on the footing they have in

view. Therefore they do not all marry, or marry so late that of

six women, or at least four, who should produce a child every

year there is actually only one in six who becomes a mother.

     If the proprietors of land help to support the families, a

single generation suffices to push the increase of population as

far as the produce of the land will supply means of subsistence.

Children do not require so much of this produce as grown-up

persons. Both can live on more or less according to their

consumption. The northern people, where the land produces little,

have been known to live on so little produce that they have sent

out colonists and swarms of men to invade the lands of the south

and destroy its inhabitants to appropriate their land. According

to the different manner of living, 400,000 people might subsist

on the same produce of the land which ordinarily supports but

100,000. A man who lives upon the produce of an acre and a half

of land, may be stronger and stouter than he who spends the

produce of five or ten acres; it therefore seems pretty clear

that the number of inhabitants of a state depends on the means

allotted them of obtaining their support; and as this means of

subsistence arises from the method of cultivating the soil, and

this method depends chiefly on the taste, humours and manner of

living of the proprietors of land, the increase and decrease of

population also stand on the same foundation.

     The increase of population can be carried furthest in the

countries where the people are content to live the most poorly

and to consume the least produce of the soil. In countries where

all the peasants and labourers are accustomed to eat meat and

drink wine, beer, etc. so many inhabitants cannot be supported.

     Sir William Petty, and after him Mr Davenant, Inspector of

the Customs in England, seem to depart from nature when they try

to estimate the propagation of the race by progressive

generations from Adam, the first father. Their calculations seem

to be purely imaginary and drawn up at hazard. On the basis of

what they have seen of the actual birth rate in certain

districts, how could they explain the decrease of those

innumerable people formerly found in Asia, Egypt, etc. and even

in Europe? If seventeen centuries ago there were 26 millions of

people in Italy, now reduced to 6 million at most, how can it be

determined by the progressions of Mr King that England which

today contains 5 or 6 millions of inhabitants will probably have

13 millions in a certain number of years? We see daily that

Englishmen, in general, consume more of the produce of the land

than their fathers did, and this is the real reason why there are

fewer inhabitants than in the past.

     Men multiply like mice in a barn if they have unlimited

means of subsistence; and the English in the colonies will become

more numerous in proportion in three generations than they would

be in thirty in England, because in the colonies they find for

cultivation new tracts of land from which they drive the savages.

     In all countries at all times men have waged wars for the

land and the means of subsistence. When wars have destroyed or

diminished the population of a country, the savages and civilised

nations soon repopulate in in times of peace; especially when the

prince and the proprietors of land lend their encouragement.

     A state which has conquered several provinces may, by

tribute imposed on the vanquished, acquire an increase of

subsistence for its own people. The Romans drew a great part of

their subsistence from Egypt, Sicily and Africa and that is why

Italy then contained so many inhabitants.

     A state where mines are found, having manufactures which do

not require much of the produce of the land to send them into

foreign countries, and drawing from them in exchange plentiful

merchandise and produce of the land, acquires an increased fund

for the subsistence of its subjects.

     The Dutch exchange their labour in navigation, fishing or

manufactures principally with foreigners, for the products of

their land. Otherwise Holland could not support of itself its

population. England buys from abroad considerable amounts of

timber, hemp and other materials or products of the soil and

consumes much wine for which she pays in minerals, manufactures,

etc. That saves the English a great quantity of the products of

their soil. Without these advantages the people of England, on

the footing of the expense of living there, could not be so

numerous as they are. The coal mines save them several millions

of acres of land which would otherwise be needed to grow timber.

     But all these advantages are refinements and exceptional

cases which I mention only incidentally. The natural and constant

way of increasing population in a state is to find employment for

the people there, and to make the land serve for the production

of their means of support.

     It is also a question outside of my subject whether it is

better to have a great multitude of inhabitants, poor and badly

provided, than a smaller number, much more at their ease: a

million who consume the produce of 6 acres per head or 4 million

who live on the product of an acre and a half.





Chapter Sixteen



The more Labour there is in a State the more naturally rich the

State is esteemed



     In a long calculation worked out in the supplement it is

shown that the labour of 25 grown persons suffices to provide 100

others, also grown up, with all the necessaries of life according

to the European standard. In these estimates it is true the food,

clothing, housing, etc. are coarse and rather elementary, but

there is ease and plenty. It may be assumed that a good third of

the people of state are too young or too old for daily work and

that another sixth are proprietors of land, sick, or undertakers

of different sorts who do not by the labour of their hands,

contribute to the different needs of men. That makes half the

people without work, or at least without the work in question. So

if 25 persons do all the work needed for the maintenance of a

hundred others, there remain 25 persons out of the hundred who

are capable of working but would have nothing to do.

     The soldiers, and the domestic servants in well-to-do

families, will form part of these 25; and if all the others are

busied in working up by additional labour the things necessary

for life, like making fine linen, fine cloth, etc. the state will

be deemed rich in proportion to this increase in work, though it

add nothing to the quantity of things needed for the subsistence

and maintenance of man.

     Labour gives an additional relish to food and drink. A fork,

a knife, etc. nicely wrought, are more esteemed than those

roughly and hastily made. The same may be said of a house, a bed,

a table and everything needed for the comfort of life.

     It is true that it is of little difference in a state

whether people are accustomed to wear coarse or fine clothes if

both are equally lasting, and whether people eat nicely or

coarsely if they have enough and are in good health, since drink,

food, clothing, etc. are equally consumed whether fine or coarse,

and that nothing is left in the state of this sort of wealth.

     But it is always true to say that the states where fine

cloths, fine linen, etc. are worn, and where the feeding is

dainty and delicate, are richer and more esteemed than those

where these things are ruder, and even that the states where one

sees more people living in the manner of the first named are more

highly esteemed than those where one sees fewer in proportion.

     But if the 25 persons in a hundred of whom we have spoken

were employed to produce permanent commodities, to draw from the

mines iron, lead, tin, copper, etc. and work them up into tools

and instruments for the use of man, bowls, plates and other

useful objects much more durable than earthenware, the state will

not only appear to be richer for it but will be so in reality.

     It will be so especially if these people are employed in

drawing from the earth gold and silver which metals are not only

durable but so to speak permanent, which fire itself cannot

destroy, which are generally accepted as the measure of value,

and which can always be exchanged for any of the necessaries of

life: and if these inhabitants work to draw gold and silver into

a state in exchange for the manufactures and work which they

produce and send abroad, their labour will be equally useful and

will in reality improve the state.

     The point which seems to determine the comparative greatness

of states is their reserve stock above the yearly consumption,

like magazines of cloth, linen, corn, etc. to answer in bad

years, or war. And as gold and silver can always buy these

things, even from the enemies of the state, gold and silver are

the true reserve stock of a state, and the larger or smaller

actual quantity of this stock necessarily determines the

comparative greatness of kingdoms and states.

     If it the custom to draw gold and silver from abroad by

exporting merchandises and produce of the state, such as corn,

wine, wool, etc. this will not fail to enrich the state at the

cost of a decrease of the population; but if gold and silver be

attracted from abroad in exchange for the labour of the people,

such as manufactures and articles which contain little of the

produce of the soil, this will enrich the state in a useful and

essential manner. In a great state, indeed, the 25 persons in a

hundred of whom we have spoken, cannot be employed to make

articles for foreign consumption. A million men will make more

cloth, for example, then will be consumed annually in all the

mercantile world, because the greater number of people in every

country, and there will seldom be found in any state 100,000

persons employed upon clothing for foreigners. This is shown in

the supplement with regard to England, which of all the nations

of Europe supplies most cloth to foreigners.

     In order that the consumption of the manufactures of a state

should become considerable in foreign parts, these manufactures

must be made good and valuable by a large consumption in the

interior of the state. It is needful to discourage all foreign

manufactures and to give plenty of employment to the inhabitants.

     If enough employment cannot be found to occupy the 25

persons in a hundred upon work useful and profitable to the

state, I see no objection to encouraging employment which serves

only for ornament or amusement. The state is not considered less

rich for a thousand toys which serve to trick out the ladies or

even men, or are used in games and diversions, than it is for

useful and serviceable objects. Diogenes, at the siege of

Corinth, is said to have fell a rolling his tub that he might not

seem idle while all others were at work; and we have today

societies of men and women occupied in work and exercise as

useless to the state as that of Diogenes. How little soever the

labour of a man supplies ornament or even amusement in a state it

is worth while to encourage it unless the man can find a way to

employ himself usefully.

     It is always the inspiration of the proprietors of land

which encourages or discourages the different occupations of the

people and the different kinds of labour which they invent.

     The example of the prince, followed by his court, is

generally capable of determining the inspiration and tastes of

the other proprietors of land, and the example of these last

naturally influences all the lower ranks. A prince, then, without

doubt is able by his own example and without any constraint to

give such a turn as he likes to the labour of his subjects.

     If each proprietor in a state had only a little piece of

land, like that which is usually leased to a single farmer, there

would be hardly any cities. The people would be more numerous and

the state very rich if every proprietor employed on some useful

work the inhabitants supported on his land.

     But when the nobles have great landed possessions, they of

necessity bring about luxury and idleness. Whether an Abbot at

the head of a hundred monks live on the produce of several fine

estates, or a nobleman with 50 domestic servants, and horses kept

only for his service, live on these estates, would be indifferent

to the state if it could remain in constant peace.

     But a nobleman with his retinue and his horses is useful to

the state in time of war; he can always be useful in the

magistracy and the keeping of order in the state in peace time;

and in every case he is a great ornament to the country, while

the monks are, as people say, neither useful nor ornamental in

peace or war on this side of heaven.

     The convents of Mendicant Friars are much more pernicious to

a state than those of the closed orders. These last usually do no

more harm than to occupy estates which might serve to supply the

state with officers and magistrates, while the Mendicants who are

themselves without useful employment, often interrupt and hinder

the labour of other people. They take from poor people in

charities the subsistence which ought to fortify them for their

labour. They cause them to lose much time in useless

conversation, not to speak of those who intrigue themselves into

families and those who intrigue themselves in families and those

who are vicious. Experience shows that the countries which have

embraced Protestantism and have neither monks nor mendicants have

become visibly more powerful. They have also the advantage of

having suppressed a great number of holy days when no work is

done in Roman Catholic countries, and which diminish the labour

of the people by about an eighth part of the year.

    If it were desired to make use of everything in a state it

might be possible, it seems, to diminish the number of mendicants

by incorporating them into the monasteries as vacancies or deaths

occur there, without forbidding these retreats to those who can

give no evidence of their skill in speculative sciences, who are

capable of advancing the practical arts, i.e. in some section of

mathematics. The celibacy of churchmen is not so disadvantageous

as is popularly supposed, as is shown in the preceding chapter,

but their idleness is very injurious.





Chapter Seventeen



Of Metals and Money, and especially of gold and silver



     As land produces more or less corn according to its

fertility and the labour spent upon it, so the mines of iron,

lead, tin, gold, silver, etc. produce more or less of these

metals according to the richness of the mines and the quantity

and quality of the labour spent upon them, in digging, draining,

smelting, refining, etc. Work in silver mines is dear on account

of the mortality in causes, since rarely more than five or six

years are spent in that labour.

     The real or intrinsic value of metals is like everything

else proportionable to the land and labour that enters into their

production. The outlay on the land for this production is

considerable only so far as the owner of the mine can obtain a

profit from the work of the miners when the veins are unusually

rich. The land needed for the subsistence of the miners and

workers, that is the mining labour, is often the principal

expense and the ruin of the proprietor.

     The market value of metals, as of other merchandise or

produce, is sometimes above, sometimes below, the intrinsic

value, and varies with their plenty or scarcity according to the

demand.

     If the proprietors of land and the lower orders in a state

who imitate them, rejected the use of time and copper, wrongly

supposing that they are injurious to health, and if they all made

use of dishes and utensils of earthenware, these metals would be

at a very low price in the markets and the work that was carried

on to extract them from the mine would be discontinued. But as

these metals are found useful, and are employed in the service of

life, they will always have a market value corresponding to their

plenty or rarity and the demand for them; and they will always be

mined to replace what is lost by daily use.

     Iron is not merely serviceable for the daily use of common

life but may be said to be in a certain sense necessarily; and if

the Americans, who did not make use of it before the discovery of

their continent, had found mines of it and known how to use it,

they would doubtless have laboured to produce it at any cost.

     Gold and silver are capable of serving not only the same

purpose as tin and copper but most of the purposes of lead and

iron. They have this further advantage over other metals that

they are not consumed by fire and are so durable that they may be

esteemed permanent bodies. It is not surprising, therefore, that

men who found the other metals useful should have esteemed gold

and silver even before they are used in exchange. The Romans

prized them from the foundation of Rome and yet only used them as

money 500 years later. Perhaps all other nations did the like and

only adopted these metals as money long after using them for

other purposes. However we find from the oldest historians that

from time immemorial gold and silver were used as money in Egypt

and Asia, and we learn in the Book of Genesis that silver monies

were made in the time of Abraham.

     Let us suppose that silver was first found in a mine of

Mount Niphates in Mesopotamia. It is natural to think that one or

more proprietors of land, finding this metal beautiful and

useful, were the first to use it, and willingly encouraged the

miner or undertaker to extract more of it from the mine, giving

him in return for his work and that of his assistants so much of

the produce of the land as they needed for their maintenance.

This metal becoming more and more esteemed in Mesopotamia, if the

large landowners bought ewers of silver, the lower classes,

according to their means or savings, might buy silver cups; and

the undertaker of the mine, seeing a constant demand for his

merchandise, gave it without doubt a value proportionable to it

quality or weight against the other products or merchandise which

he took in exchange. While everybody looked on this metal as a

precious and durable object and strove to own a few pieces of it,

the undertaker, who alone could supply it, was in a manner master

to demand in exchange an arbitrary quantity of other produce and

merchandise.

     Suppose now that on the further side of the River Tigris,

and therefore outside Mesopotamia, a new silver mine is

discovered, of which the veins are incomparably richer and larger

than those of Mount Niphates, and that the working of this new

Mine which was easily drained was less laborious than that of the

first.

     The undertaker of this new mine was naturally in a position

to supply silver much cheaper than the undertaker of Mount

Niphates, and the people of Mesopotamia who wished to have pieces

and objects of silver would find it more advantageous to export

their merchandise and give it to the undertaker of the new mine

in exchange for silver than to take it from the original

undertaker. This last, finding a smaller demand, would of

necessity reduce his price; but the new undertaker lowering his

price in proportion the first adventurer would be obliged to stop

his output, and then the price of silver in exchange for other

merchandise and produce would be necessarily fixed by that which

was put upon it at the new mine. Silver then cost less to the

people beyond Tigris than to those of Mesopotamia who had to bear

the cost of a long carriage of their merchandise and produce to

obtain silver.

     It is easy to perceive that when several silver mines were

found and the proprietors of land had taken a fancy to this

metal, they were imitated by the other classes, and that the

pieces and fragments of silver, even when not worked up, were

sought after eagerly, because nothing was easier than to make

such articles from them as were desired, according to their

quantity and weight. As this metal was esteemed as its cost

value, at least, a few people who possessed some of it, finding

themselves in need, could pawn it to borrow the things they

wanted, and even to sell it later outright. Thence arose the

custom of fixing its value in proportion to its quantity or

weight as against all products and merchandise. But as silver can

be combined with iron, lead, tin, copper, etc. which are not such

scarce metals and are minded at less expense, the exchange of

silver was subject to much fraud, and this caused several

kingdoms to establish mints in order to certify by a public

coinage the true quantity of silver that each coin contains and

to return to individuals who bring bars or ingots of silver to it

the same quantity in coins bearing a stamp or certificate of the

true quantity of silver they contain.

    The costs of these certificates or coinage are sometimes paid

by the public, or by the prince, -- the method followed in

ancient times at Rome and today in England; sometimes those who

take silver to be coined pay for minting as in the custom in

France.

     Pure silver is hardly ever found in the mines. The ancients

did not know the art of refining to perfection. They always made

their silver coins of fince silver, and yet those which remain to

us of the Greeks, Romans, Jews and Asiatics are never perfectly

pure. Today there is more skill, the secret of making silver pur

has been discovered. The different methods of refining it are not

part of my subject. Many authors have treated of it, Mr Boizard

among others. I will only observe that there is a good deal of

expense in refining silver and for this reason an ounce of fine

silver is generally preferred to two ounces which contain one

half of copper or other alloy. It is expensive to separate the

alloy and extract the one ounce of pure silver which is in these

two ounces, while by simple melting any other metal can be

combined with silver in any proportion desired. If copper is

sometimes used as an alloy to fine silver it is only to render it

more malleable and more suitable for the objects made of it. But

in the valuation of all silver the copper or alloy is reckoned at

nothing and only the amount of fine pure silver is considered.

For this reason an assay is always made to ascertain the amount

of pure silver.

     Assaying is merely refining a little piece of a bar of

silver, for example, to find how much pure silver it contains and

to judge the whole bar by this small sample. A small portion of

the bar, 12 grains for example, is cut off and nicely weighed in

balances which are so accurate that a thousandth part of a grain

will sometimes turn the scale. Then the sample is refined by

aquafortis or by fire and the copper or alloy separated. When the

silver is pur it is weighed again in the same balance and if it

then weighs 11 grains instead of 12 the assayer says that the bar

is 11 parts fine, i.e. it contains 11 parts of pure silver and 1

of copper or alloy. This will be more easily understood by those

who have the curiosity to see assays carried out. There is

nothing mysterious about it. Gold is assayed in the same way,

with this difference only that the degrees of fineness of gold

are divided into 24 parts called carats, since gold is more

precious; and these carats are divided into 32 parts, while the

degrees of fineness of silver are only divided into twelfths,

called deniers, and these are divided into 24 grains apiece.

     Usage has conferred upon gold and silver the title intrinsic

value, to designate and signify the quantity of true gold or

silver contained in a bar; but in this essay I have always used

the term intrinsic value to signify the amount of land and labour

which enter into production, not having found any term more

suitable to express my meaning. I mention this only to avoid

misunderstanding. When gold and silver are not in question the

term will always hold good without any confusion.

     We have seen that the metals such as gold, silver, iron,

etc. serve several purposes and have a value proportionable to

the land and labour which enter into their production. We shall

see in part II of this essay that men have been forced of

necessity to employ a common measure to find in their dealings

the proportion and the value of the products and merchandise they

wished to exchange. The only question is what product or

merchandise would be most suitable for this common measure, and

whether it has not been necessity rather that fancy which has

given this preference to gold, silver and copper which are

generally in use today for this purpose.

     Ordinary products like corn, wine, meat, etc. have a real

value and serve the needs of life, but they are all perishable

and difficult to be transported, and therefore hardly suitable to

serve as a common measure.

     Merchandise such as cloth, linen, leather, etc. is

persishable also and cannot be subdivided without in some sort

changing their value for the service of man. Like raw produce

they cost a good deal for carriage; they even cause expense for

storage, and consequently are unsuitable for a common measure.

     Diamonds and other precious stones, even if they had no

instrinsic value and were esteemed only from fancy, would be

suitable for a common measure if they were not susceptible of

imitation and if they could be divided without loss. With these

defects and that of being unserviceable in use they cannot serve

as a common measure.

     Iron, which is always useful and fairly durable would not

serve badly in default of a better. It is consumed by fire, and

is too bulky owing to its quantity. It was used from the time of

Lycurgus till the Peloponnesian War; but as its value was

necessarily based instrinsically, or in proportion to the land

and labour which entered into its production, a great quantity of

it was needed for small value. It is curious that its quality was

spoiled by vinegar to make it useless for service and to keep it

for exchange only. Thus it could serve the austere Spartans

alone, and could not continue to do so even with them as soon as

they extended their communication with other countries. To ruin

the spartans it needed only to find rich iron mines, to make

money like theirs, and to draw in exchange their products and

merchandise whilst they could get nothing from abroad for their

spoiled iron. At that time they did not concern themselves with

any foreign trade, but only with war.

     Lead and tin have the same disadvantage of bulk as iron and

are consumable by fire, but in case of need they would not do

badly for exchange if copper were not more suitable and durable.

     Copper alone served as money to the Romans until 484 years

after the founding of Rome, and in Sweden it is still used even

in large payments: but it is too bulky for very considerable

payments, and the Swedes themselves prefer payment in gold or

silver rather than in copper.

     In the American Colonies tobacco, sugar, and cocoa have been

used as money: but these commodities are too bulky, perishable,

and of unequal quality: they are therefore hardly suitable to

serve as money or a common measure of value.

     Gold and silver alone are of small volume, equal goodness,

easily transported, divisible without loss, convenient to keep,

beautiful and brilliant in the articles made of them and durable

almost to eternity. All who have used other articles as money

return to these as soon as they can get enough of them for

exchange. It is only in the smallest purchases that gold and

silver are unsuitable. Gold or even silver coins of the value of

a liard or a denier would be too small to be handled easily. It

is said that the Chinese, in small transactions, cut off little

pieces with scissors from their plates of silver, and weighed the

pieces. But since their trade with Europe they have begun to use

copper for such occasions.

     It is then not surprising that all countries have arrived at

using gold and silver as money or a common measure of value and

copper for small payments. Utility and need have decided them,

and not fancy or consent. Silver requires much labour and dear

labour for its production. Silver miners are highly paid because

they rarely live more than five or six years at this work, which

causes a high mortality: and so a little silver coin corresponds

to as much land and labour as a large copper coin.

     Money or the common measure of value must correspond in fact

and reality in terms of land and labour to the articles exchanged

for it. Otherwise it would have only an imaginary value. If for

example a prince or a republic gave currency in the state to

something which had not such a real and instrinsic value, not

only would the other states refuse to accept it on that footing

but the inhabitants themselves would reject it when they

perceived its lack of real value. When towards the end of the

first Punic War the Romans wished to give the copper as, weighing

two ounces, the same value as the as of 1 pound or 12 ounces had

before, it could not long be maintained in exchange. The history

of all times shews that when princes have debased their money,

keeping it at the same nominal value, all raw produce and

manufacturers have gone up in price in proportion to the

debasement of the coinage.

     Mr Locke says that the consent of mankind has given its

value to gold and silver. This cannot be doubted since absolute

necessity had no share in it. It is the same consent which has

given and does give every day a value to lace, line, fine cloths,

copper, and other metals. Man could subsist without any of these

things, but it must not be concluded that they have but an

imaginary value. They have a value proportionable to the land and

labour which enter into their production. Gold and silver, like

other merchandise and raw produce, can only be produced at costs

roughly proportionable to the value set upon them, and whatever

man produces by labour, this labour must furnish his maintenance.

It is the great principle that one hears every day from the

mouths of the humble classes who have no part in our

speculations, and who live by their labour or their undertakings.

"Everybody must live."





          End of the first part.



















Part Two



Chapter One



Of Barter



    In Part I an attempt was made to prive that the real value of

everything used by manis proportionate tothe quantity of Land

used for its production and for the upkeep of those who have

fashioned it. In this second part, after summing up the different

degrees of fertility of the land in several countires and the

different kinds of produce itcan bring forth with greater

abundance according to its intrinsic quality, and assuming the

establishment of towns and their markets to facilitate the sale

of these products,it will be shewn by comparing exchanges which

may be made, wine for cloth, corn for shoes, hats, etc. and by

the difficulty which the transport of these different products or

merchandises would involve, that it was impossible to fix their

respective intrinsic value, and there was absolute necessity for

man to find a substance easily transportable, not perishable, and

having by weight a proportion or value equal to the different

products and merchandises, necessary or convenient. Thence arose

the choice of gold and silver for large business and of copper

for small traffic.

       These metals are not only durable and easily transported

but correspond to the employment of a large area of land for

their production, which gives them the real value desirable in

exchange.

       Mr Locke who, like all the English writers on this

subject, has looked only to market prices, lays down that the

value of all things in proportionable to their abundance or

scarcity, and the abundance or scarcity of the silver for which

they are exchanged. It is generally known that the prices of

produce and merchandise have been raised in Europe since so great

a quantity of silver has been brought thither from the West

Indies.

       But I consider that we must not suppose as a general rule

that the market prices of things should be proportionable to

their quantity and to that of the silver actually circulating in

one place, because the products and merchandise sent away to be

sold elsewhere do not influence the price of those which remain.

If, for example, in a market town where there is twice as much

corn as is consumed there, we compared the whole quantity of corn

to that of silver, the corn would be more abundant of corn to

that of silver, the corn would be more abundant in proportion

than the silver destined for its purchase; the market price,

however, will be maintained just as if there were only half the

quantity of corn, since the other half can be and even must be,

sent into the city, and the cost of transport will be included in

the city price which is always higher than that of the town. But

apart from the case of hoping to sell in another market, I

consider that Mr Locke's idea is correct in the sense of the

following chapter, and not otherwise.



     Chapter Two

   Of Market Prices 



       Suppose the butchers on one side and the buyers on the

other. The price of meat will be settled after some altercations,

and a pound of beef will be in value to a piece of silver pretty

nearly as the whole beef offered for sale in the market is to all

the silver brought there to buy beef.

       This proportion is come at by bargaining. The butcher

keeps up his price according to the number of buyers he sees; the

buyers, on their side, offer less according as they think the

butcher will have less sale: the price set by some is usually

followed by others. Some are more clever in puffing up their

wares, other in running them down. Though this method of fixing

market prices has no exact or geometrical foundation, since it

often depends upon the eagerness or easy temperament of a few

buyers or sellers, it does not seem that it could be done in any

more convenient way. It is clear that the quantity of produce or

of merchandise offered for sale, in proportion to the demand or

number of buyers, is the basis on which is fixed or always

supposed to be fixed the actual market prices; and that in

general these prices do not vary much from the intrinsic value.

       Let us take another case. Several matre d'htels have

been told to buy green peas when they first come in. One master

has ordered the purchase of 10 litrons for 60 livres, another 10

litrons for 50 livres, a third 10 for 40 livres and a fourth 10

livres for 30 livres. If these orders are to be carried out there

must be 40 litrons of green peas in the market. Suppose there are

only 20. The vendors, seeing many buyers, will keep up their

prices, and the buyers will come up to the prices prescribed to

them: so that those who offer 60 livres for 10 litrons will be

the first served. The sellers, seeing later that no one will go

above 50, will let the other 10 litrons go at that price. Those

who had orders not to exceed 40 and 30 livres will go away empty.

       If instead of 40 litrons there were 400, not only would

the matre d'htels get the new peas much below the sums laid

down for them, but the sellers in order to be preferred one to

the other by the few buyers will lower their new peas almost to

their intrinsic value, and in that case many matres d'htels who

had no orders will buy some.

       It often happens that sellers who are too obstinate in

keeping up their price in the market, miss the opportunity of

selling their produce or merchandise to advantage and are losers

thereby. It also happens that by sticking to their prices they

may be able to sell more profitably another day.

       Distant markets may always effect the prices of the market

where one is: if corn is extremely dear in France it will go up

in England and in other neighbouring countries.



     Chapter Three

   Of the Circulation of Money 



       It is the general opinion in England that a farmer must

make three rents. (1) The principal and true rent which he pays

to the proprietor, supposed equal in value to the produce of one

third of his farm, a second rent for his maintenance and that of

the men and horses he employs to cultivate the farm, and a third

which ought to remain with him to make his undertaking

profitable.

       The same idea obtains generally in the other countries of

Europe, though in some, like the Milanese state, the farmer gives

the landlord half the produce instead of a third, and many

landlords in all countries try to let their farms at the highest

rent they can; but when this is above a third of the produce the

farmers are generally very poor. I doubt not that the Chinese

landowner extracts from his farmer more than three fourths of the

produce.

       However when a farmer has some capital to carry on the

management of this farm the proprietor who lets him the farm for

a third of the produce will be sure of payment and will be better

off by such a bargain than if he let his land at a higher rate to

a beggarly farmer at the risk of losing all his rent. The larger

the farm the better off the farmer will be. This is seen in

England where the farmers are generally more prosperous than in

other countries where the farms are small.

       The assumption I shall make in this enquiry as to the

circulation of money is that farmers earn three rents and spend

the third rent on living more comfortably instead of saving it.

It is in fact the case with the greatest number of farmers in all

countries.

       All the produce of the country comes directly or

indirectly from the hands of the farmers as well as all the

materials from which commodities are made. It is the land which

produces everything but fish, and even then the fishermen who

catch the fish must be maintained on the produce of the land.

       The three rents of the farmer must therefore be considered

as the principal sources or so to speak the mainspring of

circulation in the state. The first rent must be paid to the

landowner in ready money: for the second and third rents ready

money is needed for the iron, tin, copper, salt, sugar, cloth and

generally all the merchandise of the city consumed in the

country; but all that hardly exceeds the sixth part of the total

or three rents. As for the food and drink of the country folk

ready money is not necessarily to obtain it.

       The farmer may brew his beer or make his wine without

spending cash, he can make his bread, kill the oxen, sheep, pigs,

etc. that are eaten in the country: he can pay in corn, meat and

drink most of his assistants -- not only labourers but country

artisans, valuing the produce at the prices of the nearest

markets and labour at the ordinary price of the locality.

       The things necessary to life are food, cloths, and

lodging. There is no need of cash to obtain food in the country,

as I have just explained. If coarse linen and cloths are made

there, if houses are built there, as is often done, the labour

for all this may be paid in barter by valuation without cash

being needed.

       The only cash needed in the country is that for the

principal rent of the landlord and for the manufactures which the

country necessarily draws from the city, such as knives,

scissors, pins, needles, cloths for some farmers or other

well-to-do people, the kitchen utensils, plates, and generally

all that is got from the city. I have already observed that it is

reckoned that half the inhabitants of a state live in the cities,

and consequently the citizens spend more than half the produce of

the land. Cash is therefore necessary, not only for the rent of

the landlord, corresponding to one third of the produce, but also

for the city merchandise consumed in the country, which may

amount to something more than one sixth of the produce of the

soil. But one third and one sixth amount to half the produce. The

cash circulating in the country must therefore be equal to at

least one half the produce of the land, by which means the other

half or somewhat less may be consumed in the country without need

of cash.

       The circulation of this money takes place when the

landlords spend in detail in the city the rents which the farmers

have paid them in lump sums, and when the undertakers of the

cities, butchers, bakers, brewers, etc. collect little by little

this same money to buy from the farmers in lump sums cattle,

wheat, barley, etc. In this way all the large sums of money are

distributed in small amounts, and all the small amounts are then

collected to make payments in large amounts, directly or

indirectly, to the farmers, and this money large or small always

passes in return for services.

       When I stated that for the country circulation there is

needed a quantity of money often equal in value to half the

produce of the land, this is the minimum; and in order that the

country circulation should be easily conducted I will suppose

that the ready cash which conducts the circulation of the three

rents, is equal in value to two of these rents, or two thirds of

the produce of the land. It will be seen later that this

supposition is not far from the truth.

       Let us now imagine that the money which conducts the whole

circulation of a little state is equal to 10,000 ounces of

silver, and that all the payments made with this money, country

to city, and city to country, are made once a year; and that

these 10,000 ounces of silver are equal in value to two of the

rents of the farmers or two thirds of the produce of the land.

The rents of the landlords will correspond to 5000 ounces, and

the whole circulation of the remaining silver between the country

people and the citizens, made by annual payments, will correspond

also to 5000 ounces.

       But if the landlords stipulate with their farmers for half

yearly instead of yearly payments, and if the debtors of the two

other rents also make their payments every six months, this will

alter the rapidity of circulation: and whereas 10,000 ounces were

needed to make the annual payments, only 5000 will now be

required, since 5000 ounces paid twice over will have the same

effect as 10,000 ounces paid once.

       Further if the landlords stipulate with their farmers for

quarterly payments, or if they are satisfied to receive their

rents from the farmers according as the four seasons of the year

enable them to sell their produce, and if all other payments are

made quarterly, only 2500 ounces will be needed for the same

circulation which would have been conducted by 10,000 ounces paid

once a year. Therefore, supposing all payments made quarterly in

the little state in question, the proportion of the value of the

money needed for the circulation is to the annual produce of the

soil (or the three rents), as 2500 livres is to 15,000 livres, or

as 1 to 6, so that the money would correspond to the sixth part

of the annual produce.

       But seeing that each branch of the circulation in the

cities is carried out by undertakers, that the consumption of

food is met by daily, weekly or monthly payments, and that

payment for the clothing purchased once or twice a year by

families is made at different times by different people; and

whereas the expenditure on drink is usually made daily, that on

small beer, coal, and a thousand other articles of consumption is

very prompt, it would seem that the proportion we have

established for quarterly payments would be too high and that the

circulation of a land produce of 15,000 ounces of silver in value

could be conducted with much less than 2500 ounces of silver in

ready money.

       As however the farmers have to make large payments to the

landlords at least every quarter and the taxes which the prince

or the state collects upon consumption are accumulated by the

collectors to make large payments to the Receivers-General, there

must be enough ready cash in circulation to make these large

payments without difficulty, without hindering the circulation of

currency for the food and clothing of the people.

       It will be seen from this that the proportion of the

amount of money needed for circulation in a state is not

incomprehensible, and that this amount may be greater or less in

a state according to the mode of living and the rapidity of

payments. But it is very difficult to lay down anything definite

as regards this quantity in general, as the proportion may differ

in different countries, and it is only conjectural when I say

that "the real cash or money necessary to carry on the

circulation and exchange in a state is about equal in value to

one third of all the annual rents of the proprietors of the said

state."

       Supposing the money in circulation equal to the third of

all the rents of the landowners and these rents equal to the

third of the annual produce of the land, it follows that "the

money circulating in a state is equal in value to the ninth part

of all the annual produce of the soil."

       Sir William Petty, in a manuscript of 1685, supposes

frequently that the money in circulation is equal to one tenth of

the produce of the soil. He gives no reason. I suppose it is an

opinion which he formed from experience and from his practical

knowledge both of the money circulating in Ireland (a great part

of the land of which country he had measured as a surveyor) and

of the produce which he estimated roughly from observation. I am

not far removed from his conclusion to the landlords' rents which

are ordinarily paid in money and easily ascertainable by a

uniform land tax, rather than to the products of the soil, the

prices of which vary daily in the markets, and a large part of

which is consumed without entering into the market. In the next

chapter I shall give several reasons, supported by examples, to

confirm my conclusion. I think it useful, even if not

mathematically exact in each country. It is enough if it is near

the truth and if it prevents the governors of states from forming

extravagant ideas of the amount of money in circulation. There is

no branch of knowledge in which one is more subject to error than

statistics when they are left to imagination, and none more

demonstrable when they are based upon detailed facts.

       Some cities and states which have no land belonging to

them subsist by exchanging their labour or manufactures for the

produce of the land of others. Such are Hamburg, Dantzig, several

other cities of the Empire, and even part of Holland. In these

states it seems more difficult to estimate the circulation. But

if we could estimate the amount of foreign land which furnishes

their subsistence, the calculation would probably not differ from

that I have made for the other states which live chiefly on their

own produce and are the subject of this essay.

       As to the cash needed to carry on foreign trade it seems

that no more is required than what is in circulation in the state

when the balance of foreign trade is equal, that is when the

products and merchandise sent abroad are equal in value to those

imported.

       If France sends cloth to Holland and receives from her

spices, of equal value, the landowner who consumes these spices

pays the value of them to the grocer, who pays the same amount to

the clothmaker, to whom it is due in Holland for the cloth he has

sent there. This is done by bills of exchange which will be

explained later. These two money payments take place in France

apart from the rent of the landowner, and no money leaves France

on that account. All other classes of society who consume Dutch

spices, similarly pay the grocer, viz. those who live on the

first rent, that is the landowners, pay from this rent, and those

who live on the other two rents in country or in city pay the

grocer directly or indirectly out of the money which conducts the

circulation of these rents. The grocer again pays this money to

the manufacturer for his bill upon Holland, and no increase of

money is needed for circulation in the state because of foreign

trade when the balance is equal. But if it is not equal, if more

merchandise is sold to Holland than is bought back, or vice

versa, money is needed for the surplus which Holland must send to

France or France to Holland. This will increase or diminish the

amount of money circulating in France.

       It may even occur that when the balance with the foreigner

is equal to the trade with him may retard the circulation of

ready money and therefore require a greater quantity of money by

reason of this commerce.

       For example, if the French ladies who wear French stuffs

wish to wear Dutch velvets, which are paid for by the cloth sent

to Holland, they will pay for these velvets to the merchants who

imported them from Holland, and these merchants will pay the

manufacturers of cloth. The money thus passes through more hands

than if these ladies took their money to the manufacturers of

cloth and contented themselves with the fabrics of France. When

the same money passes through the hands of several undertakers

the rapidity of circulation is slowed down. But it is difficult

to make an exact estimate of this sort of delay which depends

upon various circumstances. Thus, in our present example, if the

ladies pay the merchant for the velvet today, and the merchant

pay the manufacturer tomorrow for his bill on Holland, if the

manufacturer pay the wool merchant the next day and this last pay

the farmer the day after, it is possible that the farmer will

keep the money in hand more than two months to make up the

quarter's rent which he must pay his landlord. This money might

in two months have circulated through the hands of a hundred

undertakers without locking up the circulating medium needed by

the state.

       After all, the principle rent of the landowner must be

considered to be the most necessary and considerable branch of

the money in regard to circulation. If he lives in the city and

the farmer sells in the same city all his produce and buys there

all the merchandise necessary for country use, the ready money

may always remain in the city. The farmer will sell there produce

exceeding half the output of his farm; he will pay his landlord

in the same city the money value of one third of his produce and

the rest to merchants or undertakers for merchandise to be

consumed in the country. Even here, however, as the farmer sells

his produce for lump sums, which are subsequently distributed in

retail purchases, and are again collected to serve for lump

payments to the farmers, the circulation has always the same

effect (subject to its rapidity) as if the farmer took to the

country the money received for his produce and sent it back again

to the city.

       The circulation consists always of this, that the large

sums which the farmer receives on the sale of his produce are

split up in detail and then brought together again to make large

payments. Whether this money go partly out of the city or remain

there entirely it may be regarded as the circulating medium

between city and country. All the circulation takes place between

the inhabitants of the state, and they are all fed and maintained

in every way from the produce of the soil and raw materials of

the country.

       It is true that the wool, for example, which is brought

from the country, when made up into cloth in the city is worth

four times its former value. But this increase of value, which is

the price of the labour of the workmen and manufactures in the

city, is exchanged for the country produce which serves for their

maintenance.



   Chapter Four

   Further Reflection on the Rapidity or Slowness of the

Circulation of Money in Exchange



       Let us suppose that the farmer pays 1300 ounces of silver

a quarter to his landlord, who pays out of it every week 100

ounces to the baker, butcher, etc. and that these every week pay

the farmer these hundred ounces, so that the farmer collects

every week as much money as the landlord spends. In this case

there will be only 100 ounces in constant circulation, the other

1200 ounces will remain in hand partly with the landlord and

partly with the farmer.

       But it rarely happens that the landlords spend their rents

in a fixed and regular proportion. In London as soon as a

landlord receives his rent he puts most of it into the hands of a

goldsmith or banker, who lends it at interest, so that this part

is in circulation. Or else the landlord spends a good part of it

upon various things needful for his household, and before he gets

his next quarter's rent he will perhaps borrow money. Thus the

money of the first quarter's rent will circulate in a thousand

ways before it can be brought together again and replaced in the

hands of the farmer to serve to pay his second quarter.

       When the time for paying this second quarter has come the

farmer will sell his produce in large amounts, and those who buy

his cattle, corn, hay, etc. will already have collected in detail

the price of them. The money of the first quarter will thus have

circulated in the rivulets of small traffic for nearly three

months, before being collected by the retail dealers, and these

will give it to the farmer who will pay his second quarter

therewith. It would seem from this that less ready money than we

have supposed would suffice for the circulation of a state.

       Barters made by evaluation do not all call for much ready

cash. If a brewer supplies a clothier with the beer for his

family, and if the clothier in turn supplies the brewer with the

clothes he needs, both at the market price current on the day of

delivery, the only ready money needed between these two traders

is the amount of the difference between the two transactions.

       If a merchant in a market town sends to a correspondent in

the city country produce for sale, and if the latter sends back

to the former the city merchandise consumed in the country, the

business lasting the whole year between these two dealers, and

mutual confidence leading them to place to their accounts their

produce and merchandise at their respective market prices, the

only real money needed for this commerce will be the balance

which one owes to the other at the end of the year. Even then

this balance may be carried forward to the next year, without the

actual payment of any money. All the undertakers of a city, who

have continually business with each other, may practise this

method. And these exchanges by valuation seem to economise much

cash in circulation, or at least to accelerate its movement by

making it unnecessary in several hands through which it would

need to pass without this confidence and this method of exchange

by valuation. It is not without reason that it is commonly said

commercial credit makes money less scarce.

       The goldsmiths and public bankers, whose notes pass

current in payment like ready money, contribute also to the speed

of circulation, which would be retarded if money were needed in

all the payments for which these notes suffice: and although

these goldsmiths and bankers always keep in hand a good part of

the actual money they have received for their notes, they also

put into circulation a considerable amount of this actual money

as I shall explain later in dealing with public banks.

       All these reflections seem to prove that the circulation

of a state could be conducted with much less actual money than I

have supposed necessary; but the following inductions appear to

counterbalance them and to contribute to the slowing down of the

circulation.

       I will first observe that all country produce is furnished

by labour which may possibly, as already often suggested, be

carried on with little or no actual money. But all merchandise is

made in cities or market towns by the labour of men who must be

paid in actual money. If a house has cost 100,000 ounces of

silver to build, all this sum or the greatest part of it, must

have been paid every week in small amounts to the brickmaker,

masons, carpenters, etc. directly or indirectly. The expense of

the humble families, who are always the most in number in a city,

is necessarily made with actual money. In these small exchanges

credit, book debts, and bills cannot have a place. The merchants

or retailers demand cash for the things they supply: or if they

give credit to a family for a few days or months they require a

substantial money payment. A carriage builder who sells a

carriage for 400 ounces of silver in notes, will have to change

them into actual money to pay for all the materials and the men

who have worked on his carriage if they have worked on credit,

or, if he has paid them already, to start a new one. The sale of

the carriage will leave his profit and he will spend this to

maintain his family. He could not be satisfied with notes unless

he can put something aside or lay it out at interest.

       The consumption of the inhabitants of a state is, in a

sense, entirely for food. Lodging, clothing, furniture, etc.

correspond to the food of the men who have worked upon them; and

in the cities all drink and food are of necessity paid for in

hard cash. In the families of landowners in the city food is paid

for every day or every week: wine in their families is paid for

every week or every month; hats, stockings, shoes, etc. are

ordinarily paid for in actual money, at least the payments

correspond to cash for the men who have worked upon them. All the

sums which serve to pay large amounts are divided, distributed,

and spread in small payments corresponding to the maintenance of

the workmen, manservants, etc. and all these sums are necessarily

collected and reunited by the undertakers and retailers who are

employed on the subsistence of the inhabitants to make large

payments when they buy the products of the farmers. An alehouse

keeper collects by sols and livres the sums he pays to the

brewer, who uses them to pay for all the grain and materials he

buys from the country. One cannot imagine anything is bought for

ready money in a state, like furniture, merchandise, etc. the

value of which does not correspond to the maintenance of those

who have worked upon it.

       Circulation in the cities is carried out by undertakers

and always corresponds directly or indirectly to the subsistence

of the menservants, workmen, etc. It is not conceivable that it

can be effected in small detail without cash. Notes may serve as

counters in large payments for a certain time; but when the large

sums come to be distributed and spread into small transactions,

as is always the case sooner or later in the course of

circulation in a city, notes cannot serve the purpose and cash is

needed.

       All this being presupposed, all the classes in a state who

practice some economy, save and keep out of circulation small

amounts of cash till they have enough to invest at interest or

profit. Many miserly and timid people bury and hoard cash for

considerable periods.

       Many landowners, undertakers and others, always keep some

cash in their pockets or safes against unforeseen emergencies and

not to be run out of money. If a gentleman makes it his remark

that he never had less than 20 louis in his pocket throughout the

whole year, it may be said that this pocket has kept 20 louis out

of circulation for a year. One does not like to spend up to the

last sou, one is glad not be completely denuded, and to receive a

new instalment before paying even a debt with the money one has.

       The capital of minors and of suitors is often deposited in

cash and kept out of circulation.

       Beside the large payments which pass through the hands of

the farmers in the quarterly terms of the year there are many

others from one undertaker to another in the same terms, and

others at different times from borrowers to lenders of money. All

these sums are collected in retail trade, are spread abroad anew

and come back sooner or later to the farmer: but they seem to

require a more considerable amount of cash for circulation than

if these large payments were made in different times from those

when the farmers are paid for their produce.

       In fine there is so great a variety in the different

orders of the inhabitants of the state and in the corresponding

circulation of actual money, that it seems impossible to lay down

anything precise or exact as to the proportion of money

sufficient for the circulation. I have adduced so many examples

and inductions only to make it clear that I am not far out of the

truth in my conclusion "that the actual money necessary for the

circulation of the state corresponds nearly to the value of the

third of all the annual rents of the landlords." When the

landlords have a rent which amounts to half the produce or more

than a third, a greater quantity of actual money is needed for

circulation, other things being equal. When there is great

confidence in the banks and in book credits less money will

suffice, as also when the rapidity of circulation is accelerated

in any other way. But I shall show later that public banks do not

afford so many advantages as is usually supposed.





  Chapter Five

   Of the Inequality of the circulation of hard money in a state 



      The city always supplies various merchandises to the

country, and the landowners who reside in the city should always

receive there about a third of the produce of their land. The

country thus owes to the city more than half the produce of the

land. This debt would always exceed one half if all landowners

lived in the city, but as several of the least important live in

the country I suppose that the balance or debt which continually

returns from the country to the city is equal to half the produce

of the land and is paid in the city by half the products of the

country transported to it and sold to pay this debt.

       But all the countryside of a state or kingdom owes a

constant balance to the capital, as well for the rents of the

more considerable landowners who reside there as for the taxes of

the state or crown, most of which are spent in the capital. All

the provincial cities owe a constant balance to the capital,

either for the state, upon houses or consumption, or for the

different commodities which they draw from the capital. It

happens also that several individuals and landowners who live in

the provincial cities go to spend some time in the capital, for

pleasure, or for the judgment of their lawsuits in final appeal,

or because they send their children thither for a fashionable

education. Consequently all these expenses incurred in the

capital are drawn from the provincial cities.

       It may therefore be said that all the countryside and all

the cities of a state owe regularly and annually a balance or

debt to the capital. But as it is all paid in money it is evident

that the provinces always owe considerable sums to the capital;

for the products and commodities which the provinces send to the

capital are sold there for money, and with this money the debt or

balance in question is paid.

       Suppose now that the circulation of money in the provinces

and in the capital is equal both in quantity of money and speed

of circulation. The balance will be first sent to the capital in

cash and this will diminish the quantity of money in the

provinces and increase it in the capital, and consequently the

raw material and commodities will be dearer in the capital than

in the provinces, on account of the greater abundance of money in

the capital. The difference of prices in the capital and in the

provinces must pay for the costs and risks of transport,

otherwise cash will be sent to the capital to pay the balance and

this will go on till the prices in the capital and the provinces

come to the level of these costs and risks. Then the merchants or

undertakers of the market towns will buy at a low price the

products of the villages and will have them carried to the

capital to be sold there at a higher price: and this difference

of price will necessarily pay for the upkeep of the horses and

menservants and the profit of the undertaker, or else he would

cease his enterprise.

       It will follow from this that the price of raw produce of

equal quality will always be higher in the country places which

are nearest the capital than in those more distant in proportion

to the costs and risks of transport; and that the countries

adjacent to seas and rivers flowing into the capital will get a

better price for their produce in proportion than those which are

distant (other things being equal) because water transport is

less expensive than land transport. On the other hand the

products and small wares which cannot be consumed in the capital,

because they are not suitable or cannot be sent thither on

account of their bulk, or because they would be spoiled on the

way, will be infinitely cheaper in the country and distant

provinces than in the capital, owing to the amount of money

circulating for them which is much smaller in the distant

provinces.

       So it is that new laid eggs, game, fresh butter, wood

fuel, etc. will generally be much cheaper in the district of

Poitou, whilst corn, cattle and horses will be dearer at Paris

only by the difference of the cost and risk of carriage and the

dues for entering the city.

       It would be easy to make an infinite number of inductions

of the same kind to justify by experience the necessity of an

inequality in the circulation of money in the different provinces

of a great state or kingdom, and to show that this inequality is

always relative to the balance or debt which belongs to the

capital.

       If we suppose that the balance due to the capital amounts

to one fourth of the produce of the land of all the provinces of

the state the best use that can be made of the land would be to

employ the country bordering on the capital to produce the kinds

of produce which could not be drawn from distant provinces

without much expense or deterioration. This is in fact what

always takes place. The market prices of the capital serving as a

standard for the farmers to employ the land for such or such a

purpose they use the nearest, when suitable, for market gardens,

pasture, etc.

       So far as possible manufactures of cloth, linen, lace,

etc. ought to be set up in the remote provinces; and, in the

neighbourhood of coal mines or forest, which are useless by their

distance, manufactures of tools of iron, tin, copper, etc. In

this way finished manufactures could be sent to the capital with

much less cost of carriage than the raw materials to be worked up

in the capital and the subsistence of the artisans who would work

upon them there. This would save a quantity of horses and

waggoners who would be better employed for the benefit of the

state. The land would serve to maintain on the spot workmen and

useful mechanics; and a multitude of horses would be saved who

serve only upon unnecessary transport. In this way the distant

lands would yield higher rents to the proprietors and the

inequality of the circulation of the provinces and the capital

would be better proportioned and less considerable.

        Nevertheless to set up manufactures in this way would

need not only much encouragement and capital but also some way to

ensure a regular and constant demand, either in the capital

itself or in foreign countries, whose exports in return may be of

service to the capital, to pay for the merchandise which it draws

from these foreign countries or for the return of silver in kind.

       When these manufactures are set up perfection is not at

once attained. If some other province have them better or cheaper

or owing to the vicinity of the capital or the convenience of a

sea or river communication have their transport considerably

facilitated, the manufactures in question will have no success.

All these circumstances have to be considered in setting up a

manufactory. I have not  proposed to treat of them in this essay,

but only to suggest that so far as practicable manufactures

should be set up in provinces distant from the capital, to render

them more considerable and to bring about there a circulation of

money less disproportionate to that of the capital.

        For when a distant province has no manufactory and

produces only ordinary raw materials without water communication

with the capital or the ocean, it is astonishing how scarce money

is there compared with that which circulates in the capital and

how little the best lands produce to the prince and to the

proprietors who reside in the capital.

        The wines of Provence and of Languedoc sent to the north

round the Straits of Gibraltar by long and difficult navigation,

after having passed through the hands of several dealers yield

very little to the Paris owners of the land.

        It is however necessary that these distant provinces

should send their produce, in spite of all the drawbacks of

transport and distance to the capital or elsewhere either in the

state or in foreign countries in order that the returns should

provide for payment of the balance due to the capital. But these

products would be mostly consumed on the spot if there were works

or factories to pay this balance, in which case the number of

inhabitants would be much larger.

       When the province pays the balance only with its produce

which yields so little in the capital having regard to the

expenses of distance, it is evident that the proprietor living in

the capital pays the produce of much land in the country to

receive little in the capital. This arises from the inequality of

money, and this inequality is owing to the constant balance due

from the province to the capital.

       At present if a state or kingdom which supplies all

foreign countries with work of its own manufacture does so much

of this commerce that it draws every year a constant balance of

money from abroad, the circulation will become more considerable

there than in foreign countries, money will be more plentiful

there, and consequently land and labour will gradually become

dearer there. It will follow that in all the branches of commerce

the state in question will exchange a smaller amount of land and

labour with the foreigner for a larger amount, so long as these

circumstances continue.

       But if some foreigner reside in the state in question he

will be in about the same situation and circumstances as the

proprietor at Paris who has his land in distant provinces.

       France, since the erection in 1646 of manufactories of

cloth and other works since set up, appeared to trade, at least

in part, in the way described. Since the decay of France, England

has taken possession of this trade; and all states appear

flourishing only by the larger or smaller part they have in it.

The inequality of the circulation of money in the different

states constitutes the inequality of their respective power,

other things being equal; and this inequality of circulation is

always respective to the balance of foreign trade.

       It is easy to judge from what has been said in this

chapter that the assessment by taxes of the royal tithe, made by

Mr de Vauban, would be neither advantageous nor practicable. If

the taxes on land were levied in money proportionable to the

rents of the proprietors, it would be fairer. But I must not

wander from my subject to show the inconvenience and

impossibility of Mr de Vauban's proposal.





     Chapter Six

   Of the increase and decrease in the quantity of hard money in

a State 



       If mines of gold or silver be found in a state and

considerable quantities of minerals drawn from them, the

proprietors of these mines, the undertaker, and all those who

work there, will not fail to increase their expenses in

proportion to the wealth and profit they make: they will also

lend at interest the sums of money which they have over and above

what they need to spend.

       All this money, whether lent or spent, will enter into

circulation and will not fail to raise the price of products and

merchandise in all the channels of circulation which it enters.

Increased money will bring about increased expenditure and this

will cause an increase of market prices in the highest years of

exchange and gradually in the lowest.

       Everybody agrees that the abundance of money or its

increase in exchange, raises the price of everything. The

quantity of money brought from American to Europe for the last

two centuries justifies this truth by experience.

       Mr Locke lays it down as a fundamental maxim that the

quantity of produce and merchandise in proportion to the quantity

of money serves as the regulator of market price. I have tried to

elucidate his idea in the preceding chapters: he has clearly seen

that the abundance of money makes everything dear, but he has not

considered how it does so. The great difficulty of this question

consists in knowing in what way and in what proportion the

increase of money raises prices.

       I have already remarked that an acceleration or greater

rapidity in circulation of money in exchange, is equivalent to an

increase of actual money up to a point. I have also observed that

the increase or decrease of prices in a distant market, home or

foreign, influences the actual market prices. On the other hand

money flows in detail through so many channels that it seems

impossible not to lose sight of it seeing that having been

amassed to make large sums it is distributed in little rills of

exchange, and then gradually accumulated again to make large

payments. For these operations it is constantly necessary to

change coins of gold, silver and copper according to the activity

of exchange. It is also usually the case that the increase or

decrease of actual money in a state is not perceived because it

flow abroad, or is brought into the state, by such imperceptible

means and proportions that it is impossible to know exactly the

quantity which enters or leaves the state.

       However all these operations pass under our eyes and

everybody takes part in them. I may therefore venture to offer a

few observations on the subject, even though I may not be able to

give an account which is exact and precise.

       I consider in general that an increase of actual money

causes in a state a corresponding increase of consumption which

gradually brings about increased prices.

       If the increase of actual money comes from mines of gold

or silver in the state the owner of these mines, the adventurers,

the smelters, refiners, and all the other workers will increase

their expenses in proportion to their gains. They will consume in

their households more meat, wine, or beer than before, will

accustom themselves to wear better cloths, finer linen, to have

better furnished houses and other choicer commodities. They will

consequently give employment to several mechanics who had not so

much to do before and who for the same reason will increase their

expenses: all this increase of expense in meat, wine, wool, etc.

diminishes of necessity the share of the other inhabitants of the

state who do not participate at first in the wealth of the mines

in question. The altercations of the market, or the demand for

meat, wine, wool, etc. being more intense than usual, will not

fail to raise their prices. These high prices will determine the

farmers to employ more land to produce them in another year:

these same farmers will profit by this rise of prices and will

increase the expenditure of their families like the others. Those

then who will suffer from this dearness and increased consumption

will be first of all the landowners, during the term of their

leases, then their domestic servants and all the workmen or fixed

wage-earners who support their families on their wages. All these

must diminish their expenditure in proportion to the new

consumption, which will compel a large number of them to emigrate

to seek a living elsewhere. The landowners will dismiss many of

them, and the rest will demand an increase of wages to enable

them to live as before. It is thus, approximately, that a

considerable increase of money from the mines increases

consumption, and by diminishing the number of inhabitants entails

a greater expense among those who remain.

       If more money continues to be drawn from the mines all

prices will owing to this abundance rise to such a point that not

only will the landowners raise their rents considerably when the

leases expire and resume their old style of living, increasing

proportionably the wages their servants, but the mechanics and

workmen will raise the prices of their articles so high that

there will be a considerable profit in buying them from the

foreigner who makes them much more cheaply. This will naturally

induce several people to import many articles made in foreign

countries, where found very cheap: this will gradually ruin the

mechanics and manufacturers of the state who will not be maintain

themselves there by working at such low owing to the dearness of

living.

       When the excessive has diminished the inhabitants of a

state, those who remain to a too large expenditure, raised

produce of the land and the labour of workmen to excessive

prices, ruined the manufactures of the state by use of foreign

productions on the part of landlords and mine workers, the money

produced by the mines will necessarily go abroad to pay for the

imports: this will gradually impoverish the state and render it

in some sort dependent on the Foreigner to whom it is obliged to

send money every year as it is drawn from the mines. The great

circulation of money, which was general at the beginning, ceases:

poverty and misery follow and the labour of the mines appears to

be only to the advantage of those employed upon them and the

Foreigners who profit thereby.

       This is approximately what has happened to Spain since the

discovery of the Indies. As to the Portuguese, since the

discovery of the gold mines of Brazil, they have nearly always

made use of foreign articles and manufactures; and it seems that

they work at the mines only for the account and advantage of

foreigners. All the gold and silver which these two states

extract from the mines does not supply them in circulation with

more precious metal than others. England and France have even

more as a rule.

       Now if the increase of money in the state proceeds from a

balance of foreign trade (i.e. from sending abroad articles and

manufactures in greater value and quantity than is imported and

consequently receiving the surplus in money) this annual increase

of money will enrich a great number of merchants and Undertakers

in the state, and will give employment to numerous mechanics and

workmen who furnish the commodities sent to the foreigner from

whom the money is drawn. This will increase gradually the

consumption of these industrial inhabitants and will raise the

price of land and labour. But the industrious who are eager to

acquire property will not at first increase their expense: they

will wait till they have accumulated a good sum from which they

can draw an assured interest, independently of their trade. When

a large number of the inhabitants have acquired considerable

fortunes from this money, which enters the state regularly and

annually, they will, without fail, increase their consumption and

raise the price of everything. Though this dearness involves them

in a greater expense than they at first contemplated they will

for the most part continue so long as their capital lasts; for

nothing is easier or more agreeable than to increase the family

expenses, nothing more difficult or disagreeable than to retrench

them.

       If an annual and continuous balance has brought about in a

state a considerable increase of money it will not fail to

increase consumption, to raise the price of evening and even to

diminish the number of inhabitants unless additional produce is

drawn from abroad proportionable to the increased consumption.

Moreover it is usual in states which have acquired a considerable

abundance of money to draw many things from neighbouring

countries where money is rare and consequently everything is

cheap: but as money must be sent for this the balance of trade

will become smaller. The cheapness of land and labour in the

foreign countries where money is rare will naturally cause the

erection of manufactories and works similar to those of the

state, but which will not at first be so perfect nor so highly

valued.

       In this situation the state may subsist in abundance of

money, consume all its own produce and also much foreign produce

and over and above all this maintain a small balance of trade

against the foreigner or at least keep the balance level for many

years, that is import in exchange for its work and manufactures

as much money from these foreign countries as it has to send them

for the commodities or products of the land it takes from them.

If the state is a maritime state the facility and cheapness of

its shipping for the transport of its work and manufactures into

foreign countries may compensate in some sort the high price of

labour caused by the too great abundance of money; so that the

work and manufactures of this state, dear though they be, will

sell in foreign countries cheaper sometimes than the manufactures

of another state where labour is less highly paid.

       The cost of transport increases a good deal the prices of

things sent to distant countries; but these costs are very

moderate in maritime states, where there is regular shipping to

all foreign ports so that Ships are nearly always found there

ready to sail which take on board all cargoes confided to them at

a very reasonable freight.

       It is not so in states where navigation does not Nourish.

There it is necessary to build ships expressly for the carrying

trade and this sometimes absorbs all the profit; and navigation

there is always very expensive, which entirely discourages trade.

       England today consumes not only the greatest part of its

own small produce but also much foreign produce, such as Silks,

Wines, Fruit, Linen in great quantity, etc. while she sends

abroad only the produce of her mines, her work and manufactures

for the most part, and dear though labour be owing to the

abundance of money, she does not fail to sell her articles in

distant countries, owing to the advantage of her shipping, at

prices as reasonable as in France where these same articles are

much cheaper.

       The increased quantity of money in circulation in a state

may also be caused, without balance of trade, by subsidies paid

to this state by foreign powers, by the expenses of several

ambassadors, or of travellers whom political reasons or curiosity

or pleasure may induce to reside there for some time, by the

transfer of the property and fortune of some Families who from

motives of religious liberty or other causes quit their own

country to settle down in this state. In all these cases the sums

which come into the state always cause an increased expense and

consumption there and consequently raise the prices of all things

in the channels of exchange into which money enters.

       Suppose a quarter of the inhabitants of the state consume

daily meat, wine, beer, etc. and supply themselves frequency with

cloths, linen, etc. before the increase in money, but that after

the increase a third or half of the inhabitants consume these

same things, the prices of them will not fail to rise, and the

dearness of meat will induce several of those who formed a

quarter of the state to consume less of it than usual. A man who

eats three pounds of meat a day will manage with two pounds, but

he feels the reduction, while the other half of the inhabitants

who ate hardly any meat will not feel the reduction. Bread will

in truth go up gradually because of this increased consumption,

as I have often suggested, but it will be less dear in proportion

than meat. The increased price of meat causes diminished

consumption on the part of a small section of the people, and so

is felt; but the of a small section of the people, and so is

felt; but the increased price of bread diminishes the share of

all the inhabitants, and so is less felt. If 100,000 extra people

come to live in a state of 10 millions of inhabitants, their

extra consumption of bread will amount to only pound in 100 which

must be subtracted from the old inhabitants; but when a man

instead of 100 pounds of bread consumes 99 for his subsistence he

hardly feels this reduction.

       When the consumption of meat increases the farmers add to

their pastures to get more meat, and this diminishes the arable

land and consequently the amount of corn. But what generally

causes meat to become dearer in proportion than Bread is that

ordinarily the free import of foreign corn is permitted while the

import of Cattle is absolutely forbidden, as in England, or heavy

import duties are imposed as in other states. This is the reason

why the rents of meadows and pastures go up in England, in the

abundance of money, to three times more than the rents of arable

land.

       There is no doubt that Ambassadors, Travellers, and

Families who come to settle in the state, increase consumption

there and that prices rise in all the channels of exchange where

money is introduced.

       As to subsidies which the state has received from foreign

powers, either they are hoarded for state necessities or are put

into circulation. If we suppose them hoarded they do not concern

my argument for I am considering only money in circulation.

Hoarded money, plate, Church treasures, etc. are wealth which the

state turns to service in extremity, but are of no present

utility. If the state puts into circulation the subsidies in

question it can only be by spending them and this ill very

certainly increase consumption and send up all prices. Whoever

receives this money will set it in motion in the principal affair

of life, which is the food, either of himself or of some other,

since to this everything corresponds directly or indirectly.



    Chapter Seven

  Continuation of the same subject 



       As gold, silver, and copper have an intrinsic value

proportionable to the land and labour which enter into their

production at the mines added to the cost of their importation or

introduction into states which have no mines, the quantity of

money, as of all other commodities, determines its value in the

bargaining of the market against other things.

       If England begins for the first time to make use of gold,

silver, and copper in exchanges money will be valued according to

the quantity of it in circulation proportionably to its power of

exchange against all other merchandise and produce, and their

value will be arrived at roughly by the altercations of the

markets. On the footing of this estimation the landowners and

Undertakers will fix the wages of their Domestic Servants and

Workmen at so much a day or a year, so that they and their

families may be able to live on the wages they receive.

       Suppose now that the residence of Ambassadors and foreign

travellers in England have introduced as much money into the

circulation there as there was before; this money will at first

pass into the hands of various mechanics, Domestic Servants,

Undertakers and others who have had a share in providing the

equipages, amusements, etc. of these Foreigners; the

manufacturers, farmers, and other Undertakers will feel the

effect of this increase of money which will habituate a great

number of people to a larger expense than before, and this will

in consequence send up market prices. Even the children of these

Undertakers and mechanics will embark upon new expense: in this

abundance of money their Fathers will give them a little money

for their petty pleasures, and with this they will buy cakes and

patties, and this new quantity of money will spread itself in

such a way that many who lived without handling money will now

have some. Many purchases which used to be made on credit will

now be made for cash, and there will therefore be greater

rapidity in the circulation of money in England than there was

before.

       From all this I conclude that by doubling the quantity of

money in a state the prices of products and merchandise are not

always doubled. A River which runs and winds about in its bed

will not flow with double the speed when the amount of its water

is doubled.

       The proportion of the dearness which the increased

quantity of money brings about in the state will depend on the

turn which this money will impart to consumption and circulation.

Through whatever hands the money which is introduced may pass it

will naturally increase the consumption; but this consumption

will be more or less great according to circumstances. It will be

directed more or less to certain kinds of products or merchandise

according to the idea of those who acquire the money. Market

prices will rise more for certain things than for others however

abundant the money may be. In England the price of meat might be

tripled while the price of corn went up only one fourth.

       In England it is always permitted to bring in corn from

foreign countries, but not cattle. For this reason however great

the increase of hard money may be in England the price of corn

can only be raised above the price in other countries where money

is scarce by the cost and risks of importing corn from these

foreign countries.

       It is not the same with the price of Cattle, which will

necessarily be proportioned to the quantity of money offered for

meat in proportion to the quantity of meat and the number of

Cattle bred there.

       An ox weighing 800 pounds sells in Poland and Hungary for

two or three ounces of silver, but commonly sells in the London

market for more than 40. Yet the bushel of flour does not sell in

London for double the price in Poland and Hungary.

       Increase of money only increases the price of products and

merchandise by the difference of the cost of transport, when this

transport is allowed. But in many cases the carriage would cost

more than the thing is worth, and so timber is useless in many

places. This cost of carriage is the reason why milk, fresh

butter, salads, game, etc. are almost given away in the provinces

distant from the capital.

       I conclude that an increase of money circulating in a

state always causes there an increase of consumption and a higher

standard of expense. But the dearness caused by this money does

not affect equally all the kinds of products and merchandise,

proportionably to the quantity of money, unless what is added

continues in the same circulation as the money before, that is to

say unless those who offer in the market one ounce of silver be

the same and only ones who now offer two ounces when the amount

of money in circulation is doubled in quantity, and that is

hardly ever the case. I conceive that when a large surplus of

money is brought into a state the new money gives a new turn to

consumption and even a new speed to circulation. But it is not

possible to say exactly to what extent.



    Chapter Eight

 Further Reflections on the same subject



       We have seen that the quantity of money circulating in a

state may be increased by working the mines which are found in

it, by subsidies from foreign powers, by the immigration of

Families of foreigners, by the residence of Ambassadors and

Travellers, but above all by a regular and annual balance of

trade from supplying merchandise to Foreigners and drawing from

them at least part of the price in gold and silver. It is by this

last means that a state grows most substantially, especially when

its trade is accompanied and supported by ample navigation and by

a considerable raw produce at home supplying the material

necessary for the goods and manufactures sent abroad.

       As however the continuation of this Commerce gradually

introduces a great abundance of money and little by little

increases consumption, and as to meet this much Foreign produce

must be brought in, part of the annual balance goes out to pay

for it. On the other hand the habit of spending increasing the

employment of labourers the prices of manufactured goods always

go up. Without fail some foreign countries endeavour to set up

for themselves the same kinds of manufactures, and so cease to

buy those of the state in question; and though these new

establishments of crafts and manufactures be not at first perfect

they slacken and even prevent the exportation of those of the

neighbouring state into their own country where they can be got

cheaper.

       Thus it is that the state begins to lose some branches of

its profitable trade: and many of its workmen and mechanics who

see labour Fallen off leave the state to find more work in the

countries with the new manufacture. In spite of this diminution

in the balance of trade the custom of importing various products

will continue. The articles and manufactures of the state having

a great reputation, and the facility of navigation affording the

means of sending them at little cost into distant countries, the

state will for many years keep the upper hand over the new

manufactures of which we have spoken and will still maintain a

small Balance of trade, or at least will keep it even. If however

some other maritime state tries to perfect the same articles and

its navigation at the same time it will owing to the cheapness of

its manufactures take away several branches of trade from the

state in question. In consequence this state will begin to lose

its balance of trade and will be forced to send every year a part

of its money abroad to pay for its importations.

       Moreover, even if the state in question could keep a

balance of trade in its greater abundance of money it is

reasonable to suppose that this abundance will not arrive without

many wealthy individuals springing up who will plunge into

luxury. They will buy pictures and gems from the foreigner, will

procure their silks and rare objects, and set such an example of

luxury in the state that in spite of the advantage of its

ordinary trade its money will flow abroad annually to pay for

this luxury. This will gradually impoverish the state and cause

it to pass from great power into great weakness.

       When a state has arrived at the highest point of wealth (I

assume always that the comparative wealth of states consists

principally in the respective quantities of money which they

possess) it will inevitably fall into poverty by the ordinary

course of things. The too great abundance of money, which so long

as it lasts forms the power of states, throws them back

imperceptibly but naturally into poverty. Thus it would seem that

when a state expands by trade and the abundance of money raises

the price of land and labour, the Prince or the Legislator ought

to withdraw money from circulation, keep it for emergencies, and

try to retard its circulation by every means except compulsion

and bad faith, so as to forestall the too great dearness of its

articles and prevent the drawbacks of luxury.

       But as it is not easy to discover the time opportune for

this, nor to know when money has become more abundant than it

ought to be for the good and preservation of the advantages of

the state, the Princes and Heads of Republics, who do not concern

themselves much with this sort of knowledge, attach themselves

only to make use of the facility which they find through the

abundance of their state revenues, to extend their power and to

insult other countries on the most frivolous pretexts. And all

things considered they do not perhaps so badly in working to

perpetuate the glory of their reigns and administrations, and to

leave monuments of their power and wealth; for since, according

to the natural course of humanity, the state must collapse of

itself they do but accelerate its fall a little. Nevertheless it

seems that they ought to endeavour to make their power last all

the time of their own administration.

       It does not need a great many years to raise abundance to

the highest point in a state, still fewer are needed to bring it

to poverty for lack of commerce and manufactures. Not to speak of

the power and fall of the Republic of Venice, the Hanseatic

Towns, Flanders and Brabant, the Dutch Republic, etc. who have

succeeded each other in the profitable branches of trade, one may

say that the power of France has been on the increase only from

1646 (when manufactures of cloths were set up there, which were

until then imported) to 1684 when a number of Protestant

Undertakers and artisans were driven out of it, and that kingdom

has done nothing but recede since this last date.

       To judge of the abundance and scarcity of money in

circulation. I know no better measure than the leases and rents

of landowners. When land is let at high rents it is a sign that

there is plenty of money in the state; but when land has to be

let much lower it shows, other things being equal, that money is

scarce. I have read in an Etat de la France that the acre of

vineyard which was let in 1660 near Mantes, and therefore not far

from the capital of France, for 200 livres tournois in money of

full weight, only let in 1700 for 100 livres tournois in lighter

money, though the silver brought from the West Indies in the

interval should naturally have sent up the price of land in

Europe.

       The author [of the Etat] attributes this fall in rent to

defective consumption. And it seems that he had in fact observed

that the consumption of Wine had diminished. But I think he has

mistaken the effect for the cause. The cause was a greater rarity

of money in France, and the effect of this was naturally a

falling off in consumption. In this Essay I have always

suggested, on the contrary, that abundant money naturally

increases consumption and contributes above everything to the

cultivation of land. When abundant money raises produce to

respectable prices the inhabitants make haste to work to acquire

it; but they are not in the same hurry to acquire produce or

merchandise beyond what is needed for their maintenance.

       It is clear that every state which has more money in

circulation than its neighbours has an advantage over them so

long as it maintains this abundance of money.

       In the first place in all branches of trade it gives less

land and labour than it receives: the price of land and labour

being everywhere reckoned in money is higher in the state where

money is most abundant. Thus the state in question receives

sometimes the produce of two acres of land in exchange for that

of one acre, and the work of two men for that of only one. It is

because of this abundance of money in circulation in London that

the work of one English embroiderer costs more than that of 10

Chinese embroiderers, though the Chinese embroider much better

and turn out more work in a day. In Europe one is astonished how

these Indians can live, working so cheap, and how the admirable

stuffs which they send us cost so little.

      In the second place, the revenues of the state where money

abounds, are raised more easily and in comparatively much larger

amount. This gives the state, in case of war or dispute, the

means to gain all sorts of advantages over its adversaries with

whom money is scarce.

        If of two Princes who war upon each other for the

sovereignty or conquest of a state one have much money and the

other little money but many estates which may be worth twice as

much as all the money of his enemy, the first will be better able

to attach to himself Generals and Officers by gifts of money than

the second will be by giving twice the value in lands and

estates. Grants of land are subject to challenge and revocation

and cannot be relied upon so well as the money which is received.

With money munitions of war and food are bought even from the

enemies of the state. Money can be given without witnesses for

secret service. Lands, Produce, merchandise would not serve for

these purposes, not even jewels or diamonds, because they are

easily recognised. After all it seems to me that the comparative

power and wealth of states consist, other things being equal, in

the greater or less abundance of money circulating in them hic et

nunc.

       It remains to mention two other methods of increasing the

amount of money in active circulation in a state The first is

when Undertakers and private individual borrow money from their

foreign correspondents a interest, or individuals abroad send

their money into the state to buy shares or government stocks

there. This often amounts to very considerable sums upon which

the state must annually pay interest to these foreigners These

methods of increasing the money in the state make it more

abundant there and diminish the rate of interest. By means of

this money the Undertakers in the state find it possible to

borrow more cheaply to set people on work and to establish

manufactories in the hope of profit. The Artisans and all those

through whose hands this money passes, consume more than they

would have done if they had not been employed by means of this

money, which consequently increases prices just as if it belonged

to the state, and through the increased consumption or expense

thus caused the public revenues derived from taxes on consumption

are augmented. Sums lent to the state in this way bring with them

many present advantages, but the end of them is always burdensome

and harmful. The state must pay the interest to the foreigners

every year, and besides this is at the mercy of the foreigners

who can always put it into difficulty when they take it into

their heads to withdraw their capital. It will certainly arrive

that they will want to withdraw it at the moment when the state

has most need of it, as when preparations for war are in hand and

a hitch is feared. The interest paid to the foreigner is always

much more considerable than the increase of pubic revenue which

his money occasions. These loans of money are often seen to pass

from one country to another according to the confidence of

investors in the states to which they are sent. But to tell the

truth it most commonly happens that states loaded with these

loans, who have paid heavy interest on them for many years, fall

at length by bankruptcy into inability to pay the capital. As

soon as distrust is awakened the shares or public stocks fall,

the foreign shareholders do not like to realise them at a loss

and prefer to content themselves with the interest, hoping that

confidence will revive. But sometimes it never revives. In states

which decline into decay the principal object of ministers is

usually to restore confidence and so attract foreign money by

loans of this kind. For unless the ministry fails to keep faith

and to observe its engagements the money of the subjects will

circulate without interruption. It is the money of the foreigners

which has the power of increasing the circulating currency in the

state.

       But the resource of these borrowings which gives a present

ease comes to a bad end and is a fire of straw. To revive a state

it is needful to have a care to bring about the influx of an

annual, a constant and a real balance of trade, to make

flourishing by Navigation the articles and manufactures which can

always be sent abroad cheaper when the state is in a low

condition and has a shortage of money. Merchants are first to

begin to make their fortunes, then the lawyers may get part of

it, the Prince and the farmers of the revenue get a share at the

expense of these, and distribute their graces as they please.

When money becomes too plentiful in the state, luxury will instal

itself and the state will fall into decay.

       Such is approximately the circle which may be run by a

considerable state which has both capital and industrious

inhabitants. An able minister is always able to make it

recommence this round. Not many years are needed to see it tried

and succeed, at least at the beginning which is its most

interesting position. The increased quantity of money in

circulation will be perceived in several ways which my argument

does not allow me to examine now.

       As for states which have not much capital and can only

increase by accidents and conjuncture it is difficult to find

means to make them flourish by trade. No ministers can restore

the Republics of Venice and Holland to the brilliant situation

from which they have fallen. But as to Italy, Spain, France, and

England, however low they may be fallen, they are always capable

of being raised by good administration to a high degree of power

by trade alone, provided it be undertaken separately, for if all

these states were equally well administered they would be great

only in proportion to their respective capital and to the greater

or less industry of their people.

       The last method I can think of to increase the quantity of

money actually circulating in a state is by violence and arms and

this is often blended with the others, since in all Treaties of

Peace it is generally provided to retain the trading rights and

privileges which it has been possible to derive from them. When a

state exacts contributions or makes several other states

tributary to it, this is a very sure method of obtaining their

money. I will not undertake to examine the methods of putting

this device into practice, but will content myself with saying

that all the nations who have flourished in this way have not

failed to decline, like states who have nourished through their

trade. The ancient Romans were more powerful in this wise than

all the other peoples we know of. Yet these same Romans before

losing an inch of the land of their vast states fell into decline

by luxury and brought themselves low by the diminution of the

money which had circulated among them, but which luxury caused to

pass from their great Empire into oriental countries.

       So long as the luxury of the Romans (which did not begin

till after the defeat of Antiochus, King of Asia about A.U.C.

564) was confined to the produce of the land and labour of all

the vast estates of their dominion, the circulation of money

increased instead of diminishing. The public was in possession of

all the mines of gold, silver, and copper in the Empire. They had

the gold mines of Asia, Macedonia, Aquilaea and the rich mines

both of gold and silver of Spain and other countries. They had

several mints where gold, silver and copper coins were struck.

The consumption at Rome of all the articles and merchandise which

they drew from their vast Provinces did not diminish the

circulation of the currency, any more than pictures, statues and

jewels which they drew from them. Though the patricians laid out

excessive amounts for their feasts and paid 15,000 ounces of

silver for a single fish, all that did not diminish the quantity

of money circulating in Rome, seeing that the tribute of the

Provinces regularly brought it back, to say nothing of what

Praetors and Governors brought thither by their extortions. The

amounts annually extracted from the mines merely increased the

circulation at Rome during the whole reign of Augustus. Luxury

was however already on a very great scale, and there was much

eagerness not only for curiosities produced in the Empire but

also for jewels from India, pepper and spices, and all the

rarities of Arabia, and the silks which were not made with raw

materials of the Empire began to be in demand there. The money

drawn from the mines still exceeded however the sums sent out of

the Empire to buy all these things. Nevertheless under Tiberius a

scarcity of money was felt. That Emperor had shut up in his

Treasury 2 milliards and 700 millions of sesterces. To restore

abundance of circulation he had only to borrow 300 millions on

the mortgage of his estates. Caligula in less than one year spent

all this treasure of Tibetius after his death, and it was then

that the abundance of money in circulation was at its highest in

Rome. The fury of luxury kept on increasing. In the time of

Pliny, the historian, there was exported from the Empire, as he

estimated, at least 100 millions of sesterces annually. This was

more than was drawn from the mines. Under Trajan the price of

land had fallen by one-third or more, according to the younger

Pliny, and money continued to decrease until the time of the

Emperor Septimus Severus. It was then so scarce at Rome that the

Emperor made enormous granaries, being unable to collect large

treasure for his enterprises. Thus the Roman Empire fell into

decline through the loss of its money before losing any of its

estates. Behold what luxury brought about and what it always will

bring about in similar circumstances.





  Chapter 9

 Of the Interest of Money and its Causes  



      Just as the prices of things are fixed in the altercations

of the market by the quantity of things offered for sale in

proportion to the quantity of money offered for them, or, what

comes to the same thing, by the proportionate number of sellers

and buyers, so in the same way the interest of money in a state

is settled by the proportionate number of lenders and borrowers.

      Though money passes for a pledge in exchange it does not

multiply itself or beget an interest in simple circulation. The

needs of man seem to have introduced the usage of interest. A man

who lends his money on good security or on mortgage runs at least

the risk of the ill will of the borrower, or of expenses,

lawsuits and losses. But when he lends without security he runs

the risk of losing everything. For this reason needy men must in

the beginning have tempted lenders by the bait of a profit. And

this profit must have been proportionate to the needs of the

borrowers and the fear and avarice of the lenders. This seems to

me the origin of interest. But its constant usage in states seems

based upon the profits which the Undertakers can make out of it.

      The land naturally produces, aided by human labour, 4, 10,

20, 50, 100, 150 times the amount of corn sown upon it, according

to the fertility of the soil and the industry of the inhabitants.

It multiplies fruits and cattle. The farmer who conducts the

working of it has generally two thirds of the produce, one third

pays his expenses and upkeep, the other remains for the profit of

his enterprise.

      If the farmer have enough capital to carry on his

enterprise, if he have the needful tools horses for ploughing,

cattle to make the land he will take for himself after paying all

expense of the produce of his farm. But if a competent labourer

who lives from day to day on his wages and has no capital, can

find some one willing to lend him land or money buy some, he will

be able to give the lender all the third rent, or third part of

the produce of a farm of which he will become the farmer or

Undertaker. However he will think his position improved since he

will find in the second rent and will become master instead man.

If by great economy and pinching himself somewhat of his

necessities he can gradually accumulate some little capital, he

will have every year less to borrow, and will at last arrive at

keeping the whole of his third rent.

      If this new Undertaker finds means to buy corn or cattle on

credit, to be paid off at a long date when he can make money by

the sale of his farm produce, he will gladly pay more than the

market price for ready money. The result will be the same as if

he borrowed cash to buy corn for ready money, paying as interest

the difference between the cash price and the price payable at a

future date. But whether he borrow cash or goods there must be

enough left to him for upkeep or he will become bankrupt. The

risk of this is the reason why he will be required to pay 20 or

30 per cent profit or interest on the amount of money or value of

the produce or merchandise lent to him.

      Again, a master hatter who has capital to carry on his

manufacture of hats, either to rent a house, buy beaver, wool,

dye, etc. or to pay for the subsistence of his workmen every

week, ought not only to find his upkeep in this enterprise, but

also a profit like that of the farmer who has his third part for

himself. This upkeep and the profit should come from the sale of

the hats whose price ought to cover not only the materials but

also the upkeep of the hatter and his workmen and also the profit

in question.

      But a capable journeyman hatter with no capital may

undertake the same manufacture by borrowing money and materials

and abandoning the profit to anybody who is willing to lend him

the money or entrust him with the beaver, wool, etc. for which he

will pay only some time later when he has sold his hats. If when

his bills are due the lender requires his capital back, or if the

wool merchant and other lenders will not grant him further credit

he must give up his business, in which case he may prefer to go

bankrupt. But if he is prudent and industrious he may be able to

prove to his creditors that he has in cash or in hats about the

value of what he has borrowed and they will probably choose to

continue to give him credit and he satisfied for the present with

their interest or profit. In this way he will carry on and will

perhaps gradually save some capital by retrenching a little upon

his necessities. With the aid of this he will have every year

less to borrow, and when he has collected a capital sufficient to

conduct his manufacture, which will always be proportionable to

his sales, the profit will remain to him entirely and he will

grow rich if he does not increase his expenditure.

      It is well to observe that the upkeep of such a

manufacturer is small compared with the sums he borrows in his

trade or with the materials entrusted to him, and therefore the

lenders run no great risk of losing their capital if he is

respectable and hard working: but as it is quite possible that he

is not so the lenders always require from him a profit or

interest of 20 to 30 per cent of the value of their loan. Even

then only those who have a good opinion of him will trust him.

The same inductions may be made with regard to all the masters,

artisans, manufacturers and other Undertakers in the state who

carry on enterprises in which the capital considerably carry on

enterprises in which the capital considerably exceeds the value

of their annual upkeep.

      But if a water-carrier in Paris sets up as the Undertaker

of his own work, all the capital he needs will be the price of

two buckets which he can buy for an ounce of silver and then all

his gains are profit. If by his labour he gains 50 ounces of

silver a year, the amount of his capital or borrowing will be to

that of his profit as 1 to 50. That is he will gain 5000 per cent

while the hatter will gain only 50 per cent and will also have to

pay 20 or 30 per cent to the lender.

      Nevertheless a money lender will prefer to lend 1000 ounces

of silver to a hatmaker at 20 per cent interest rather than to

lend 1000 ounces to 1000 water carriers at 500 per cent interest.

The water carriers will quickly spend on their maintenance not

only the money they gain by their daily labour but all that which

is lent to them. These capitals lent to them are small compared

with what they need for their maintenance: whether they be much

or little employed they can easily spend all they earn. Therefore

it is hardly possible to arrive at the profits of these little

undertakers. It might well be that a water carrier gains 5000 per

cent of the value of the buckets which serve as his capital, even

10,000 per cent if by hard work he gains 100 ounces of silver a

year. But as he may spend on his living 100 ounces just as well

as 50, it is only by knowing what he devotes to his upkeep that

we can find how much he has of clear profit.

      The subsistence and upkeep of Undertakers must always be

deducted before arriving at their profit. We have done this in

the example of the farmer and of the hatmaker, but it can hardly

be determined in the case of the petty Undertakers, who are for

the most part insolvent when they are in debt.

      It is customary for the London brewers to lend a few

barrels of beer to the keepers of ale-houses, and when these pay

for the first barrels to continue to lend them more. If these

ale-houses do a brisk business the brewers sometimes make a

profit of 500 per cent per annum; and I have heard that the big

brewers grow rich when no more than half the ale-houses go

bankrupt upon them in the course of the year.

      All the merchants in a state are in the habit of lending

merchandise or produce for a time to retailers, and proportion

the rate of their profit or interest to that of their risk. This

risk is always great because of the high proportion of the

borrower's upkeep to the loan. For if the borrower or retailer

have not a quick turnover in small business he will quickly go to

ruin and will spend all he has borrowed on his own subsistence

and will therefore be forced into bankruptcy.

      The fishwives, who buy fish at Billingsgate in London to

sell again in the other quarters of the City, generally pay under

a contract made by an expert scrivener, one shilling per guinea,

or twenty-one shillings, interest per week, which amounts to 260

per cent per annum. The market-women at Paris, whose business is

smaller, pay 5 sols for the week's interest on an ecu of 3

livres, which exceeds 430 per cent per annum. And yet there are

few lenders who make a fortune from such high interest.

      These high rates of interest are not only permitted but are

in a way useful and necessary in a state. Those who buy fish in

the streets pay these high interest charges in the increased

price. It suits them and they do not feel it. In like manner an

artisan who drinks a pot of beer and pays for it a price which

enables the brewer to get his 500 per cent profit, is satisfied

with this convenience and does not feel the loss in so small a

detail.

      The Casuists, who seem hardly suitable people to judge the

nature of interest and of matters of trade, have invented a term,

damnum emergens, by whose aid they consent to tolerate these high

rates of interest; and rather than upset the custom and

convenience of society, they have agreed and allowed to those who

lend at great risk to exact in proportion a high rate of

interest: and this without limit, for they would be hard put to

it to find any certain limit since the business depends in

reality on the fears of the lenders and the needs of the

borrowers.

      Maritime merchants are praised when they can make a profit

on their Adventures, even though it be 10,000 per cent; and

whatever profit wholesale merchants may make or stipulate for in

Selling on long credit produce or merchandise to smaller retail

merchants, I have not heard that the Casuists make it a crime.

They are or seem to be a little more scrupulous about loans in

hard cash though it is essentially the same thing. Yet they

tolerate even these loans by a distinction, lucrum cessans, which

they have invented. I understand this to mean that a man who has

been in the habit of making his money bring in 500 per cent in

his trade may demand this profit when he lends it to another.

Nothing is more amusing than the multitude of laws and canons

made in every age on the subject of the interest of money, always

by wiseacres who were hardly acquainted with trade and always

without effect.

      From these examples and inductions it seems that there are

in a state many classes and channels of interest or profit, that

in the lowest classes interest is always highest in proportion to

the greater risk, and that it diminishes from class to class up

to the highest which is that of merchants who are rich and

reputed solvent. The interest demanded in this class is called

the current rate of interest in the state and differs little from

interest on the mortgage of land. The bill of a solvent and solid

merchant is as much esteemed, at least for a short date, as a

lien upon land, because the possibility of a lawsuit or a dispute

on this last makes up for the possibility of the bankruptcy of

the merchant.

      If there were in a state no Undertakers who could make a

profit on the money or goods which they borrow, the use of

interest would probably be less frequent than it is. Only

extravagant and prodigal people would contract loans. But

accustomed as every one is to make use of Undertakers there is a

constant source for Loans and therefore for interest. They are

the Undertakers who cultivate the land and supply bread, meat,

clothes, etc. to all the inhabitants of a city. Those who work on

wages for these Undertakers seek also to set themselves up as

Undertakers, in emulation of each other. The multitude of

Undertakers is much greater among the Chinese, and as they all

have lively intelligence, a genius for enterprise, and great

perseverance in carrying it out, there are among them many

Undertakers who are among us people on fixed wages. They supply

labourers with meals, even in the fields. It is perhaps this

multitude of small Undertakers and others, from class to class,

who finding the means to gain a good deal by ministering to

consumption without its being felt by the consumers, keep up the

rate of interest in the highest class at 30 per cent while it

hardly exceeds 5 per cent in our Europe. At Athens in the time of

Solon interest was at 18 per cent. In the Roman Republic it was

most commonly 12 per cent, but has been known to be 48, 20, 8, 6,

and at the lowest 4 per cent. It was never so low in the free

market as towards the end of the Republic and under Augustus

after the conquest of Egypt. The Emperor Antoninus and Alexander

Severus only reduced interest to 4 per cent by lending public

money on the mortgage of land.





   Chapter 10 and last

  Of the Causes of the Increase and Decrease of the Interest of

Money in a State 



      It is a common idea, received of all those who have written

on trade, that the increased quantity of currency in a state

brings down the price of interest there, because when money is

plentiful it is more easy to find some to borrow. This idea is

not always true or accurate. For proof it needs only to be

recalled that in 1720, nearly all the money in England was

brought to London and over and above this the number of notes put

out accelerated the movement of money extraordinarily. Yet this

abundance of money and currency instead of lowering the current

rate of interest which was before at 5 per cent and under, served

only to increase the rate which was carried up to 50 and 60 per

cent. It is easy to account for this increased rate of interest

by the principles and the causes of interest laid down in the

previous chapter. The reason is that everybody had become an

undertaker in the South Sea scheme and wanted to borrow money to

buy shares, expecting to make an immense profit out which it

would be easy to pay this high rate of interest.

      If the abundance of money in the state comes from the hands

of moneylenders it will doubtless bring down the current rate of

interest by increasing the number of money lenders: but if it

comes from the intervention of spenders it will have just the

opposite effect and will raise the rate of interest by increasing

the number of Undertakers who will have employment from this

increased expense, and will need to borrow to equip their

business in all classes of interest.

      Plenty or scarcity of money in a state always raises or

lowers the price of everything in bargaining without any

necessary connection with the rate of interest, which may very

well be high in states where there is plenty of money and low in

those where money is scarcer: high where everything is dear, and

low where everything is cheap: high in London, low in Genoa.

      The rate of interest rises and falls every day upon mere

rumours which tend to diminish or increase the security of

lenders, without the prices of things in exchange being affected

thereby.

      The most regular cause of a high rate of interest in a

state is the great expense of nobles and landowners or other rich

people. Undertakers and master craftsmen are in the custom of

supplying the great houses in all their branches of expenditure.

These Undertakers have nearly always need to borrow money in

order to supply them: and when the nobility consume their

revenues in advance and borrow money they contribute doubly to

raise the rate of interest.

      On the contrary when the nobility of the state live

economically and buy at first hand so far as they can, they get

through their servants many things without their passing through

the hands of Dealers, they diminish the profits and numbers of

the Undertakers in the state and therefore of borrowers as well

as the rate of interest, because this class of Undertakers

working on their own capital borrow the least they can, and

contenting themselves with small profits prevent those who have

no capital from embarking in these enterprises on borrowed money.

Such is today the position of the Republics of Genoa and Holland,

where interest is sometimes at 2 per cent or under in the highest

class, whilst in Germany, Poland, France, Spain, England and

other countries the easiness and expense of noblemen and

landowners always keep the Undertakers and master craftsmen of

the country accustomed to large profits enabling them to pay a

high rate of interest, which is higher still when they import

everything from abroad with attendant risk.

      When the Prince or the state incurs heavy expense, such as

making war, the rate of interest is raised for two such as making

war, the rate of interest is raised for two reasons: the first is

that this multiplies the number of Undertakers by several new

large enterprises for war supplies, and so increases borrowing.

The second is because of the greater risk which war always

involves.

       On the contrary when the war is over risk diminishes, the

number of Undertakers is lessened and war-contractors ceasing to

be so retrench their expenses and become lenders of the money

they have gained. If now the Prince or state offer to repay part

of the debt it will interest, and this will have considerably

reduce the rate of interest, and this will have a more assured

result if part of the debt can be really paid off without

borrowing elsewhere, because the repayments increase the number

of lenders in the highest class of interest which will affect all

the other classes.

      When the plentifulness of money in the state is due to a

continuous Balance of trade, this money first passes through the

hands of Undertakers, and although it increases consumption it

does not fail to bring down the rate of interest, because most of

the Undertakers then acquire enough capital to carry on their

business without money, and even become lenders of the sums they

have gained beyond what they need to carry on their trade. If

there are not in the state a great number of noblemen and rich

people who spend heavily then the abundance of money will

certainly bring down the rate of interest, while increasing the

price of goods and merchandise in exchange. This is what usually

happens in Republics which have neither much capital nor

considerable landed property and grow rich merely by foreign

trade. But in states which have a large capital and great

landowners the money brought in by foreign trade increases their

rents, and enables them to incur heavy expenditure which

maintains several Undertakers and mechanics besides those who

trade with the foreigner. This always keeps interest at a high

rate in spite of the abundance of money.

      When the nobility and landowners ruin themselves by

extravagances, the money lenders who have mortgages on their

lands often acquire the absolute ownership of them, and it may

well arrive in the state that the lenders are creditors for much

more money than there is circulating there, in which case one may

consider them as subaltern owners of the land and goods mortgaged

for their security. If not their capital will be lost by

bankruptcies.

      In the same way one may consider the owners of shares and

public funds as subaltern owners of the revenues of the state

devoted to payment of their interest. But if the Legislature were

compelled by the necessities of the state to employ these

revenues for other purposes, the shareholders or owners of public

funds would lose everything without the money circulating in the

state being diminished on that account by a single liard.

      If the Prince or administrators of the state wish to

regulate the current rate of interest by law, the regulation must

be fixed on the basis of the current market rate in the highest

class, or thereabout. Otherwise the law will be futile, because

the contracting parties, obedient to the force of competition or

the current price settled by the proportion of lenders to

borrowers, will make secret bargains, and this legal constraint

will only embarrass trade and raise the rate of interest instead

of settling it. The Romans of old after several laws to restrict

interest passed one to forbid altogether the lending of money.

This law had no more success than its predecessors. The law of

Justinian to restrain patricians from taking more than 4 per

cent, those of a lower order 6 per cent, and traders 8 per cent

was equally amusing and unjust, whilst it was not forbidden to

make 50 and 100 per cent profit in all sorts of business.

      If it is allowable and respectable for a landlord to let a

farm to a poor farmer at a high rental, risking the loss of the

rent of a whole year, it seems that it should be permissible to a

lender to advance his money to a needy borrower, at the risk of

losing not only his interest or profit but also his capital, and

to stipulate for so much interest as the borrower will freely

consent to pay him. It is true that Loans of this character make

more people wretched. Making away with both capital and interest

they are more impotent to recover themselves than the farmer who

does not carry off the land. But the bankruptcy laws being

favourable enough to debtors to allow them to start again it

seems that usury laws should always be adjusted to market rates,

as in Holland.

      The current rate of interest in a state seems to serve as a

basis and measure for the purchase price of land. If the current

interest is 5 per cent or one-twentieth part the price of land

should be the same. But as the ownership of land gives a standing

and a certain jurisdiction in the state it happens that when

interest is one-twentieth part, the price of land is at 1/24 or

1/25, though mortgages on the same land hardly pass the current

rate of interest.

      After all, the price of land, like all other prices,

naturally settles itself by the proportion of sellers to buyers,

etc.; and as there will be many more buyers in London, for

example, than in the Provinces, and as these buyers who live in

the capital will prefer to buy land in their locality rather than

in distant Provinces, they will rather buy land in the vicinity

at 1/30 or 1/35 than land at a distance 1/25 or 1/22. There are

often other reasons of expediency affecting the price of land,

unnecessary to mention here, since they do not invalidate our

explanations of the nature of interest.

















Part Three



Chapter One



On Foreign Trade



    When a state exchanges a small product of land for a larger

in foreign trade, it seems to have the advantage; and if current

money is more abundant there than abroad it will always exchange

a smaller product of land for a greater.

    When the state exchanges its labour for the produce of

foreign land it seems to have the advantage, since its

inhabitants are fed at the foreigner's expense.

    When a state exchanges its produce conjointly with its

labour, for a larger produce of the foreigner conjointly with

equal or greater labour, it seems again to have the advantage.

    If the ladies of quality of Paris consume yearly Brussels

lace to the value of 100,000 ounces of silver, a quarter of an

acre of land in Brabant, which will grow 150 pounds weight of

flax, to be made into fine lace in Brussels, will answer this

value. This will require the yearly labour of about 2000 people

in Brabant for the several parts of the work from the sowing of

the flax to the final perfection of the lace. The lace merchant

or undertaker at Brussels will advance the capital. He will

directly or indirectly pay all the spinners and lace-women and

the proportion of the labour of those who make their tools. All

those who have taken part in the work will buy, directly or

indirectly, their maintenance from the farmer in Brabant who pays

in part the rent of his landlord. If in this economy the produce

of the land attributed to these 2000 persons be put at 3 arpents

per head as well for the maintenance of themselves as for that of

their families who subsist in part upon it, there will be 6000

arpents of land in Brabant employed for the support of those who

have worked on the lace, at the expense of the ladies of Paris

who will pay for and wear the lace.

    The ladies of Paris will pay the 100,000 ounces of silver,

each according to the amount she has bought. All this silver must

be sent to Brussels in specie, less only the cost of remittance,

and the entrepreneur at Brussels must find in it not only payment

of all his advances and the interest of the money which he has

perhaps borrowed, but also a profit on his undertaking for the

maintenance of his family. If the price which the ladies pay for

the lace does not cover all the costs and profits there will be

no encouragement for this manufacture, and the entrepreneurs will

cease to carry it on or become bankrupt; but as we have supposed

this manufacture is continued, it is necessary that all costs be

covered by the prices paid by the ladies of Paris, and the

100,000 ounces of silver sent to Brussels if the people of

Brabant take no commodity from France to compensate this debt.

    The ladies of Paris will pay 100,000 ounces to him who sells

and delivers to them the lace; he will pay them to the banker who

will give him one or more bills of exchange on his Brussels

corespondent. The banker will remit the money to the wine

merchants in Champagne who have 100,000 ounces of silver at

Brussels and who will give him their bills of exchange of the

same value drawn upon him by his Brussels correspondent. Thus the

100,000 ounces paid for the Champagne wine at Brussels will

balance the 100,000 ounces paid for the lace at Paris, and in

this way the trouble of sending to Brussels the money received at

Brussels will be avoided. This balance is effected by bills of

exchange, the nature of which I will try to explain in the next

chapter.

    Meanwhile this example shows that the 100,000 ounces which

the ladies of Paris pay for the lace, come into the hands of the

merchants who send Champagne wine to Brussels; and that the

100,000 ounces which the consumers of the Champagne pay for this

wine at Brussels fall into the hands of the entrepreneurs or lace

merchants. The entrepreneurs on each side distribute this money

to those whose labour they employ, either on the wines or on the

lace.

    It is clear from this that the ladies of Paris support and

maintain all those who work on the lace in Brabant and cause

money to circulate there, and equally that the consumers of

Champagne wine at Brussels support and maintain in Champagne not

only the vineyard keepers and others who take part in the

production of the wine, the cartwrights, farriers, carters, etc.

who take part in the transport, and the horses engaged in it, but

that they also pay the value of the produce of the land for the

wine, and cause a circulation of money in Champagne.

    Nevertheless this circulation or trade in Champagne, which

makes so great a stir, which maintains the keeper of the

vineyard, the farmer, the cartwright, the farrier, the carter,

etc. and which pays precisely as well the rent of the owner of

the vineyard as that of the owner of the pastures which serve to

feed the carthorses, is in the present case a burdensome and

unprofitable trade to France when considered by the effects that

it produces.

     If the muid of wine sells at Brussels for 60 ounces of

silver and if we suppose one arpent of vine land produces 4 muids

there must be sent to Brussels the produce of 4166?arpents of

land to correspond to 100,000 ounces of silver, and about 2000

arpents of pasture and arable for the hay and oats consumed by

the cart horses if they are solely employed on this work all the

year round. And so there will be about 6000 arpents of land

abstracted from the maintenance of Frenchmen, and that of the

people of Brabant increased by over 4000 arpents of produce,

since the Champagne wine which they drink saves more than 4000

arpents which they would probably use to produce beer for their

drink if they did not drink wine. However the lace with which all

that is paid for costs the people of Brabant only one quarter of

an arpent of flax. Thus with one arpent of produce allied to

their labour, the people of Brabant pay for more than 16,000

arpents to the French, their conjoined labour being less. They

obtain an increase of subsistence and give only an article of

luxury which brings no real advantage to France, since the lace

is worn and consumed there and cannot then be exchanged for

anything useful. Following the rule of intrinsic values, the land

used in Champagne for the production of the wine, the maintenance

of the vineyard keepers, the coopers, the cartwrights, farriers,

carters, carthorses, etc., ought to be equal to the land used in

Brabant for the production of the flax, the support of the

spinners and lace makers, and all those who have taken part in

the manufacture of this lace.

     But if money is more abundant in circulation in Brabant than

in Champagne land and labour will be dearer there and

consequently, valuing in silver both sides, the French will lose

still more considerably.

     This is an example of a branch of trade which strengthens

the foreigner, lessen the number of inhabitants of the state, and

without causing any circulating money to leave it weakens the

same state. I have chosen it to show more strikingly how one

state may be the dupe of another in trade, and the method of

judging the advantages and disadvantages of foreign trade.

     It is by examining the results of each branch of commerce

singly that foreign trade can be usefully regulated. It cannot be

distinctly apprehended by abstract reasons. It will always be

found by examining particular cases that the exportation of all

manufactured articles is advantageous to the state, because in

this case the foreigner always pays and supports workmen useful

to the state: that the best returns or payments imported are

specie, and in default of specie the produce of foreign land into

which there enters the least labour. By these methods of trading

states which have very little raw produce are often seen to

support inhabitants in great numbers at the expense of

foreigners, and large states maintain their inhabitants in

greater ease and abundance.

     But as great states have no need to increase the number of

their inhabitants it is enough to make those who are in it live

there on the raw produce of the state with more comfort and ease

and to increase the strength of the state for its defence and

security. To do so by foreign trade it is needful to encourage as

much as possible the export of goods and manufactures of the

state in exchange so far as may be for gold and silver in kind.

If by abundant harvest it happened that there was in the state

much produce over and above the ordinary annual consumption it

would be profitable to encourage the exportation of it in return

for its value in gold and silver. These metals do not corrupt and

disappear like the produce of the land, and with gold and silver

one can always import into the state what is lacking there.

     It would not however be profitable to put the state into the

annual custom of sending abroad large quantities of its raw

produce in return for foreign manufactures. It would be to weaken

and diminish the inhabitants and the strength of the state at

both ends.

     But I have no intention of entering into detail as to the

branches of trade which should be encouraged for the good of the

state. Enough to say that it should always be endeavoured to

import as much silver as possible.

     The increase in the quantity of silver circulating in a

state gives it great advantages in foreign trade so long as this

abundance of money lasts. The state then exchanges a small

quantity of produce and labour for greater. It raises its taxes

more easily and finds no difficulty in obtaining money in case of

public need.

     It is true that the continued increase of money will at

length by it abundance cause a dearness of land and labour in the

state. The goods and manufactures will in the long run cost so

much that the foreigner will gradually cease to buy them, and

will accustom himself to get them cheaper elsewhere, and this

will by imperceptible degrees ruin the work and manufactures of

the state. The same cause which will raise the rents of landlords

(which is the abundance of money) will draw them into the habit

of importing many articles from foreign countries where they can

be had cheap. Such are the natural consequences. The wealth

acquired by a state through trade, labour and economy will plunge

it gradually into luxury. States who rise by trade do not fail to

sink afterwards. There are steps which might be, but are not,

taken to arrest this decline. But it is always true that when the

state is in actual possession of a balance of trade and abundant

money it seems powerful, and it is so in reality so long as this

abundance continues.

     Infinite inductions might be added to justify these ideas of

foreign trade and the advantages of abundant money. It is

astonishing to observe the disproportion in the circulation of

money in England and in China. The manufactures of the Indies,

like silks and printed calicoes, muslins, etc. in spite of a sea

voyage of 18 months, are at a very low price in England, which

would pay for them with the thirtieth part of her articles and

manufactures if the Indians would buy them. But they are not so

foolish as to pay extravagant prices for our work while work is

done better and infinitely cheaper in their own country. So they

sell us their manufactures only for ready cash, which we carry to

them annually to increase their wealth and diminish our own. The

Indian manufactures consumed in Europe only diminish our money

and the work of our own manufactures.

     An American who sells beaver skins to a European is rightly

astonished to learn that woollen hats are as serviceable as those

made of beaver, and that all the difference, which causes so long

a sea journey, is in the fancy of those who think beaver hats

lighter and more agreeable to the eye and the touch. However as

these beaver skins are ordinarily paid for to the American in

articles of iron, steel, etc. and not in silver, it is a trade

which is not injurious to Europe, especially since it supports

workmen and particularly sailors, who in the needs of the state

are very useful, whilst the trade with the manufactures of the

East Indies carries off the money and diminishes the workmen of

Europe.

     It must be admitted that the East India trade is profitable

to the Dutch Republic and that she makes the loss of it fall on

the rest of Europe by selling the spices and manufactures in

Germany, Italy, Spain and the New World, which return to her all

the money which she sends to the Indies and much more. It is even

useful to Holland to clothe her women and other folk with the

manufactures of India rather than with English or French fabrics.

It suits the Dutch better to enrich the Indians than their

neighbours who might profit by it to oppress them. Moreover they

sell to the other peoples of Europe the cloths and small

manufactures of their own raw produce much dearer than they sell

the Indian manufactures at home where they are consumed.

     England and France would be mistaken to imitate the Dutch in

this respect. These kingdoms have at home the means of clothing

their women with their own raw material, and though their fabrics

are dearer than those of Indian manufacture they should prevent

their people from wearing the foreign material. They ought not to

permit the falling off of their own articles and manufactures nor

become dependent on the foreigner, still less allow their money

to be taken away for that purpose.

     But as the Dutch find means to sell Indian merchandise in

the other states of Europe, the English and French should do the

same, whether to diminish the naval power of Holland or to

increase their own, and above all to do without the aid of

Holland in the branches of consumption which a bad habit has

rendered necessary in these kingdoms. It is an evident

disadvantage to allow the wearing of Indian fabrics in the

kingdoms of Europe which have wherewith to clothe their people

with their own products.

     Just as it is disadvantageous to a state to encourage

foreign manufactures so it is to encourage foreign navigation.

When a state sends abroad its articles and manufactures it

derives the full advantage if it sends them in its own ships. It

then maintains a good number of sailors who are as useful to the

state as workmen. But if it leaves the carriage of them to

foreign vessels it strengthens the foreign shipping and weakens

its own.

     Navigation is an essential point in foreign trade. In the

whole of Europe the Dutch are those who build ships the cheapest.

Timber is floated down to them by river, and the proximity of the

north supplies them at less expense with masts, wood, pitch,

rope, etc. Their windmills for sawing wood facilitate the working

of it. Also they navigate with smaller crews and their sailors

live very cheaply. One of their windmills for sawing wood saves

the labour of 80 men a day.

     Owing to these advantages they would be the only sea

carriers in Europe if cheapness only were followed. And if they

had enough of their own raw material to form an extensive

commerce they would doubtless have the most flourishing maritime

service in Europe. But the greater number of their seamen does

not suffice without the interior strength of the state, for the

superiority of their naval power. They would never arm warships

nor sailors if the state had large revenues to build the ships

and pay the men: they would profit in everything from extended

markets.

     England, in order to prevent the Dutch from increasing at

her expense their advantage on the sea by this cheapness, has

forbidden any nation from bringing into England other merchandise

than that of their own growth. In this way, the Dutch being

unable to serve as carriers for England, the English have

strengthened their own shipping. And though they sail at greater

costs than the Dutch the wealth of their overseas cargoes renders

these costs less considerable.

     France and Spain are maritime states which have rich produce

sent to the north, whence goods and merchandise are brought to

them. It is not surprising that their shipping is inconsiderable

in proportion to their produce and the extent of their seaboard,

since they leave it to foreign vessels to bring them all they

receive from the north and to take away from them the goods which

the states of the north receive from them.

     These states, France and Spain, do not take into account in

their policy the consideration of trade in the way in which it

would be advantageous. Most merchants in France and Spain who

have to do with the foreigner are rather agents or clerks of

foreign merchants than adventurers carrying on the trade on their

own account.

     It is true that the states of the north are, by their

situation and the vicinity of countries which produce all that is

needed for building ships, in a position to carry everything

cheaper than France and Spain could do. But if these two kingdoms

took steps to strengthen their shipping, this obstacle would not

prevent them. England has long since partly shown them the

example. They have at home and in their colonies all that is

needed for the construction of ships, or at least it would not be

difficult to get them produced there, and there is an infinity of

methods that might be used to make such a policy successful if

the legislature or the ministry would concur in it. My subject

does not allow me in this essay to examine these methods in

detail. I will limit myself to saying that in countries where

trade does not regularly support a considerable number of ships

and sailors it is almost impossible for the prince to maintain a

flourishing navy without such expense as would be capable by

itself of ruining the treasure of his state.

     I will conclude than by observing that the trade most

essential to a state for the increase or decrease of its power is

foreign trade, that the home trade is not of equally great

importance politically, that foreign trade is only half supported

when no care is taken to increase and maintain large merchants

who are natives of the country, ships, sailors, workmen and

manufacturers, and above all that care must always be taken to

maintain the balance against the foreigner.







Chapter II



Of the Exchanges and their Nature





     Inside the city of Paris the carriage of money from one

house to another usually costs 5 sols per bag of 1000 livres. If

it were necessary to carry it from the Fauxbourg St. Antoine to

the Invalides it would cost more than twice as much, and if there

were not generally trustworthy porters of money it would cost

still more. If there were often robbers on the road the money

would be sent in large amounts, with an escort, at greater cost,

and if some one charged himself with the transport at his own

cost and risks he would require payment for it in proportion to

these costs and risks. So it is that the expense of transport

from Rouen to Paris and from Paris to Rouen amounts generally to

50 sols per bag of 1000 livres which in the language of the

bankers is 1/4 percent. The bankers generally send the money in

strong kegs which robbers can hardly carry off because of the

iron and the weight, and as there are always mail coaches on this

route the costs are not considerable on the large sums sent

between these two places.

      If the city of Chalons sur Marne every year pays the

receiver of the King's taxes, 10,000 ounces of silver on the one

hand, and on the other the wine merchants of Chalons and its

neighbourhood sell to Paris, through their agents, Champagne wine

of the value of 10,000 ounces of silver, if the ounce of silver

in France passes in trade for 5 livres, the total of the 10,000

ounces in question will be 50,000 livres both in Paris and in

Chalons.

     The Receiver of Taxes in this example has 50,000 livres to

send to Paris, and the agents of the Chalons wine merchants have

50,000 livres to send to Chalons. This double transaction or

transport may be avoided by a set off or as they are called bills

of exchange, if the parties get together and arrange it.

     Let the agents of the Chalons wine-merchants take (each his

own part) the 50,000 livres to the cashier of the Tax Office at

Paris. Let him give them one or more cheques or bills of exchange

on the Receiver of Taxes at Chalons, payable to their order. Let

them endorse or transfer their order to the Chalons wine

merchants and these will obtain from the Receiver at Chalons the

50,000 livres. In this way the 50,000 livres at Paris will be

paid to the Cashier of the Tax department at Paris and the 50,000

livres at Chalons will be paid to the wine merchants of that

City, and by exchange or set off there will be saved the trouble

of sending this money from one city to the other. Or else let the

wine merchants at Cahlons,who have 50,000 livres at Paris, go and

offer their bills of exchange to the Receiver of Taxes, who will

endorse them to the cashier of the tax office at Paris who will

collect the amount there, and let the Receiver at Chalons pay the

merchants for their bills of exchange the 50,000 livres which he

has at Chalons. Whichever way this set off is effected, whether

the bills of exchange be drawn from Paris, as in this example

ounce for ounce is paid, and 50,000 livres for 50,000 livres, the

exchange is said to be at par.

     The same method might be adopted between these wine

merchants at Chalons and the agents of the nobility in Paris who

have land in the Chalons district, and the wine merchants or

other merchants at Chalons who have sent goods or merchandise to

Paris and have money there and other merchants who have drawn

merchandise from Paris and sold it at Chalons. If there is a

large trade between these two cities bankers will set up at Paris

and Chalons who will enter into relations with the interested

parties on both sides and will be the agents or intermediaries

for the payments which would have to be sent from one of these

cities to the other. Now if all the wine and other goods and

merchandise which have been sent from Chalons to Paris and have

actually been sold there for ready money exceed in value the

total receipts of the taxes at Chalons, and the rents which the

nobility of Paris have in the Chalons district as well as the

value of the goods and merchandise sent from Paris to Chalons and

sold there for ready money, by 5000 ounces of silver or 25,000

livres it will be necessary for the banker in Paris to send there

for ready money, by 5000 ounces of silver or 25,000 livres it

will be necessary for the banker in Paris to send this amount to

Chalons in money. This will be the excess or balance of trade

between these two cities. It will, I say, be of necessity sent to

Chalons in specie, and this operation will be carried out in the

following way or in some similar fashion.

     The agents or correspondents of the wine merchants of

Chalons and of others who have sent goods or merchandise from

Chalons to Paris have the money for these sales in hand at Paris.

They are ordered to remit it to Chalons. They are not accustomed

to risk it by carriage, they will apply to the cashier to the Tax

Office who will give them cheques or bills of exchange on the

Receiver of Taxes at Chalons up to the amount which he has at

Chalons, and generally at par. But as they need to send further

sums to Chalons they will apply to the banker who will have at

his disposal the rents of the Paris nobility who have lands in

that district. This banker will furnish them, like the Cashier of

the Tax Office, with bills of exchange on his correspondent at

Chalons up to the amount of the funds which he has at his

disposal at Chalons and had been ordered to bring to Paris. This

set off will also be made at par, unless the banker tries to make

some little profit out of it for his trouble, as well from the

agents who apply to him to send their money to Chalons as from

the nobility who have charged him with the transmission of their

money from Chalons to Paris. If the banker has also at his

disposal at Chalons the value of the merchandise sent thither

from Paris and sold there for ready money he will also furnish

letters of exchange for this value.

     But in our case supposed the agents of the Chalons merchants

have still in hand at Paris 25,000 livres which they are ordered

to remit to Chalons above all the sums mentioned above. If they

offer this money to the Cashier of the Tax Office he will reply

that he has no more funds at Chalons, and cannot supply them with

bills of exchange or cheques on that city. If they offer the

money to the banker he will tell them that he has no more funds

at Chalons and has no need to draw, but if they will pay him 3

per cent for exchange he will provide cheques. They will offer

one or two per cent and at last 2? not being able to do better.

At this price the Banker will decide to give them bills of

exchange, that is if they pay to him at Paris 2 livres 10 sols he

will supply a bill of exchange for 100 livres on his Chalons

correspondent, payable at 10 or 15 days, so as to put his

correspondent in a position to make the payment of the 25,000

livres for which he draws upon him. At this rate of exchange he

will send him the money by mail or carriage in specie, gold or,

in default of gold, silver. He will pay 10 livres for each bag of

1000 livres, or in bank parlance 1 per cent. He will pay his

Chalons correspondent as commission 5 livres per bag of 1000

livres or ?per cent, and will keep one per cent for his own

profit. On this footing the exchange at Paris for Chalons is at

2?per cent above par, because one pays 2 livres 10 sols for each

100 livres as the commission on exchange.

     It is somewhat in this way that the balance of trade is

transported from one city to the other through bankers, and

generally on a large scale. All those who bear the name of

bankers are not accustomed to these transactions and many of them

deal only in commissions and bank speculations. I will include

among bankers only those who remit money. It is they who always

fix the exchange, the charge for which follows the cost and risks

of the carriage of specie in the different cases.

     The charge of exchange between Paris and Chalons is rarely

fixed at more than 2?or 3 per cent over or under par. But from

Paris to Amsterdam the charge will amount to 5 or 6 per cent when

specie has to be sent. The journey is longer, the risk is

greater, more correspondents and commission agents are involved.

From India to England the charge for carriage will be 10 to 12

per cent. From London to Amsterdam it will hardly exceed 2 per

cent in peace time.



     In our present example it will be said that the exchange at

Paris for Chalons will be 2?per cent above par, and at Chalons

it will be said that the exchange for Paris is 2?per cent below

par, because in these circumstances he who will give money at

Chalons for a letter of exchange for Paris will give only 97

livres 10 sols to receive 100 livres at Paris. And it is evident

that the City or Place where exchange is above par is in debt to

that where it is below par so long as the exchange continues on

this basis. Exchange at Paris is 2?per cent above par for

Chalons only because Paris is indebted to Chalons and that the

money for this debt must be carried from Paris to Chalons. This

is why when exchange is commonly seen to be below par in one city

as compared with another it may be concluded that this first city

owes a balance of trade to the other, and that when the exchange

at Madrid or Lisbon is above par for all other countries it shows

that these two capitals must send specie to other countries.

     In all places and cities which use the same money and the

same gold and silver specie like Paris and Chalons sur Marne,

London and Bristol, the charge for exchange is known and

expressed by giving and taking so much per cent above or below

par. When 98 livres are paid in one place to receive 100 livres

in another it is said that exchange is about 2 per cent below par

when 102 livres, are paid in one place to receive only 100 livres

in another it is said that the exchange is exactly 2 per cent

above par, when 100 livres are given in one place for 100 livres

in another it is said that the exchange is at par. There is no

difficulty or mystery in all this.

     But when exchange is regulated between two cities or places

where the money is quite different, where the coins are of

different size, fineness, make, and names, the nature of exchange

seems at first more difficult to explain, though at bottom this

exchange differs from that between Paris and Chalons only in the

jargon of bankers. At Paris one speaks of the Dutch exchange by

reckoning the ecu of three livres against so many deniers de gros

of Holland, but the parity of exchange between Paris and

Amsterdam is always 100 ounces of gold or silver against 100

ounces of gold or silver of the same weight and fineness. 102

ounces paid at Paris to receive 100 ounces at Amsterdam always

comes to 2 per cent above par. The banker who effects the

remittance of the balance of trade must always know how to

calculate parity. But in the language of foreign exchange the

price of exchange at London with Amsterdam is made by giving a

pound sterling in London to receive 35 Dutch escalins at the

bank: with Paris in giving at London 30 deniers or pence sterling

to receive at Paris one ecu or three livres tournois. These

methods of speech do not say whether exchange is above or below

par, but the banker who remits the balance of trade reckons it up

well and knows how much foreign money he will receive for the

money of his own country which he despatches.

     Whether we fix the exchange at London for English silver in

Muscovy roubles, in Mark Lubs of Hamburg, in Rixdollars of

Germany, in Livres of Flanders, in Ducats of Venice, in Piastres

of Genoa or Leghorn, in Millreis or Crusadoes of Portugal, in

Pieces of Eight of Spain, or Pistoles, etc. the parity of

exchange for all these countries will be always 100 ounces of

gold or silver against 100 ounces; and if in the language of

exchange it happens that one gives more or less than this parity,

it comes to the same in effect as if exchange is said to be so

much above or below par, and we shall always know whether or not

England owes a balance to the place with which the exchange is

settled just as in our example of Paris and Chalons.





Chapter 3



Further explanations of the nature of the Exchanges





     We have seen that the exchanges are regulated by the

intrinsic value of specie, that is at par, and their variation

arises from the costs and risks of transport from one place to

another when the valance of trade has to be sent in specie.

Argument is unnecessary in a matter which we see in fact and

practice. Bankers sometimes introduce refinements into this

practice.

     If England owes France 100,000 ounces of silver for the

balance of trade, if France owes 100,000 ounces to Holland, and

Holland 100,000 to England, all these three amounts may be set

off by bills of exchange between the respective bankers of these

three states without any need of sending silver on either side.

     If Holland sends to England in January merchandise of the

value of 100,000 ounces of silver and England only sends to

Holland in the same month merchandise to the value of 50,000

ounces (I suppose the sale and payment made in January on both

sides) there will be due to Holland in this month a balance of

trade of 50,000 ounces, and the exchange on Amsterdam will be in

London in January 2 or 3 per cent above par, or in the language

of exchange, the exchange on Holland which was in December at par

or at 35 escalins to the pound sterling in London will rise there

in January to about 36 escalins. But when the Bankers have sent

this balance of 50,000 ounces to Holland the exchange on

Amsterdam will naturally fall back to par or 35 escalins in

London.

     But if an English banker foresees in January, owing to the

sending into Holland of an unusual quantity of merchandise, that

at the time of payments and sales in March Holland will be

indebted considerably to England, he may instead of sending the

50,000 ecus or ounces due in January to Holland, furnish in that

month bills of exchange on his Amsterdam correspondent payable at

double usance or two months, the amount of the value to be paid

on maturity, and by this method profit on the exchange which in

January was above par and in March will be below par, and so gain

doubly without sending a sol to Holland.

     This is what bankers call speculation, which often causes

variations in the exchanges for a short period independently of

the balance of trade; but in the long run we must get back to

this balance which fixes the constant and uniform rule of

exchange. And though the speculations and credits of bankers may

sometimes delay the transport of the sums which one city or state

owes to another, in the end it is always necessary to pay the

debt and send the balance of trade in specie to the place where

it is due.

     If England gains regularly a balance of trade with Portugal

and always loses a balance with Holland the rates of exchange

with Holland and Portugal will make this evident: it will be seen

that at London the exchange on Lisbon is below par and that

Portugal is indebted to England. It will be seen also that the

exchange on Amsterdam is above par and that England is indebted

to Holland. But the quantity of the debt cannot be seen from the

exchanges. It will not be seen whether the balance of silver

drawn from Portugal will be greater or less than what has to be

sent to Holland.

     There is however one thing which will always show at London

whether England gains or loses the general balance of her trade

(by general balance is understood the difference of the

individual balances with all the foreign states which trade with

England), and that is the price of gold and silver metal but

especially of gold (now that the proportion between gold and

silver in coined money differs from the market rate, as will be

explained in the next chapter). If the price of gold metal in the

London market, which is the centre of English trade, is lower

than the price at the Tower where guineas or gold coins are

minted, or at the same price as these coins intrinsically, and if

gold metal is taken to the Tower in exchange for their value in

guineas or minted coins, it is a certain proof that England is a

gainer in the general balance of her trade. It proves that the

gold taken from Portugal suffices not only to pay the balance

which England sends into Holland, Sweden, Muscovy, and the other

states where she is indebted, but that there remains some of the

gold to be sent to the Mint, and the quantity or sum of this

general balance of trade is known from that of the specie coined

at the Tower of London.

     But if the gold metal is sold in the London market above the

Tower price, which is usually ?.18.0 an ounce, the metal will no

longer be taken to the Mint, and this is a certain sign that so

much gold is not drawn from abroad (from Portugal for instance)

as must be sent into the other countries where England is

indebted. It is a proof that the general balance of trade is

against England. This would not be known but for the prohibition

in England to send gold coin out of the country. But this

prohibition is the reason why the timid London bankers prefer to

buy gold metal (which they are allowed to send abroad) at ?.18.0

up to ? an ounce for export rather than send out guineas or gold

coins at ?.18.0 against the law and at the risk of confiscation.

Some of them take this risk, others melt the gold coins to send

them out as bullion, and it is impossible to judge how much gold

England loses when the general balance of trade is against her.

     In France the cost of minting is deducted, usually 1?per

cent, i.e. the price for coin is always higher than for uncoined

metal. To know whether France loses in the general valance of her

trade, it will suffice to know whether the bankers send French

coins abroad. If they do so it is a proof that they do not find

bullion to buy for export, since the bullion though at a lower

price than coined money in France, is of greater value than these

coins in foreign countries by at least 1?per cent.

     Though the exchanges rarely vary apart from the balance of

trade between one country and others, and though this balance is

naturally the mere difference in value of the goods and

merchandise which the state sends to other countries and receives

from them, yet there are often circumstances and accidental

causes which cause considerable sums to be conveyed from one

state to another without any question of merchandise or trade,

and these causes affect the exchanges just as the balance of

trade would do.

     Such are the sums of money which one state sends into

another for its secret services and political aims, for subsidies

to allies, for the upkeep of troops, Ambassadors, noblemen who

travel, etc., capital which the inhabitants of one state send to

another to invest in public or private funds, the interest which

these inhabitants receive annually from such investments, etc.

The exchanges vary with all these accidental causes and follow

the rule of the transport of silver required. In considering the

balance of trade matters of this kind are not separated, and

indeed it would be very difficult to separate them. They have

very certainly an influence on the increase and decrease of

circulating money in a state and on its comparative strength and

power.

     My subject does not allow me to enlarge on the effects of

these accidental causes: I confine myself always to the simple

views of commerce lest I should complicate my subject, which is

too much encumbered by the multiplicity of the facts which relate

to it.

     Exchanges rise more or less above par in proportion to the

great or small costs and risks of the transport of money and this

being granted they naturally rise much more above par in the

cities or states where it is forbidden to export money than in

those where its export is free.

     Suppose that Portugal consumes regularly every year

considerable quantities of woollen and other manufactures of

England, as well for its own people as for those of Brazil, that

it pays for them partly in wine, oils, etc., but for the surplus

payment there is a regular balance of trade remitted from Lisbon

to London. If the King of Portugal rigorously prohibits under

penalty not only of confiscation but of life the transport of any

gold or silver metal out of his States, the terror of this

prohibition will in the first place stop the Bankers from

meddling about sending the balance. The price of the English

manufactures will be kept in hand at Lisbon. The English

merchants unable to receive their funds from Lisbon will send no

more cloth thither. The result will be that cloth will become

extraordinarily dear. Though their price has not gone up in

England they cease to be sent to Lisbon because their value

cannot be recovered. To have these cloths the Portuguese nobility

and others who cannot do without them will offer twice the usual

price, but as they cannot get enough of them without sending

money out of Portugal, the increased price of cloth will become

the profit of any one who in spite of the prohibition will export

gold or silver. This will encourage various Jews and others to

take gold and silver to English vessels in  the port of Lisbon,

even at the risk of their lives. They will gain at first 100 or

50 per cent in this traffic and this profit is paid by the

Portuguese in the high price they give for the cloth. They will

gradually familiarise themselves with this manoeuvre after having

often practised it successfully, and at length money will be seen

to be put on board English ships for a payment of 2 or 1 per

cent.

     The King of Portugal lays down the law or prohibition. His

subjects, even his courtiers, pay the cost of the risk run to

circumvent and elude it. No advantage then is gained by such a

law, on the contrary it causes a real loss to Portugal since it

causes more money of the state to go abroad than if there were no

such law.

     For those who gain by this manoeuvre, whether Jews or

others, send their profits abroad, and when they have enough of

them or when they take fright they often themselves follow their

money.

     If some of these lawbreakers were taken in the act, their

goods confiscated and their lives forfeited, this circumstance

and execution instead of stopping the export of money would only

increase it, because those who formerly were satisfied with 1 or

2 per cent for exporting money will ask 20 or 50 per cent, and so

the export must always go on to pay the balance.

     I do not know whether I have succeeded in making these

reasons clear to those who have no idea of trade. I know that for

those who have practical knowledge of it nothing is easier to

understand, and that they are rightly astonished that those who

govern states and administer the finances of great kingdoms have

so little knowledge of the nature of exchanges as to forbid the

export of bullion and specie of gold and silver.

     The only way to keep them in a state is so to conduct

foreign trade that the balance is not adverse to the state. 





Chapter 4



Of the variations in the proportion of values with regard to the

metals which serve as money





     If metals were as easily found as water commonly is

everybody would take what he wanted of them and they would have

hardly any value. The metals which are most plentiful and cost

the least trouble to produce are also the cheapest. Iron seems

the most necessary, but as it is commonly found in Europe with

less trouble and labour than copper it is much cheaper.

     Copper, silver, and gold are the three metals in general use

for money. Copper mines are the most abundant and cost less in

land and labour to work. The richest copper mines today are in

Sweden. 80 ounces of copper are needed there to pay for an ounce

of silver. It is also to be observed that the copper extracted

from some mines is more perfect and lustrous than what is

obtained from others. The copper of Japan and Sweden is brighter

than that of England. That of Spain was, in the time of the

Romans, better than that of Cyprus. But gold and silver, from

whatever mine extracted, are always of the same perfection when

refined.

     The value of copper, as of everything else, is

proportionable to the land and labour which enter into its

production. Beside the ordinary uses to which it is put, like

pots and pans, kitchen utensils, locks, etc. it is in nearly all

states used as money in small purchases. In Sweden it is used

even in large payments when silver is scarce there. During the

first five centuries of Rome it was the only money. Silver only

began to be employed in exchange in the year 484. The ratio of

copper to silver was then rated in the mints at 72 to 1: in the

coinage of 512 at 80 to 1: in 537, 64 to 1: in 586 at 48 to 1; in

663 by Drusus and 672 by Sulla at 53 to 1: in 712 by Marcus

Antonius and 724 by Augustus 56 to 1: in AD 54 under Nero 60 to

1: in 160 AD under Antoninus 64 to 1; in the time of Constantine

AD 330, 120 and 125 to 1: in the age of Justinian about AD 550 at

100 to 1. Since then it has always varied below the ratio of 100

to 1 in the European mints.

     Today when copper money is only used in small dealings,

whether alloyed with calamine to make yellow copper as in

England, or with a small portion of silver as in France and

Germany it is generally rated in the, proportion of 40 to 1,

though the market price of copper is ordinarily to that of silver

as 80 or 100 to 1. The reason is that the cost of coining is

generally deducted from the weight of the copper. When there is

not too much of this small money for effecting the petty

exchanges in the state, coins of copper or copper and alloy pass

without difficulty in spite of their defect in intrinsic value .

But when it is attempted to pass them in a foreign country they

will only be taken at the weight of the copper and the silver

alloy. Even in states where through the avarice or ignorance of

the governors, currency is given to too great a quantity of this

small cash for the transaction of small dealings, and it is

ordered that it should be received up to a certain limit in large

payments it is unwillingly accepted and small cash is at a

discount in silver coin, as in the token money and Ardites in

Spain in large, payments. Yet small coins always pass without

difficulty in small purchases, the value of the payments being

usually small in themselves the loss is still less. This is why

they are accepted without difficulty, and that copper is

exchanged for small silver coins above the weight and intrinsic

value of copper in the state itself, but not in other states,

each state having wherewith to carry on its small dealings with

its own copper coins.

     Gold and silver, like copper, have a value proportionable to

the land and labour necessary for their production; and if the

public assumes the cost of minting these metals their value in

bars and in coin is identical, their market value and their mint

value is the same, their value in the state and in foreign

countries is always alike, depending on the weight and fineness,

that is on weight alone if the metals are pure and without alloy.

     Silver mines have always been found more abundant than those

of gold, but not equally in all countries or at all times.

Several ounces of silver have always been needed to buy one ounce

of gold, sometimes more sometimes less according to the abundance

of these metals and the demand for them. In the year AUC 310, 13

ounces of silver were needed in Greece to buy an ounce of gold,

i.e. gold was to silver as 1 to 13: AUC 400 or thereabouts 1 to

12, AUC 460 1 to 10 in Greece, Italy and the whole of Europe.

This ratio of 1 to 10 seems to have persisted for 3 centuries to

the death of Augustus, AUC 767  or AD 14. Under Tiberius gold

became scarce or silver more plentiful, and the ratio gradually

rose to 1 to 12, 12? and 13. Under Constantine AD 330 and

Justinian AD 550 it was 1 to 14. Later history is more obscure.

Some authors think it was 1 to 18 under certain French kings. In

AD 840 under Charles the Bald gold and silver coins were struck

at 1 to 12. Under St Louis, who died in 1270 the ratio was 1 to

10: in 1361, 1 to 12: in 1421 over 1 to 11: in 1500 under 1 to

12: about 1600, 1 to 12: in 1641, 1 to 14: in 1700, 1 to 15: in

1730, 1 to 14?

     The quantity of gold and silver brought from Mexico and Peru

in the last century has not only made these metals more plentiful

but has increased the value of gold compared with silver which

has been more abundant, so that in the Spanish mints, following

the market prices, the ratio is fixed at 1 to 16. The other

States of Europe have followed pretty closely the Spanish price

in their Mints, some at 1 to 15, others at 15 7/8, 15 5/8, etc.

following the ideas and views of the Directors of the Mints. But

since Portugal has drawn great quantities of gold from Brazil the

ratio has commenced to fall again if no in the Mints at least in

the markets, and this gives a greater value to silver than in the

past. Moreover a good deal of gold is often brought from the East

Indies in exchange for the silver taken thither from Europe,

because the ratio is much lower in India.

     In Japan where there are a good many silver mines the ratio

of gold to silver is today 1 to 8: in China 1 to 10: in the other

countries of the Indies on this side 1 to 11, 1 to 12, 1 to 13,

and 1 to 14 as we get nearer to the West and to Europe. But if

the mines of Brazil continue to supply so much gold the ratio may

probably fall eventually to 1 to 10 even in Europe which seems to

me the most natural if anything but chance is the guide to the

ratio. It is quite certain that when all the gold and silver

mines in Europe, Asia and Africa were the most exploited for the

Roman republic the ratio of 1 to 10 was the most constant. If all

the gold mines regularly produced a tenth part of what the silver

mines produce, it could not be determined that for that reason

the ratio between these two metals would be as 1 to 10. The ratio

would always depend on the demand and on the market price.

Possibly rich people might prefer to carry gold money in their

pockets rather than silver and might develope a taste for

gildings and gold ornaments rather than silver, thus increasing

the market price of gold.

      Neither could the ratio between these metals be arrived at

by considering the quantity of them found in a state. Suppose the

ratio 1 to 10 in England and that the quantity of gold and silver

in circulation there were 20 million ounces of silver and 2

million ounces of gold, that would be equal to 40 million ounces

of silver, and suppose that 1 million ounces of gold be exported

from England out of the 2 millions, and 10 million ounces of

silver brought in in exchange, there would then be 30 million

ounces in of silver and only 1 million ounces of gold, still

equivalent in all to 40 million ounces of silver. If the quantity

of ounces be considered there are 30 millions of silver and 1

million of gold, and therefore if the quantity of the two metals

decided the ratio it would be as 1 to 30, but that is impossible.

The ratio in the neighbouring countries is 1 to 10, and it would

therefore cost only 10 million ounces of silver with a trifle for

the cost of carriage to bring back to the state 1 million ounces

of gold in exchange for 10 million ounces of silver.

     To judge then of the ratio between gold and silver the

market price is alone decisive: the number of those who need one

metal in exchange for the other, and of those who are willing to

make such an exchange, determines the ratio. It often depends on

the humour of men: the bargaining is done roughly and not

geometrically. Still I do not think that one can imagine any rule

but this to arrive at it. At least we know that in practice it is

the one which decides, as in the price and value of everything

else. Foreign markets affect the price of gold and silver more

than they do the price of any other goods or merchandise because

nothing is transported with greater ease and less injury. If

there were a free and regular trade between England and Japan, if

a number of ships were regularly employed in this trade and the

balance of trade were in all respects equal, i.e. if as much

merchandise were always sent from England to Japan, having regard

to price and value, as was imported from Japan, it would end in

drawing at last all the gold from Japan in exchange for silver,

and the ratio between gold and silver in Japan would be made the

same as it is in England, subject only to the risks of

navigation; for in our hypothesis the costs of the voyage would

be supported by the trade in merchandise.

     Taking the ratio at 1 to 15 in England and 1 to 8 in Japan

there would be more than 87 per cent to gain by carrying silver

from England to Japan and bringing back gold. But this difference

is not enough in the ordinary course to pay the costs of so long

and difficult a voyage.

     It pays better to bring back merchandise from Japan rather

than gold in exchange for silver. It is only the costs and risks

of the transport of gold and silver which can leave a difference

in the ratio between these metals in different states: in the

nearest state the ratio will differ very little, there will be a

difference from one state to another of 1, 2 or 3 per cent and

from England to Japan the total of all these differences of ratio

will amount to more than 87 per cent.

      It is the market price which decides the ratio of the value

of gold to that of silver. The market price is the base of this

proportion in the value assigned to coins of gold and silver. If

the market price varies considerably, that of the coinage must be

reformed to follow the market rate. If this be not done confusion

and disorder set in in the circulation, and coins of one or the

other metal will be taken above the Mint value. There are an

infinity of examples of this in antiquity. There is a quite

recent one in England under the regulations made at the London

Mint. The ounce of silver, eleven twelfths fine, is worth there

5s 2d sterling. Since the ratio of gold to silver (which had been

fixed at 1 to 16 in imitation of Spain) has fallen to 1 to 15 and

1 to 14? the ounce of silver sold at 5s 6d sterling, while the

gold guinea continued to circulate at 2 1s 6d sterling, which

caused the export from England of all the silver crowns,

shillings and sixpences which were not worn by circulation,

silver money became so scarce in 1728 (though only the most worn

pieces remained) that people had to change a guinea at a loss of

nearly 5 per cent. The trouble and confusion thus produced in

trade and circulation obliged the Treasury to request the

celebrated Sir Isaac Newton, Master, of the Tower Mint, to make a

Report on the measures he thought most suitable to remedy this

disorder.

     There was nothing easier. It was only necessary to follow

the market price of silver in coining silver at the Tower. And

whereas the ratio of gold to silver was of old time by the laws

and regulations of the Tower Mint 1 to 15? it was only necessary

to make the silver coins lighter in the proportion of the market

price which had fallen below 1 to 15; and, to anticipate the

variation which the gold of Brazil brings about annually in the

ratio between these two metals, it might even have been possible

to fix it on the footing of 1 to 14? as was done in 1725 in

France and as they will be forced later to do in England itself.

     It is true that the coinage in England might equally have

been adjusted to the market price and ratio by diminishing the

nominal value of gold coins. This was the policy adopted by Sir

Isaac Newton in his Report, and by Parliament in consequence of

this Report. But, as I shall explain, it was the least natural

and the most disadvantageous policy. Firstly it was more natural

to raise the price of silver coins, because the public had

already done so in the market, the ounce of silver which was

worth only 62d sterling at the Mint being worth more than 65d in

the market, and all the silver money being exported except what

the circulation had considerably reduced in weight. On the other

hand it was less disadvantageous to the English nation to raise

the silver money than to lower the gold money considering the

sums which England owes the foreigner.

     If it is supposed that England owes the foreigner 5 millions

sterling of capital, invested in the public funds, it may be

equally supposed that the Foreigner paid this amount in gold at

the rate of 21s 6d a guinea or in silver at 65d sterling the

ounce, according to the market price.

     These 5 millions have therefore cost the Foreigner at 21s 6d

the guinea 4,651,163 guineas; but now that the guinea is reduced

to 21s the capital to be repaid is 4,761,904 guineas, a loss to

England of 110,741 guineas, without counting the loss on the

interest annually paid.

     Newton told me in answer to this objection that according to

the fundamental laws of the Kingdom silver was the true and only

monetary standard and that as such it could not be altered.

     It is easy to answer that the public having altered this Law

by custom and the price of the market it had ceased to be a law,

that in these circumstances there was no need to adhere

scrupulously to it to the detriment of the nation and to pay to

foreigners more than their due. If the gold coins were not

considered true money, gold would have supported the variation,

as in Holland and China where gold is looked upon rather as

merchandise than money. If the silver coins had been raised to

their market price without touching gold there would have been no

loss to the foreigner, and there would have been plenty of silver

coins in circulation. They would have been coined at the Mint,

whereas now no more will be coined until some new arrangement is

made.

     By reducing the value of gold (brought about by Newton's

Report from 21s 6d to 21s) the ounce of silver which was sold in

the London market before at 65 pence and 65?pence no longer sold

in truth but at 64d. But as it was coined at the Tower the ounce

was valued in the market at 64d and if it was taken to the Tower

to be coined it would be worth no more than 62d. So no more is

taken. A few shillings or fifths of crowns have been struck at

the expense of the South Sea Company, losing the difference of

the market price; but they disappeared as soon as they were put

into circulation. Today no silver coins can be seen in

circulation if they are of full mint weight, only coins which are

worn and do not exceed in weight the market price.

     However the value of silver continues to rise imperceptibly

in the market. The ounce which was worth only 64 after the

reduction of which we have spoken has risen again to 65?and 66

in the market; and in order to have silver coin in circulation

and coined at the Tower, it will be necessary again to reduce the

value of the gold guinea from 21s to 20s and to lose to the

foreigner double of what is lost already unless it is preferred

to follow the natural course and to adjust silver coin to the

market price. Only the market price can find the ratio of the

value of gold and silver as of all other values. Newton's

reduction of the guinea to 21s was devised only to prevent the

disappearance of the light and worn coins which remain in

circulation, and not to fix in gold and silver coins the true

ratio of their price, I mean by their true ratio that which is

fixed by market prices. This price is always the touchstone in

these matters. Its variations are slow enough to allow time to

regulate the mints and prevent disorders in the circulation.

     In some centuries the value of silver rises slowly against

gold, in others the value of gold rises against silver. This was

the case in the age of Constantine who reduced all values to that

of gold as the more permanent; but the value of silver is

generally the more permanent and gold is more subject to

variation.





Chapter V



Of the augmentation and diminution of coin in denomination







    According to the principles we have established the quantity

of money circulating in exchange fixes and determines the price

of everything in a State taking into account the rapidity or

sluggishness of circulation.

    We often see however in the increases and decreases practised

in France such strange variations that it might be supposed that

market prices correspond rather to the nominal value of coin than

to its quantity in exchange, the quantity of livres tournois in

money of account rather than the quantity of marks and ounces,

which seems directly opposed to our principles.

    Suppose, as happened in 1714, ecu is current for 5 livres and

the King Arret which orders the lowering of the ecu for 20

months, viz 1 per cent per month to nominal value to 4 livres

instead of 5. Let us see will be naturally the consequences of

this having regard to the spirit of the Nation.

    All those who owe money will make haste to pay it during the

diminutions so as not to lose by them. Undertakers and Merchants

find it easy to borrow which decides the least able and the least

increase their enterprise. They borrow money, as fancy, without

interest and load themselves with violence of their demands.

Vendors have getting rid of their merchandise for money which

diminish in their hands in nominal value. They towards foreign

merchandise and import considerable quantities of it for the

consumption of several years. All this causes money to circulate

more rapidly and raises the price of everything. Then high prices

prevent the foreigner from taking merchandise from France as

usual. France keeps her own merchandise and at the same time

imports great quantities. This double operation is the reason why

considerable amounts of specie must be sent abroad to pay the

balance.

    The rate of exchange never fails to show this disadvantage.

Exchange is commonly seen at 6 and 10 per cent against France

during these diminutions. Enlightened people in France hoard

their money in these times. The King finds means to borrow much

money on which he willingly loses the diminution, proposing to

compensate himself by an augmentation at the end of the

diminution.

    With this object after several diminutions they begin to

hoard money in the King's Treasury, to postpone the payments,

pensions, and army pay. In these circumstances money becomes

extremely rare at the end of the diminutions both by reason of

the sums hoarded by the King and various individuals and by

reason of the nominal value of the coin, which value is

diminished. The amounts sent abroad also contribute greatly to

the scarcity of money, and this scarcity gradually brings it

about that the merchandise with which the undertakers are loaded

up is offered at 50 or 60 per cent below the prices prevailing at

the time of the first diminutions. Circulation falls into

convulsions. Hardly enough money can be found to send to market.

Many Undertakers and Merchants go bankrupt and their merchandise

is sold at bargain prices.

    Then the King augments anew the coinage, settles the new ecu

or ounce of silver of the new issue at 5 livres, begins with this

new coinage to pay the troops and the pensions. The old coinage

is demonetised and received at the Mint at a lower nominal value.

The King profits by the difference.

    But all the sums of new coinage which come from the Mint do

not restore the abundance of money in circulation. The amounts

kept hoarded by individuals and those sent abroad greatly exceed

the nominal increase on the coinage which comes from the Mint.

    The cheapness of merchandise in France begins to draw thither

the money of the foreigner, who finding it 50 or 60 or more per

cent cheaper sends gold and silver metal to France to buy it. In

this way the foreigner who sends his bullion to the Mint recoups

himself easily from the tax paid there on this bullion. He finds

the double advantage of the low price of the merchandise he buys,

and the loss of the Mint charge falls really on the French in the

sale of their merchandise to the foreigner. They have merchandise

enough for several years' consumption. They resell to the Dutch,

for example, the spices which they bought of them for two thirds

of what they paid. All this takes place gradually, the foreigner

decides to buy these merchandises from France only because of

their cheapness. The balance of trade, which was against France

at the time of the diminutions turns in her favour at the time of

augmentation, and the King is able to profit by 20 per cent or

more on all the bullion brought into France and taken to the

Mint. As Foreigners now owe a trade balance to France and have

not in their country coins of the new issue they must take their

bullion and coins of the old issue to the Mint to obtain new

coins for payment. But this trade balance which Foreigners owe to

France arises only from the merchandise which they import from it

at low prices.

    France is all round the dupe of these operations. She pays

very high prices for foreign goods during the diminutions, sells

them back at very low prices at the time of the augmentation to

the same foreigners, sells her own merchandise at low prices

which she had kept so high during the diminutions and so it would

be difficult for all the money which left France during the

diminutions to come back during the augmentation. If coins of the

new issue are counterfeited abroad, as is nearly always the case,

France loses the 20 per cent which the King has established as

the Mint charge. This is so much gained for the Foreigner who

profits further by the low prices of merchandise in France.

    The King makes a considerable profit by the Mint tax, but it

costs France three times as much to enable him to make this

profit.

    It is well understood that when there is a current balance of

trade in favour of France against the foreigner the King is able

to raise a tax of 20 per cent or more by a new coinage and an

increase in the nominal value of coins. But if the trade balance

was against France at the time of this new coinage and

augmentation the operation would have no success and the King

would not derive a great profit from it. The reason is that in

this case it is necessary to send money continually abroad. But

the old ecu is as good in foreign countries as the new. That

being so the Jews and Bankers will give a premium or bonus in

secret for the old coins and the individual who can sell them

above the Mint price will not take them thither. At the Mint they

give him only about 4 livres for his ecu, but the Banker will

give him at first 4 livres 5 sols, and then 4 livres 10, and at

last 4 livres 15. And this is how it may happen that an

augmentation of the coinage may lack success. It can hardly

happen when the raising is made after the lowerings indicated,

because then the balance naturally turns in favour of France, as

we have explained.

    The experience of the augmentation of 1726 may serve to

confirm all this. The diminutions which had preceded this

augmentation were made suddenly without warning, which prevented

the ordinary operations of diminutions. This prevented the trade

balance from turning strongly in favour of France at the

augmentation of 1726, few people took their old coin to the Mint,

and the profit of the Mint tax which was in view had to be

abandoned.

    It is not within my subject to explain the reasons of

Ministers for lowering the coinage suddenly nor the reasons which

deceived them in their project of the augmentation of 1726. I

have mentioned the increases and decreases in France only because

their results seem sometimes to clash with the principles I have

established that abundance or scarcity of money in a State raises

or lowers all prices proportionably.

    After explaining the effects of lowering and raising the

coinage, as practised in France, I maintain that they neither

destroy nor weaken my principles, for if I am told that what cost

20 livres or 5 ounces of silver before the lowering referred to

does not even cost 4 ounces or 20 livres of the new money after

the augmentation, I will assent to this without departing from my

principles, because there is less money in circulation than there

was before the diminutions, as I have explained. The difficulties

of exchange in the times and operations of which we speak cause

variations in the prices of things and in that of the interest of

money which cannot be taken as a rule in the ordinary principles

of circulation and dealing.

    The change in the nominal value of money has at all times

been the effect of some disaster or scarcity in the State, or of

the ambition of some Prince or individual. In the year A.U.C. 157

Solon increased the nominal value of the drachma of Athens after

a sedition and abolition of debt. Between A.U.C. 490 and 512 the

Roman Republic several times increased the nominal value of its

copper coins, so that their as came to be worth six. The pretext

was to provide for the needs of the State and to pay the debts

incurred in the first Punic War. This did not fail to cause great

confusion. In 663 Livius Drusus, Tribune of the people, increased

the nominal value of amount, and this gave occasion to introduce

confusion into exchange. In A.U.C. 712 Antony in his Triumvirate

increased the nominal of silver by 5 per cent, mixing iron with

the silver, to meet the needs of the Triumvirate. Many Emperors

subsequently debased or increased coinage. The Kings of France at

different times have done likewise. This is why the livre

tournois, which was a pound weight of silver has sunk to so

little value. These proceedings have never failed to cause

disorder in States. It matters little or nothing what is the

nominal value of coins provided it be permanent. The pistole of

Spain is worth 9 livres or florins in Holland, about 18 livres in

France, 37 livres 10 sols at Venice, 50 livres at Parma. In the

same proportion values are exchanged between these different

countries. The price of everything increases gradually when the

nominal valne of coins increases, and the actual quantity in

weight and fineness of the coins, taking into account the

rapidity of circulation, is the base and regulator of values. A

State neither gains nor loses by the raising or lowering of these

coins so long as it keeps the same quantity of them, though

individuals may gain or lose by the variation according to their

engagements. All people are full of false prejudice and false

ideas as to the nominal value of their coinage. We have shown in

the Chapter on Exchanges that the invariable rule of them is the

price and fineness of the current coins of different countries,

marc for marc and ounce for ounce. If a raising or lowering of

the nominal value changes this rule for a time in France it is

only during a crisis and difficulty in trade. A return is always

made little by little to intrinsic value, to which prices are

necessarily brought both in the market and in the foreign

exchanges.







Chapter VI



Of Banks and their Credit







    If a hundred economical gentlemen or proprietors of land, who

put by every year money from their savings to buy land on

occasion, deposit each one 10,000 ounces of silver with a

goldsmith or banker in London, to avoid the trouble of keeping

this money in their houses and the thefts which might be made of

it, they will take from them notes payable on demand. Often they

will leave their money there a long time, and even when they have

made some purchase they will give notice to the banker some time

in advance to have their money ready when the formalities and

legal documents are complete.

    In these circumstances the banker will often be able to lend

90,000 ounces of the 100,000 he owes throughout the year and will

only need to keep in hand 10,000 ounces to meet all the

withdrawals. He has to do with wealthy and economical persons; as

fast as one thousand ounces are demanded of him in one direction,

a thousand are brought to him from another. It is enough as a

rule for him to keep in hand the tenth part of his deposits.

There have been examples and experiences of this in London.

Instead of the individuals in question keeping in hand all the

year round the greatest part of 100,000 ounces the custom of

depositing it with a banker causes 90,000 ounces of the 100,000

to be put into circulation. This is primarily the idea one can

form of the utility of banks of this sort. The bankers or

goldsmiths contribute to accelerate the circulation of money.

They lend it out at interest at their own risk and peril, and yet

they are or ought to be always ready to cash their notes when

desired on demand.

    If an individual has 1000 ounces to pay to another he will

give him in payment the banker's note for that amount. This other

will perhaps not go and demand the money of the banker. He will

keep the note and give it on occasion to a third person in

payment, and this note may pass through several hands in large

payments without any one going for a long time to demand the

money from the banker. It will be only some one who has not

complete confidence or has several small sums to pay who will

demand the amount of it. In this first example the cash of a

banker is only the tenth part of his trade.

    If 100 individuals or landowners deposit with a banker their

income every six months as it is received, and then demand their

money back as and when they have need to spend it, the banker

will be in a position to lend much more of the money which he

owes and receives at the beginning of the half years, for a short

term of some months, than he will be towards the end of these

periods. And his experience of the conduct of his clients will

teach him that he can hardly lend during the whole year more than

about one half of the sums which he owes. Bankers of this kind

will be ruined in credit if they fail for one instant to pay

their notes on their first presentation, and when they are short

of cash in hand they will give anything to have money at once,

that is to say a much higher interest than they receive on the

sums they have lent. Hence they make it a rule based on their

experience to keep always in hand enough to meet demands, and

rather more than less. Many Bankers of this kind (and they are

the greatest number) always keep in hand half the amount

deposited with them and lend the other half at interest and put

it into circulation. In this second example the Banker causes his

notes of 100,000 ounces or ecus to circulate with 50,000 ecus, If

he has a great flow of deposits and great credit this increases

confidence in his notes, and makes people less eager to cash

them, but only delays, his payments a few days or weeks when the

notes fall into the hands of persons who are not accustomed to

deal with him, and he ought always to guide himself by those who

are accustomed to entrust their money to him. If his notes come

into the hands of those of his own business they will have

nothing more pressing than to withdraw the money from him.

    If those who deposit money with the Banker are Undertakers

and Merchants who pay in large sums daily and soon after draw

them out it will often happen that if the Banker divert more than

one third of his cash he will find himself in difficulty to meet

the demands.

    It is easy to understand by these examples that the sums of

money which a Goldsmith or a Banker can lend at interest or

divert from his cash are naturally proportionable to the practice

and conduct of his clients; that while we have seen Bankers who

were safe with a cash reserve of one-tenth, others can hardly

keep less than one half or two-thirds, though their credit be as

high as that of the first.

    Some trust one Banker, some another. The most fortunate is

the Banker who has for clients rich gentlemen who are always

looking out for safe employment for their money without wishing

to invest it at interest while they wait.

    A general national bank has this advantage over the bank of a

single Goldsmith that there is always more confidence in it. The

largest deposits are willingly brought to it, even from the most

remote quarters of the city, and it leaves generally to small

Bankers only the deposit of petty sums in their neighbourhood.

Even the revenues of the State are paid in to it in countries

where the Prince is not absolute. And this, far from injuring

credit and confidence in it, serves only to increase them.

    If payments in a national bank are made by transfers or

clearings there will be this advantage, that they are not subject

to forgeries, but if the Bank gives notes false notes may be made

and cause disorder. There will be also this disadvantage that

those who are in the quarters of the city at a distance from the

Bank will rather pay and receive in money than go thither,

especially those in the country. But if the bank notes are

dispersed they can be used far and near. In the national Banks of

Venice and Amsterdam payment is made only in book credit, but in

that of London it is made in credit, in notes, and in money at

the choice of the individuals, and it is today the strongest

Bank.

    It will then be understood that all the advantage of Banks,

public or private in a city, is to accelerate the circulation of

money and to prevent so much of it from being hoarded as it would

naturally be for several intervals.





Chapter VII



Further explanations and enquiries as to the utility of a

National Bank





    It is of little importance to examine why the Bank of Venice

and that of Amsterdam keep their books in moneys of account

different from current money, and why there is always an agio on

converting these book credits into currency. It is not a point of

any service for circulation. The Bank of England has not followed

it in this. Its accounts, its notes and its payments are made and

are kept in current coin, which seems to me more uniform and more

natural and no less useful.

    I have not been able to obtain exact information of the

quantity of sums ordinarily brought to these Banks, nor the

amount of their notes and accounts, loans, and sums kept as

reserve. Some one who is better informed on these points will be

better able to discuss them. As, however, I know fairly well that

these sums are not so huge as commonly supposed I will not omit

to give an idea of them.

    If the bills and notes of the Bank of England which seems to

me the most considerable, amount weekly on an average to

4,000,000 ounces of silver or about 1 million sterling, and if

they are content to keep regularly in reserve a quarter or

?50,000 sterling or 1 million ounces of silver in coin, the

utility of this Bank to circulation corresponds to an increase of

the money of the State by 3 million ounces or ?50,000 sterling

which is without doubt a very large sum and of very great utility

for the circulation when it has need to be speeded up: for I have

remarked elsewhere that there are cases where it is better for

the welfare of the State to retard the circulation than to

accelerate it. I have heard that the notes and bills of the Bank

of England have risen in some cases to 2 millions sterling, but

it seems to me this can only have been by extraordinary accident.

And I think the utility of this Bank corresponds in general only

to about one tenth part of all the money in circulation in

England.

    If the explanations given to me in round figures in 1719 on

the receipts of the Bank of Venice are correct it may be said of

national banks generally that their utility never corresponds to

the tenth part of the current money circulating in a State. This

is approximately what I ascertained there.

    The revenues of the State of Venice may amount annually to 4

million ounces of silver, which must be paid in Bank money, and

the Collectors set up for that purpose who receive at Bergamo and

in the most distant places taxes in money, are obliged to change

them into bank money when they make payment of them to the

Republic.

    All payments at Venice for negociations, purchases and sales

above a certain modest sum must by law be made in Bank money. All

the retailers who have collected current money in their dealings

are compelled to buy Bank money with it to make their payments

for large amounts. And those who need for their expenses or for

the detail of small circulation to get back current money have to

sell their Bank money to obtain it.

    It is found that the sellers and buyers of the Bank money are

regularly equal when the total of all the credits or inscriptions

on the books of the Bank do not exceed the value of 800,000

ounces of silver or thereabout.

    Time and experience (according to my informant) have given

this knowledge to the Venetians. When the Bank was first set up

individuals brought their money to the Bank to have credit at the

Bank of the same value. This money deposited at the Bank was

later spent for the needs of the Republic and yet the Bank money

preserved its original value because there were as many people

who had need to buy it as those who had need to sell it. Finally

the State being pressed for money gave to the War Contractors

credits in Bank money instead of silver and doubled the amount of

its credits.

    Then the number of sellers of Bank money being much greater

than the buyers Bank money began to be at a discount against

silver and fell 20 per cent below. By this discredit the revenue

of the Republic fell off one fifth and the only remedy found for

this disorder was to pledge part of the State revenue to borrow

Bank money at interest. By these borrowings of Bank money half of

them were cancelled and then the sellers and buyers being about

equal the Bank regained its original credit and the total of Bank

money was brought back to 800,000 ounces of silver.

    It is thus that it has been ascertained that the utility of

the Bank of Venice as regards circulation corresponds to about

800,000 ounces of silver: and if it is supposed that all the

current money in the States of that Republic amount to 8 million

ounces of silver the utility of the Bank corresponds to one tenth

of that silver.

    A national Bank in the capital of a great Kingdom or State

must, it seems, contribute less to the utility of circulation

because of the distance of its provinces, than in a small State.

And when money circulates there in greater abundance than among

its neighbours a national Bank does more harm than good. An

abundance of fictitious and imaginary money causes the same

disadvantages as an increase of real money in circulation, by

raising the price of land and labour, or by making works and

manufactures more expensive at the risk of subsequent loss. But

this furtive abundance vanishes at the first gust of discreet and

precipitates disorder.

    Towards the middle of the reign of Louis XIV there was more

money in circulation in France than in neighbouring countries,

and the King's revenue was collected there without the help of a

Bank, as easily and conveniently as it is collected today in

England with the help of the Bank of England.

    If the clearings at Lyons in one of its four fairs amount to

80 millions of livres, if they are begun and finished with a

single million of ready money, they are doubtless of great

convenience in saving the trouble of an infinity of transports of

silver from one house to another. But with that exception it

seems that with this same million of cash which began and ended

these clearings it would be quite feasible to conduct in three

months all the payments of 80 millions.

    The Paris bankers have often observed that the same bag of

money has come back to them 4 or 5 times in the same day when

they had a good deal to pay out and receive.

    I think pubic banks of very great utility in small States and

those where silver is rather scarce, but of little service for

the solid advantage of a great State.

    The Emperor Tiberius, a Prince strict and economical, had

saved up in the Imperial Treasury 2700 millions of sesterces,

equal to 25 millions sterling or 100 million ounces of silver, an

enormous sum in coin for those times and even for today. It is

true that in tying up so much money he embarrassed the

circulation and that silver became scarcer at Rome than it had

been.

    Tiberius, who attributed this scarcity to the monopoly of

Contractors and Financiers who farmed the Imperial revenues,

ordered by an edict that they should buy land up to at least two

thirds of their capital. This Edict, instead of animating the

circulation threw it completely into disorder. All the Financiers

hoarded and called in their capital under the pretext of putting

themselves into a position to obey the Edict by buying land,

which instead of rising in value sunk to a much lower price owing

to the scarcity, of silver in circulation. Tiberius remedied this

scarcity by lending to individuals on good security only 300

million sesterces, a ninth part of the money which he had in his

Treasury.

    If the ninth part of the Treasury sufficed at Rome to

re-establish the circulation it would seem that the establishment

of a general Bank in a great Kingdom where its utility would

never correspond to the tenth part of the money in circulation

when it is not hoarded, would be of no real and permanent

advantage, and that considered in its intrinsic value it can only

be regarded as an expedient for gaining time.

    But a real increase in the quantity of circulating money is

of a different nature. We have already spoken of it and the

Treasure of Tiberius gives us again occasion to say a word of it

here, This treasure of 2700 millions of sesterces, left at the

death of Tiberius, was squandered by the Emperor Caligula his

successor in less than a year. Money was never seen so abundant

at Rome, What was the result? This mass of money plunged the

Romans into luxury and into all sorts of crimes to pay for it.

More than 60,000 pounds sterling left the Empire every year for

the merchandise of the Indies, and in less than 30 years the

Empire grew poor and silver became very scarce there without any

dismemberment or loss of a Province.

    Though I consider a general Bank is in reality of very little

solid service in a great State I allow that there are

circumstances in which a Bank may have effects which seem

astonishing.

    In a city where there are public debts for considerable

amounts the facility of a Bank enables one to buy and sell

capital stock in a moment for enormous sums without causing any

disturbance in the circulation. If at London a person sells his

South Sea stock to buy stock in the Bank or in the East India

Company, or hoping that in a short time he will be able to buy at

a lower price stock in the same South Sea Company, he always

takes Banknotes, and generally money is not asked for in respect

of these notes but only for the interest on them. As one hardly

spends one's capital there is no need to change it into coin, but

one is always forced to ask the Bank for money for subsistence

since cash is needed for small dealings.

    If a Landowner who has 1000 ounces of silver pays 200 of them

for the interest of public stock and spends 800 ounces of them

himself, the thousand ounces will always require coinage. This

proprietor will spend 800 and the Owners of the funds will spend

200 of them. But when these Proprietors are in the habit of

speculation, selling and buying public stock, no ready silver is

needed for these operations, bank notes suffice. If it were

necessary to draw hard cash out of circulation to serve in these

purchases and sales it would amount to a great sum and would

often impede the circulation, or rather it would happen in that

case that the stocks could not be sold and bought so often.

    It is doubtless the origin of these capitals or money

deposited in the Bank and drawn out only on rare occasions, such

as when an owner of capital engages in some transaction or needs

cash for small purchases, which explains why the Bank keeps in

reserve only the fourth or sixth part of the silver against which

it issues notes. If the Bank had not the funds of many of these

capitals it wonld in the ordinary course of circulation find

itself would in the ordinary course of circulation find itself

compelled like private banks to keep half its deposits in hand to

be solvent. It is true that the Bank books and its dealings do

not distinguish those capitals which pass through several hands

in the sales and purchases made in Change Alley. These notes are

often renewed at the Bank and changed against others in

purchases. But the experience of purchases and sales of stock

show clearly that the total of them is considerable, and without

these purchases and sales the sums deposited at the Bank would be

certainly smaller.

    This means that when a State is not in debt and has no need

of purchases and sales of stock the help of a Bank will be less

necessary and less important.

    In 1720 the capital of public stock and of bubbles which were

snares and enterprises of private companies at London, rose to

the value of 800 millions sterling, yet the purchases and sales

of such pestilential stock were carried on without difficulty

through the quantity of notes of all kinds which were issued,

while the same paper money was accepted in payment of interest.

But as soon as the idea of great fortunes induced many

individuals to increase their expenses, to buy carriages, foreign

linen and silk, cash was needed for all that, I mean for the

expenditure of the interest, and this broke up all the systems,

This example shows that the paper and credit of public and

private Banks may cause surprising results in everything which

does not concern ordinary expenditure for drink and food,

clothing, and other family requirements, but that in the regular

course of the circulation the help of Banks and credit of this

kind is much smaller and less solid than is generally supposed.

Silver alone is the true sinews of circulation.





Chapter VIII



Of the Refinements of Credit of General Banks







    The national Bank of London is composed of a large number of

shareholders who make choice of Directors to govern its

operations. Their primitive advantage consisted in making a

yearly distribution of the profits made by interest on the money

lent out of the Bank deposits. Later the public debt was

incorporated with it, on which the State pays an annual interest.

    In spite of such a solid foundation when the Bank had made

large advances to the State and the holders of notes were

apprehensive that the Bank was in difficulties, a run on the Bank

has been seen and holders of notes went in crowds to the Bank to

draw out money. The same thing happened on the collapse of the

South Sea Company in 1720.

    The refinements introduced to support the Bank and moderate

its discredit were first to set up a number of clerks to count

out the money to those bringing notes, to pay out large amounts

in sixpences and shillings to gain time, to pay some part to

individual holders who had been waiting whole days to take their

turn; but the most considerable sums were paid to friends who

took them away and brought them back secretly to the Bank to

repeat the same manoeuvre the next day. In this way the Bank

saved its appearance and gained time until the panic should

abate. But when that did not suffice the Bank opened a

subscription engaging trusty and solvent people to join as

guarantors of large amounts to maintain the credit and

circulation of the Bank notes.

    It was by this last refinement that the credit of the Bank

was maintained in 1720 when the South Sea Company collapsed. As

soon as it was publicly known that the subscription list was

filled by wealthy and powerful people, the run on the Bank ceased

and deposits were brought in as usual.

    If a Minister of State in England, seeking to lower the rate

of interest or for other reasons, forces up the price of public

stock in London and if he has enough credit with the Directors of

the Bank (under the obligation of indemnifying them in case of

loss) to get them to issue a quantity of bank notes without

backing, begging them to use these notes themselves to buy

several blocks and capitals of the public stock, this stock will

not fail to rise in price through these operations, And those who

have sold stock, seeing the high price continue, will perhaps

decide (so as not to leave their bank notes idle and thinking

from the rumours spread about that the rate of interest will fall

and the stock go up further in price) to buy it back at a higher

price than they sold it for, If several people seeing the agents

of the Banks buy this stock step in and do likewise thinking to

profit like them, the public funds will increase in price to the

point which the Minister wishes. And it may happen that the Bank

will cleverly resell at a higher price all the stock it has

purchased at the Minister's request, and will not only make a

large profit on it but will retire and cancel all the

extraordinary banknotes which it had issued.

    If the Bank alone raises the price of public stock by buying

it, it will by so much depress it when it resells to cancel its

excess issue of notes. But it always happens that many people

wishing to follow the Agents of the Bank in their operations help

to keep up the price. Some of them get caught for want of

understanding these operations, in which there enter infinite

refinements or rather trickery which lie outside my subject.

    It is then undoubted that a Bank with the complicity of a

Minister is able to raise and support the price of public stock

and to lower the rate of interest in the State at the pleasure of

this Minister when the steps are taken discreetly, and thus pay

off the State debt. But these refinements which open the door to

making large fortunes are rarely carried out for the sole

advantage of the State, and those who take part in them are

generally corrupted. The excess banknotes, made and issued on

these occasions, do not upset the circulation, because being used

for the buying and selling of stock they do not serve for

household expenses and are not changed into silver. But if some

panic or unforeseen crisis drove the holders to demand silver

from the Bank the bomb would burst and it would be seen that

these are dangerous operations.



