<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <TITLE>index</TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT FACE="Times New Roman,Times"><FONT SIZE=+3>Essays,

Moral and Literary</FONT></FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT FACE="Times New Roman,Times"><FONT SIZE=-1>&nbsp;</FONT></FONT></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT FACE="Times New Roman,Times"><FONT SIZE=+2>by David Hume</FONT></FONT></B></CENTER>



<HR WIDTH="100%">

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><A HREF="Of Essay Writing.txt">OF ESSAY WRITING</A>

<BR>&nbsp;

<BR><A HREF="Of Superstition and Enthusiasm.txt">OF SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM</A>

<BR>&nbsp;

<BR><A HREF="Of the Delicacy of Taste and Passion.txt">OF THE DELICACY

OF TASTE AND PASSION</A>

<BR>&nbsp;

<BR><A HREF="Of the Liberty of the Press.txt">OF THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS</A>

<BR>&nbsp;

<BR><A HREF="Of the Rise and Progress of the Arts and Sciences.txt">OF

THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES</A>

<BR>&nbsp;

<BR><A HREF="Of the Standard of Taste.txt">Of the Standard of&nbsp; Taste</A>

<BR>&nbsp;

<BR><A HREF="Of Tragedy.txt">OF TRAGEDY</A></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>



<HR WIDTH="100%">

</BODY>

</HTML>



                    









		OF SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM

                                     

                                     

                           David Hume

                                

                              1741

                                





     <That the corruption of the best things produces the worst>,

is grown into a maxim, and is commonly proved, among other

instances, by the pernicious effects of <superstition> and

<enthusiasm>, the corruptions of true religion.

     These two species of false religion, though both pernicious,

are yet of a very different, and even of a contrary nature. The

mind of man is subject to certain unaccountable terrors and

apprehensions, proceeding either from the unhappy situation of

private or public affairs, from ill health, from a gloomy and

melancholy disposition, or from the concurrence of all these

circumstances. In such a state of mind, infinite unknown evils

are dreaded from unknown agents; and where real objects of terror

are wanting, the soul, active to its own prejudice, and fostering

its predominant inclination, finds imaginary ones, to whose power

and malevolence it sets no limits. As these enemies are entirely

invisible and unknown, the methods taken to appease them are

equally unaccountable, and consist in ceremonies, observances,

mortifications, sacrifices, presents, or in any practice, however

absurd or frivolous, which either folly or knavery recommends to

a blind and terrified credulity. Weakness, fear, melancholy,

together with ignorance, are, therefore, the true sources of

Superstition.

     But the mind of man is also subject to an unaccountable

elevation and presumption, arising from prosperous success, from

luxuriant health, from strong spirits, or from a bold and

confident disposition. In such a state of mind, the imagination

swells with great, but confused conceptions, to which no

sublunary beauties or enjoyments can correspond. Every thing

mortal and perishable vanishes as unworthy of attention. And a

full range is given to the fancy in the invisible regions or

world of spirits, where the soul is at liberty to indulge itself

in every imagination, which may best suit its present taste and

disposition. Hence arise raptures, transports, and surprising

flights of fancy; and confidence and presumption still

encreasing, these raptures, being altogether unaccountable, and

seeming quite beyond the reach of our ordinary faculties, are

attributed to the immediate inspiration of that Divine Being, who

is the object of devotion. In a little time, the inspired person

comes to regard himself as a distinguished favourite of the

Divinity; and when this frenzy once takes place, which is the

summit of enthusiasm, every whimsy is consecrated: Human reason,

and even morality are rejected as fallacious guides: And the

fanatic madman delivers himself over, blindly, and with out

reserve, to the supposed illapses of the spirit, and to

inspiration from above. Hope, pride, presumption, a warm

imagination, together with ignorance, are, therefore, the true

sources of Enthusiasm.

     These two species of false religion might afford occasion to

many speculations; but I shall confine myself, at present, to a

few reflections concerning their different influence on

government and society.

     My first reflection is, <That superstition is favourable to

priestly power, and enthusiasm not less or rather more contrary

to it, than sound reason and philosophy>. As superstition is

founded on fear, sorrow, and a depression of spirits, it

represents the man to himself in such despicable colours, that he

appears unworthy, in his own eyes, of approaching the divine

presence, and naturally has recourse to any other person, whose

sanctity of life, or, perhaps, impudence and cunning, have made

him be supposed more favoured by the Divinity. To him the

superstitious entrust their devotions: To his care they recommend

their prayers, petitions, and sacrifices: And by his means, they

hope to render their addresses acceptable to their incensed

Deity. Hence the origin of Priests,[2] who may justly be regarded

as an invention of a timorous and abject superstition, which,

ever diffident of itself, dares not offer up its own devotions,

but ignorantly thinks to recommend itself to the Divinity, by the

mediation of his supposed friends and servants. As superstition

is a considerable ingredient in almost all religions, even the

most fanatical; there being nothing but philosophy able entirely

to conquer these unaccountable terrors; hence it proceeds, that

in almost every sect of religion there are priests to be found:

But the stronger mixture there is of superstition, the higher is

the authority of the priesthood.[3]

     On the other hand, it may be observed, that all enthusiasts

have been free from the yoke of ecclesiastics, and have expressed

great independence in their devotion; with a contempt of forms,

ceremonies, and traditions. The quakers are the most egregious,

though, at the same time, the most innocent enthusiasts that have

yet been known; and are, perhaps, the only sect, that have never

admitted priests amongst them. The independents, of all the

English sectaries, approach nearest to the quakers in fanaticism,

and in their freedom from priestly bondage. The presbyterians

follow after, at an equal distance in both particulars. In short

this observation is founded in experience; and will also appear

to be founded in reason, if we consider, that, as enthusiasm

arises from a presumptuous pride and confidence, it thinks itself

sufficiently qualified to approach the Divinity, without any

human mediator. Its rapturous devotions are so fervent, that it

even imagines itself actually to approach him by the way of

contemplation and inward converse; which makes it neglect all

those outward ceremonies and observances, to which the assistance

of the priests appears so requisite in the eyes of their

superstitious votaries. The fanatic consecrates himself, and

bestows on his own person a sacred character, much superior to

what forms and ceremonious institutions can confer on any other.

     My <second> reflection with regard to these species of false

religion is, <that religions, which partake of enthusiasm are, on

their first rise, more furious and violent than those which

partake of superstition; but in a little time become more gentle

and moderate>. The violence of this species of religion, when

excited by novelty, and animated by opposition, appears from

numberless instances; of the <anabaptists> in Germany, the

<camisars> in France, the l<evellers> and other fanatics in

England and the <covenanters> in Scotland. Enthusiasm being

founded on strong spirits, and a presumptuous boldness of

character, it naturally begets the most extreme resolutions;

especially after it rises to that height as to inspire the

deluded fanatic with the opinion of divine illuminations, and

with a contempt for the common rules of reason, morality, and

prudence.

     It is thus enthusiasm produces the most cruel disorders in

human society; but its fury is like that of thunder and tempest,

which exhaust themselves in a little time, and leave the air more

calm and pure than before. When the first fire of enthusiasm is

spent, men naturally, in all fanatical sects, sink into the

greatest remissness and coolness in sacred matters; there being

no body of men among them, endowed with sufficient authority,

whose interest is concerned to support the religious spirit: No

rites, no ceremonies, no holy observances, which may enter into

the common train of life, and preserve the sacred principles from

oblivion. Superstition, on the contrary, steals in gradually and

insensibly; renders men tame and submissive; is acceptable to the

magistrate, and seems inoffensive to the people: Till at last the

priest, having firmly established his authority, becomes the

tyrant and disturber of human society, by his endless

contentions, persecutions, and religious wars. How smoothly did

the Romish church advance in her acquisition of power ? But into

what dismal convulsions did she throw all Europe, in order to

maintain it ? On the other hand, our sectaries, who were formerly

such dangerous bigots, are now become very free reasoners; and

the <quakers> seem to approach nearly the only regular body of

<deists> in the universe, the l<iterati>, or the disciples of

Confucius in China.[4]

     My <third> observation on this head is, <that superstition

is an enemy to civil liberty, and enthusiasm a friend to it>. As

superstition groans under the dominion of priests, and enthusiasm

is destructive of all ecclesiastical power, this sufficiently

accounts for the present observation. Not to mention, that

enthusiasm, being the infirmity of bold and ambitious tempers, is

naturally accompanied with a spirit of liberty; as superstition,

on the contrary, renders men tame and abject, and fits them for

slavery. We learn from English history, that, during the civil

wars, the <independents> and <deists>, though the most opposite

in their religious principles; yet were united in their political

ones, and were alike passionate for a commonwealth. And since the

origin of <whig> and <tory>, the leaders of the <whigs> have

either been <deists> or profest <latitudnarians> in their

principles; that is, friends to toleration, and indifferent to

any particular sect of <christians>: While the sectaries, who

have all a strong tincture of enthusiasm, have always, without

exception, concurred with that party, in defence of civil

liberty. The resemblance in their superstitions long united the

high church <tories>, and the <Roman catholics>, in support of

prerogative and kingly power; though experience of the tolerating

spirit of the <whigs> seems of late to have reconciled the

<catholics> to that party.

     The <molinists> and <jansenists> in France have a thousand

unintelligible disputes, which are not worthy the reflection of a

man of sense: But what principally distinguishes these two sects,

and alone merits attention, is the different spirit of their

religion. The <molinists> conducted by the <jesuits>, are great

friends to superstition, rigid observers of external forms and

ceremonies, and devoted to the authority of the priests, and to

tradition. The <jansenists> are enthusiasts, and zealous

promoters of the passionate devotion, and of the inward life;

little influenced by authority; and, in a word, but half

catholics. The consequences are exactly conformable to the

foregoing reasoning. The <jesuits> are the tyrants of the people,

and the slaves of the court: And the <jansenists> preserve alive

the small sparks of the love of liberty, which are to be found in

the French nation.













                    Of the Standard of  Taste



                           David Hume

                              1757

                                

                                





                                

     The great variety of Taste, as well as of opinion, which

prevails in the world, is too obvious not to have fallen under

every one's observation. Men of the most confined knowledge are

able to remark a difference of taste in the narrow circle of

their acquaintance, even where the persons have been educated

under the same government, and have early imbibed the same

prejudices. But those, who can enlarge their view to contemplate

distance nations and remote ages, are still more surprised at the

great inconsistence and contrariety. We are apt to call barbarous

whatever departs widely from our own taste and apprehension: But

soon find the epithet of reproach retorted on us. And the highest

arrogance and self-conceit is at last startled, on observing an

equal assurance on all sides, and scruples, amidst such a contest

of sentiment, to pronounce positively in its own favour.

     As this variety of taste is obvious to the most careless

enquirer; so will it be found, on examination, to be still

greater in reality than in appearance. The sentiments of men

often differ with regard to beauty and deformity of all kinds,

even while their general discourse is the same. There are certain

terms in every language, which import blame, and others praise;

and all men, who use the same tongue, must agree in their

application of them. Every voice is united in applauding

elegance, propriety, simplicity, spirit in writing; and in

blaming fustian, affectation, coldness and a false brilliancy:

But when critics come to particulars, this seeming unanimity

vanishes; and it is found, that they had affixed a very different

meaning to their expressions. In all matters of opinion and

science, the case it opposite: The difference among men is there

oftener found to lie in generals than in particulars; and to be

less in reality than in appearance. An explanation of the terms

commonly ends the controversy; and the disputants are surprised

to find, that they had been quarreling, while at bottom they

agreed in their judgment.

     Those who found morality on sentiment, more than on reason,

are inclined to comprehend ethics under the former observation,

and to maintain, that, in all questions, which regard conduct and

manners, the difference among men is really greater than at first

sight it appears. It is indeed obvious, that writers of all

nations and all ages concur in applauding justice, humanity,

magnanimity, prudence, veracity; and in blaming the opposite

qualities. Even poets and other authors, whose compositions are

chiefly calculated to please the imagination, are yet found, from

HOMER down to FENELON, to inculcate the same moral precepts, and

to bestow their applause and blame on the same virtues and vices.

This great unanimity is usually ascribed to the influence of

plain reason; which, in all these cases, maintains similar

sentiments in all men, and prevents those controversies, to which

the abstract sciences are so much exposed. So far as the

unanimity is real, this account may be admitted as satisfactory:

But we must also allow that some part of the seeming harmony in

morals may be accounted for from the very nature of language. The

word virtue, with its equivalent in every tongue, implies praise;

as that of vice does blame: And no one, without the most obvious

and grossest impropriety, could affix reproach to a term, which

in general acceptation is understood in a good sense; or bestow

applause, where the idiom requires disapprobation. HOMER's

general precepts, where he delivers any such will never be

controverted; but it is obvious, that, when he draws particular

pictures of manners, and represents heroism in ACHILLES and

prudence in ULYSSES, he intermixes a much greater degree of

ferocity in the former, and of cunning and fraud in the latter,

than FENELON would admit of . The same ULYSSES in the GREEK poet

seems to delight in lies and fictions; and often employs them

without any necessity of even advantage: But his more scrupulous

son, in the FRENCH epic writer, exposes himself to the most

imminent perils, rather than depart from the most exact line of

truth and veracity.

      The admirers and follows of the ALCORAN insist on the

excellent moral precepts interspersed throughout that wild and

absurd performance. But it is to be supposed, that the ARABIC

words, which correspond to the ENGLISH, equity, justice,

temperance, meekness, charity, were such as, from the constant

use of that tongue, must always be taken in a good sense; and it

would have argued the greatest ignorance, not of morals, but of

language, to have mentioned them with any epithets, besides those

of applause and approbation. But would we know, whether the

pretended prophet had really attained a just sentiment of morals?

Let us attend to his narration; and we shall soon find, that he

bestows praise on such instances of treachery, inhumanity,

cruelty, revenge, bigotry, as are utterly incompatible with

civilized society. No steady rule of right seems there to be

attended to; and every action is blamed or praised, so far only

as it is beneficial or hurtful to the true believers.

      The merit of delivering true general precepts in ethics is

indeed very small. Whoever recommends any moral virtues, really

does no more than is implied in the terms themselves. That

people, who invented the word charity, and use it in a good

sense, inculcated more clearly and much more efficaciously, the

precept, be charitable, than any pretended legislator or prophet,

who should insert such a maxim in his writings. Of all

expressions, those, which, together with their other meaning,

imply a degree either of blame or approbation, are the least

liable to be perverted or mistaken.

      It is natural for us to seek a Standard of Taste; a rule,

by which the various sentiments of men may be reconciled; at

least, a decision, afforded, confirming one sentiment, and

condemning another.

      There is a species of philosophy, which cuts off all hopes

of success in such an attempt, and represents the impossibility

of ever attaining any standard of taste. The difference, it is

said, is very wide between judgment and sentiment. All sentiment

is right; because sentiment has a reference to nothing beyond

itself, and is always real, wherever a man is conscious of it.

But all determinations of the understanding are not right;

because they have a reference to something beyond themselves, to

wit, real matter of fact; and are not always conformable to that

standard. Among a thousand different opinions which different men

may entertain of the same subject, there is one, and but one,

that is just and true; and the only difficulty is to fix and

ascertain it. On the contrary, a thousand different sentiments,

excited by the same object, are all right: Because no sentiment

represents what is really in the object. It only marks a certain

conformity or relation between the object and the organs or

faculties of the mind; and if that conformity did not really

exist, the sentiment could never possibly have being. Beauty is

no quality in things themselves: It exists merely in the mind

which contemplates them; and each mind perceives a different

beauty. One person may even perceive deformity, where another is

sensible of beauty; and every individual ought to acquiesce in

his own sentiment, without pretending to regulate those of

others. To seek in the real beauty, or real deformity, is as

fruitless an enquiry, as to pretend to ascertain the real sweet

or real bitter. According to the disposition of the organs, the

same object may be both sweet and bitter; and the proverb has

justly determined it to be fruitless to dispute concerning

tastes. It is very natural, and even quite necessary to extend

this axiom to mental, as well as bodily taste; and thus common

sense, which is so often at variance with philosophy, especially

with the skeptical kind, is found, in one instance at least, to

agree in pronouncing the same decision.

     But though this axiom, by passing into a proverb, seems to

have attained the sanction of common sense; there is certainly a

species of common sense which opposes it, at least serves to

modify and restrain it. Whoever would assert an equality of

genius and elegance between OGILBY and MILTON, or BUNYAN and

ADDISON, would be thought to defend no less an extravagance, than

if he had maintained a mole-hill to be as high as TENERIFFE, or a

pond as extensive as the ocean. Though there may be found

persons, who give the preference to the former authors; no one

pays attention to such a taste; and we pronounce without scruple

the sentiment of these pretended critics to be absurd and

ridiculous. The principle of the natural equality of tastes is

then totally forgot, and while we admit it on some occasions,

where the objects seem near an equality, it appears an

extravagant paradox, or rather a palpable absurdity, where

objects so disproportioned are compared together.

      It is evident that none of the rules of composition are

fixed by reasonings a priori, or can be esteemed abstract

conclusions of the understanding, from comparing those habitudes

and relations of ideas, which are eternal and immutable. Their

foundation is the same with that of all the practical sciences,

experience; nor are they any thing but general observations,

concerning what has been universally found to please in all

countries and in all ages. Many of the beauties of poetry and

even of eloquence are founded on falsehood and fiction, on

hyperboles, metaphors, and an abuse or perversion of terms from

their natural meaning. To check the sallies of the imagination,

and to reduce every expression to geometrical truth and

exactness, would be the most contrary to the laws of criticism;

because it would produce a work, which, by universal experience,

has been found the most insipid and disagreeable. But though

poetry can never submit to exact truth, it must be confined by

rules of art, discovered to the author either by genius or

observation. If some negligent or irregular writers have pleased,

they have not pleased by their transgressions of rule or order,

but in spite of these transgressions: They have possessed other

beauties, which were conformable to just criticism; and the force

of these beauties has been able to overpower censure, and give

the mind a satisfaction superior to the disgust arising from the

blemishes. ARIOSTO leases; but not by his monstrous and

improbable fictions, by his bizarre mixture of the serious and

comic styles, by the want of coherence in his stories, or by the

continual interruptions of his narration. He charms by the force

and clearness of his expression, by the readiness and variety of

his inventions, and by his natural pictures of the passions,

especially those of the gay and amorous kind: And however his

faults may diminish our satisfaction, they are not able entirely

to destroy it. Did our pleasure really arise from those parts of

his poem, which we denominate faults, this would be no objection

to criticism in general: It would only be an objection to those

particular rules of criticism, which would establish such

circumstances to be faults, and would represent them as

universally blameable. If they are found to please, they cannot

be faults; let the pleasure, which they produce, be ever so

unexpected and unaccountable.

      But though all the general rules of art are founded only on

experience and on the observation of the common sentiments of

human nature, we must not imagine, that, on every occasion the

feelings of men will be conformable to these rules. Those finer

emotions of the mind are of a very tender and delicate nature,

and require the concurrence of many favourable circumstances to

make them play with facility and exactness, according to their

general and established principles. The least exterior hindrance

to such small springs, or the least internal disorder, disturbs

their motion, and confounds the operation of the whole machine.

When we would make an experiment of this nature, and would try

the force of any beauty or deformity, we must choose with care a

proper time and place, and bring the fancy to a suitable

situation and disposition. A perfect serenity of mind, a

recollection of thought, a due attention to the object; if any of

these circumstances be wanting, our experiment will be

fallacious, and we shall be unable to judge of the catholic and

universal beauty. The relation, which nature has placed between

the form and the sentiment will at least be more obscure; and it

will require greater accuracy to trace and discern it. We shall

be able to ascertain its influence not so much from the operation

of each particular beauty, as from the durable admiration, which

attends those works, that have survived all the caprices of mode

and fashion, all the mistakes of ignorance and envy.

      The same HOMER, who pleased at ATHENS and ROME two thousand

years ago, is still admired at PARIS and at LONDON. All the

changes of climate, government, religion, and language, have not

been able to obscure his glory. Authority or prejudice may give a

temporary vogue to a bad poet or orator, but his reputation will

never be durable or general. When his compositions are examined

by posterity or by foreigners, the enchantment is dissipated, and

his faults appear in their true colours. On the contrary, a real

genius, the longer his works endure, and the more wide they are

spread, the more sincere is the admiration which he meets with.

Envy and jealousy have too much place in a narrow circle; and

even familiar acquaintance with his person may diminish the

applause due to his performances. But when these obstructions are

removed, the beauties, which are naturally fitted to excite

agreeable sentiments, immediately display their energy and while

the world endures, they maintain their authority over the minds

of men.

      It appears then, that, amidst all the variety and caprice

of taste, there are certain general principles of approbation or

blame, whose influence a careful eye may trace in all operations

of the mind. Some particular forms or qualities, from the

original structure of the internal fabric, are calculated to

please, and others to displease; and if they fail of their effect

in any particular instance, it is from some apparent defect or

imperfection in the organ. A man in a fever would not insist on

his palate as able to decide concerning flavours; nor would one,

affected with the jaundice, pretend to give a verdict with regard

to colours. In each creature, there is a sound and a defective

state; and the former alone can be supposed to afford us a true

standard of a considerable uniformity of sentiment among men, we

may thence derive an idea of the perfect beauty; in like manner

as the appearance of objects in daylight, to the eye of a man in

health, is denominated their true and real colour, even while

colour is allowed to be merely a phantasm of the senses.

      Many and frequent are the defects in the internal organs,

which prevent or weaken the influence of those general

principles, on which depends our sentiment of beauty or

deformity. Though some objects, by the structure of the mind, be

naturally calculated to give pleasure, it is not to be expected,

that in every individual the pleasure will be equally felt.

Particular incidents and situations occur, which either throw a

false light on the objects, or hinder the true from conveying to

the imagination the proper sentiment and perception.

      One obvious cause, why many feel not the proper sentiment

of beauty, is the want of that delicacy of imagination, which is

requisite to convey a sensibility of those finer emotions. This

delicacy every one pretends to: Every one talks of it; and would

reduce every kind of taste or sentiment to its standard. But as

our intention in this essay is to mingle some light of the

understanding with the feelings of sentiment, it will be proper

to give a more accurate definition of delicacy, than has hitherto

been attempted. And not to draw our philosophy from too profound

a source, we shall have recourse to a noted story in DON QUIXOTE.

      It is with good reason, says SANCHO to the squire with the

great nose, that I pretend to have a judgment in wine: this is a

quality hereditary in our family. Two of my kinsmen were once

called to give their opinion of a hogshead, which was supposed to

be excellent, being old and of a good vintage. One of them tastes

it; considers it; and after mature reflection pronounces the wine

to be good, were it not for a small taste of leather, which he

perceived in it. The other, after using the same precautions,

gives also his verdict in favour of the wine; but with the

reserve of a taste of iron, which he could easily distinguish.

You cannot imagine how much they were both ridiculed for their

judgment. But who laughed in the end? On emptying the hogshead,

there was found at the bottom, an old key with a leathern thong

tied to it.

     The great resemblance between mental and bodily taste will

easily teach us to apply this story. Though it be certain, that

beauty and deformity, more than sweet and bitter, are not

qualities in objects, but belong entirely to the sentiment,

internal or external; it must be allowed, that there are certain

qualities in objects, which are fitted by nature to produce those

particular feelings. Now as these qualities may be found in a

small degree, or may be mixed and confounded with each other, it

often happens, that the taste is not affected with such minute

qualities, or is not able to distinguish all the particular

flavours, amidst the disorder, in which they are presented. Where

the organs are so fine, as to allow nothing to escape them; and

at the same time so exact as to perceive every ingredient in the

composition: This we call delicacy of taste, whether we employ

these terms in the literal or metaphorical sense. Here then the

general rules of beauty are of use; being drawn from established

models, and from the observation of what pleases or displeases,

when presented singly and in a high degree: And if the same

qualities, in a continued composition and in a small degree,

affect not the organs with a sensible delight or uneasiness, we

exclude the person from all pretensions to this delicacy. To

produce these general rules or avowed patterns of composition is

like finding the key with the leathern thong; which justified the

verdict of SANCHO's kinsmen, and confounded those pretended

judges who had condemned them. Though the hogshead had never been

emptied, the taste of the one was still equally delicate, and

that of the other equally dull and languid: But it would have

been more difficult to have proved the superiority of the former,

to the conviction of every by-stander. In like manner, though the

beauties of writing had never been methodized, or reduced to

general principles; though no excellent models had ever been

acknowledged; the different degrees of taste would still have

subsisted, and the judgment of one man had been preferable to

that of another; but it would not have been so easy to silence

the bad critic, who might always insist upon his particular

sentiment, and refuse to submit to his antagonist. But wen we

show him an avowed principle of art; when we illustrate this

principle by examples, whose operation, from his own particular

taste, he acknowledges to be conformable to the principle; when

we prove, that the same principle may be applied to the present

case, where he did not perceive or feel its influence: He must

conclude, upon the whole, that the fault lies in himself, and

that he wants the delicacy, which is requisite to make him

sensible of every beauty and every blemish, in any composition or

discourse.

      It is acknowledged to be the perfection of every sense or

faculty, to perceive with exactness its most minute objects, and

allow nothing to escape its notice and observation. The smaller

the objects are, which become sensible to the eye, the finer is

that organ, and the more elaborate its make and composition. A

good palate is not tried by strong flavours; but by a mixture of

small ingredients, where we are still sensible of each part,

notwithstanding its minuteness and its confusion with the rest.

In like manner, a quick and acute perception of beauty and

deformity must be the perfection of our mental taste; nor can a

man be satisfied with himself while he suspects, that any

excellence or blemish in a discourse has passed him unobserved.

In this case, the perfection of the man, and the perfection of

the sense or feeling, are found to be united. A very delicate

palate, on many occasions, may be a great inconvenience both to a

man himself and to his friends: But a delicate taste of wit or

beauty must always be a desirable quality; because it is the

source of all the finest and most innocent enjoyments, of which

human nature is susceptible. In this decision the sentiments of

all mankind are agreed. Wherever you can ascertain a delicacy of

taste, it is sure to meet with approbation; and the best way of

ascertaining it is to appeal to those models and principles,

which have been established by the uniform consent and experience

of nations and ages.

      But though there be naturally a wide difference in point of

delicacy between one person and another, nothing tends further to

encrease and improve this talent, than practice in a particular

art, and the frequent survey or contemplation of a particular

species of beauty. When objects of any kind are first presented

to the eye or imagination, the sentiment, which attends them, is

obscure and confused; and the mind is, in a great measure,

incapable of pronouncing concerning their merits or defects. The

taste cannot perceive the several excellences of the performance;

much less distinguish the particular character of each

excellency, and ascertain its quality and degree. If it pronounce

the whole in general to be beautiful or deformed, it is the

utmost that can be expected; and even this judgment, a person, so

unpracticed, will be apt to deliver with great hesitation and

reserve. But allow him to acquire experience in those objects,

his feeling becomes more exact and nice: He not only perceives

the beauties and defects of each part, but marks the

distinguishing species of each quality, and assigns it suitable

praise or blame. A clear and distinct sentiment attends him

through the whole survey of the objects; and he discerns that

very degree and kind of approbation or displeasure, which each

part is naturally fitted to produce. The mist dissipates, which

seemed formerly to hang over the object: the organ acquires

greater perfection in its operations; and can pronounce, without

danger of mistake, concerning the merits of every performance. In

a word, the same address and dexterity, which practice gives to

the execution of any work, is also acquired by the same means in

the judging of it.

      So advantageous is practice to the discernment of beauty,

that, before we can give judgment of any work of importance, it

will even be requisite, that that very individual performance be

more than once perused by us, and be surveyed in different lights

with attention and deliberation. There is a flutter or hurry of

thought which attends the first perusal of any piece, and which

confounds the genuine sentiment of beauty. The relation of the

parts is not discerned: The true characters of style are little

distinguished: The several perfections and defects seem wrapped

up in a species of confusion, and present themselves indistinctly

to the imagination. Not to mention, that there is a species of

beauty, which, as it is florid and superficial, pleases at first;

but being found incompatible with a just expression either of

reason or passion, soon palls upon the taste, and is then

rejected with disdain, at least rated at a much lower value.

      It is impossible to continue in the practice of

contemplating any order of beauty, without being frequently

obliged to form comparisons between the several species and

degrees of excellence, and estimating their proportion to each

other. A man, who has had no opportunity of comparing the

different kinds of beauty, is indeed totally unqualified to

pronounce an opinion with regard to any object presented to him.

By comparison alone we fix the epithets of praise or blame, and

learn how to assign the due degree of each. The coarsest daubing

contains a certain lustre of colours and exactness of imitation,

which are so far beauties, and would affect the mind of a peasant

or Indian with the highest admiration. The most vulgar ballads

are not entirely destitute of harmony or nature; and not but a

person, familiarized to superior beauties, would pronounce their

numbers harsh, or narration uninteresting. A great inferiority of

beauty gives pain to a person conversant in the highest

excellence of the kind, and is for that reason pronounced a

deformity: As the most finished object, with which we are

acquainted, is naturally supposed to have reached the pinnacle of

perfection, and to be entitled to the highest applause. One

accustomed to see, and examine, and weigh the several

performances, admired in different ages and nations, can only

rate the merits of a work exhibited to his view, and assign its

proper rank among the productions of genius.

      But to enable a critic the more fully to execute this

undertaking, he must preserve his mind free from all prejudice,

and allow nothing to enter into his consideration, but the very

object which is submitted to his examination. We may observe,

that every work of art, in order to produce its due effect on the

mind, must be surveyed in a certain point of view, and not be

fully relished by persons, whose situation, real or imaginary, is

not conformable to that which is required by the performance. An

orator addresses himself to a particular audience, and must have

a regard to their particular genius, interests, opinions,

passions, and prejudices; otherwise he hopes in vain to govern

their resolutions, and inflame their affections. Should they even

have entertained some prepossessions against him, however

unreasonable, he must not overlook this disadvantage; but, before

he enters upon the subject, must endeavour to conciliate their

affection, and acquire their good graces. A critic of a different

age or notion, who should peruse this discourse, must have all

these circumstances in his eye, and must place himself in the

same situation as the audience, in order to form a true judgment

of the oration. In like manner, when any work is addressed to the

public, though I should have a friendship or enmity with the

author, I must depart from this situation; and considering myself

as a man in general, forget, if possible, my individual being and

my peculiar circumstances. A person influenced by prejudice,

complies not with this condition; but obstinately maintains his

natural position, without placing himself in that point of view,

which the performance supposes. If the work be addressed to

persons of a different age or nation, he makes no allowance for

their peculiar views and prejudices; but, full of the manners of

his own age and country, rashly condemns what seemed admirable in

the eyes of those for whom alone the discourse was calculated. If

the work be executed for the public, he never sufficiently

enlarges his comprehension, or forgets his interest as a friend

or enemy, as a rival or commentator. By this means, his

sentiments are perverted; nor have the same beauties and

blemishes the same influence upon him, as if he had imposed a

proper violence on his imagination, and had forgotten himself for

a moment. So far his taste evidently departs from the true

standard; and of consequence loses all credit and authority.

      It is well known, that in all questions, submitted to the

understanding, prejudice is destructive of sound judgment, and

perverts all operations of the intellectual faculties: It is no

less contrary to good taste; nor has it less influence to corrupt

our sentiment of beauty. It belongs to good sense to check its

influence in both cases; and in this respect, as well as in many

others, reason, if not an essential part of taste, is at least

requisite to the operations of this latter faculty. In all the

nobler productions of genius, there is a mutual relation and

correspondence of parts; nor can either the beauties or blemishes

be perceived by him, whose thought is not capacious enough to

comprehend all those parts, and compare then with each other, in

order to perceive the consistence and uniformity of the whole.

Every work of art has also a certain end or purpose, for which it

is calculated; and is to be deemed more or less perfect, as it is

more or less fitted to attain this end. The object of eloquence

is to persuade, of history to instruct, of poetry to please by

means of the passions and the imagination. These ends we must

carry constantly in our view, when we peruse any performance; and

we must be able to judge how far the means employed are adapted

to their respective purposes. Besides, every kind of composition,

even the most poetical, is nothing but a chain of propositions

and reasonings; not always, indeed, the justest and most exact,

but still plausible and specious, however disguised by the

colouring of the imagination. The persons introduced in tragedy

and epic poetry, must be represented as reasoning, and thinking,

and concluding, and acting, suitably to their character and

circumstances; and without judgment, as well as taste and

invention, a poet can never hope to succeed in so delicate an

undertaking. Not to mention, that the same excellence of

faculties which contributes to the improvement of reason, the

same clearness of conception, the same exactness of distinction,

the same vivacity of apprehension, are essential to the

operations of true taste, and are its infallible concomitants. It

seldom, or never happens, that a man of sense, who has experience

in any art, cannot judge of its beauty; and it is no less rare to

meet with a man who has a just taste without a sound

understanding.

      Thus, though the principles of taste be universal, and,

nearly, if not entirely the same in all men; yet few are

qualified to give judgment on any work of art, or establish their

own sentiment as the standard of beauty. The organs of internal

sensation are seldom so perfect as to allow the general

principles their full play, and produce a feeling correspondent

to those principles. They either labour under some defect, or are

vitiated by some disorder; and by that means, excite a sentiment,

which may be pronounced erroneous. When the critic has no

delicacy, he judges without any distinction, and is only affected

by the grosser and more palpable qualities of the object: The

finer touches pass unnoticed and disregarded. Where he is not

aided by practice, his verdict is attended with confusion and

hesitation. Where no comparison has been employed, the most

frivolous beauties, such as rather merit the name of defects.,

are the object of his admiration. Where he lies under the

influence of prejudice, all his natural sentiments are perverted.

Where good sense is wanting, he is not qualified to discern the

beauties of design and reasoning, which are the highest and most

excellent. Under some or other of these imperfections, the

generality of men labour; and hence a true judge in the finer

arts is observed, even during the most polished ages, to be so

fare a character; Strong sense, united to delicate sentiment,

improved by practice, perfected by comparison, and cleared of all

prejudice, can along entitle critics to this valuable character;

and the joint verdict of such, wherever they are to be found, is

the true standard of taste and beauty.

      But where are such critics to be found? By what marks are

they to be known? How distinguish them from pretenders? These

questions are embarrassing; and seem to throw us back into the

same uncertainty, from which, during the course of this essay, we

have endeavoured to extricate ourselves.

      But if we consider the matter aright, these are questions

of fact, not of sentiment. Whether any particular person be

endowed with good sense and a delicate imagination, free from

prejudice, may often be the subject of dispute, and be liable to

great discussion and enquiry: but that such a character is

valuable and estimable will be agreed in by all mankind. Where

these doubts occur, men can do no more than in other disputable

questions, which are submitted to the understanding: They must

produce the best arguments, that their invention suggests to

them; they must acknowledge a true and decisive standard to exist

somewhere, to wit, real existence and mater of fact; and they

must have indulgence to such as differ from them in their appeals

to this standard. It is sufficient for our present purpose, if we

have proved, that the taste of all individuals is not upon an

equal footing, and that some men in general, however difficult to

be particularly pitched upon, will be acknowledge by universal

sentiment to have a preference above others.

      But in reality the difficulty of finding, even in

particulars, the standard of taste, is not so great as it is

represented. Though in speculation, we may readily avow a certain

criterion in science and deny it in sentiment, the matter is

found in practice to be much more hard to ascertain in the former

case than in the latter. Theories of abstract philosophy, systems

of profound theology, have prevailed during one age: In a

successive period, these have been universally exploded: Their

absurdity has been detected: Other theories and systems have

supplied their place, which again gave place to their successors:

And nothing has been experienced more liable to the revolutions

of chance and fashion than these pretended decisions of science.

The case is not the same with the beauties of eloquence and

poetry. Just expressions of passion and nature are sure, after a

little time, to gain public applause, which they maintain for

ever. ARISTOTLE, and PLATO, and EPICURUS, and DESCARTES, may

successively yield to each other: But TERENCE and VIRGIL maintain

an universal, undisputed empire over the minds of men. The

abstract philosophy of CICERO has lost its credit: The vehemence

of his oratory is still the object of our admiration.

      Though men of delicate taste be rare, they are easily to be

distinguished in society, by the soundness of their understanding

and the superiority of their faculties above the rest of mankind.

The ascendant, which they acquire, gives a prevalence to that

lively approbation, with which they receive any productions of

genius, and renders it generally predominant. Many men, when left

to themselves, have but a faint and dubious perception of beauty,

who yet are capable of relishing any fine stroke, which is

pointed out to them. Every convert to the admiration of the real

poet or orator is the cause of some new conversion. And though

prejudices may prevail for a time, they never unite in

celebrating any rival to the true genius, but yield at last to

the force of nature and just sentiment. Thus, though a civilized

nation may easily be mistaken in the choice of their admired

philosopher, they never have been found long to err, in their

affection for a favorite epic or tragic author.

      But notwithstanding all our endeavours to fix a standard of

taste, and reconcile the discordant apprehensions of men, there

still remain two sources of variation, which are not sufficient

indeed to confound all the boundaries of beauty and deformity,

but will often serve to produce a difference in the degrees of

our approbation or blame. The one is the different humours of

particular men; the other, the particular manners and opinions of

our age and country. The general principles of taste are uniform

in human nature: where men vary in their judgments, some defect

or perversion in the faculties may commonly be remarked;

proceeding either from prejudice, from want of practice, or want

of delicacy; and there is just reason for approving one taste,

and condemning another. But where there is such a diversity in

the internal frame or external situation as is entirely blameless

on both sides, and leaves no room to give one the preference

above the other; in that case a certain degree of diversity in

judgment is unavoidable, and we seek in vain for a standard, by

which we can reconcile the contrary sentiments.

      A young man, whose passions are warm, will be more sensibly

touched with amorous and tender images, than a man more advanced

in years, who take pleasure in wise, philosophical reflections

concerning the conduct of life and moderation of the passions. At

twenty, OVID may be the favourite author; HORACE at forty; and

perhaps TACITUS at fifty. Vainly would we, in such cases,

endeavour to enter into the sentiments of others, and divest

ourselves of those propensities, which are natural to us. We

choose our favourite author as we do our friend, from a

conformity of humour and disposition. Mirth or passion, sentiment

or reflection; whichever of these most predominates in our

temper, it gives us a peculiar sympathy with the writer who

resembles us.

      One person is more pleased with the sublime; another with

the tender; a third with raillery. One has a strong sensibility

to blemishes, and is extremely studious of correctness: Another

has a more lively feeling of beauties, and pardons twenty

absurdities and defects for one elevated or pathetic stroke. The

ear of this man is entirely turned towards conciseness and

energy; that man is delighted with a copious, rich, and

harmonious expression. Simplicity is affected by one; ornament by

another. Comedy, tragedy, satire, odes, have each its partisans,

who prefer that particular species of writing to all others. It

is plainly an error in a critic, to confine his approbation to

one species or style of writing, and condemn all the rest. But it

is almost impossible not to feel a predilection for that which

suits our particular turn and disposition. Such preferences are

innocent and unavoidable, and can never reasonably be the object

of dispute, because there is no standard, by which they can be

decided.

      For a like reason, we are more pleased, in the course of

our reading, with pictures and characters, that resemble objects

which are found in our own age or country, than with those which

describe a different set of customs. It is not without some

effort, that we reconcile ourselves to the simplicity of ancient

manners, and behold princesses carrying water from the spring,

and kings and heroes dressing their own victuals. We may allow in

general, that the representation of such manners is no fault in

the author, nor deformity in the piece; but we are not so

sensibly touched with them. For this reason, comedy is not easily

transferred from one age or nation to another. A FRENCHMAN or

ENGLISHMAN is not pleased with the ANDRIA of TERENCE, or CLITIA

of MACHIAVEL; where the fine lady, upon whom all the play turns,

never once appears to the spectators, but is always kept behind

the scenes, suitably to the reserved humour of the ancient GREEKS

and modern ITALIANS. A man of learning and reflection can make

allowance for these peculiarities of manners; but a common

audience can never divest themselves so far of their usual ideas

and sentiments, as to relish pictures which in no wise resemble

them.

      But here there occurs a reflection, which may, perhaps, be

useful in examining the celebrated controversy concerning ancient

and modern learning; where we often find the one side excusing

any seeming absurdity in the ancients from the manners of the

age, and the other refusing to admit this excuse, or at least,

admitting it only as an apology for the author, not for the

performance. In my opinion, the proper boundaries in this subject

have seldom been fixed between the contending parties. Where any

innocent peculiarities of manners are represented, such as those

above mentioned, they ought certainly to be admitted; and a man,

who is shocked with them, gives an evident proof of false

delicacy and refinement. The poet's monument more durable than

brass, must fall to the ground like common brick or clay, were

men to make no allowance for the continual revolutions of manners

and customs, and would admit of nothing but what was suitable to

the prevailing fashion. Muse we throw aside the pictures of our

ancestors, because of their ruffs and fardingales? But where the

ideas of morality and decency alter from one age to another, and

where vicious manners are described, without being marked with

the proper characters of blame and disapprobation; this must be

allowed to disfigure the poem, and to be a real deformity. I

cannot, nor is it proper I should, enter into such sentiments;

and however I may excuse the poet, on account of the manners in

his age, I never can relish the composition. The want of humanity

and of decency, so conspicuous in the characters drawn by several

of the ancient poets, even sometimes by HOMER and the GREEK

tragedians, diminishes considerably the merit of their noble

performances, and gives modern authors an advantage over them. We

are not interested in the fortunes and sentiments of such rough

heroes: We are displeased to find the limits of vice and virtue

so much confounded: And whatever indulgence we may give to the

writer on account of his prejudices, we cannot prevail on ourself

to enter into his sentiments, or bear an affection to characters,

which we plainly discover to be blameable.

      The case is not the same with moral principles, as with

speculative opinions of any kind. These are in continual flux and

revolution. The son embraces a different system from the father.

Nay, there scarcely is any man, who can boast of great constancy

and uniformity in this particular. Whatever speculative errors

may be found in the polite writings of any age or country, they

detract but little from the value of those compositions. There

needs but a certain turn of thought or imagination to make us

enter into all the opinions, which then prevailed, and relish the

sentiments or conclusions derived from them. But a very violent

effort is requisite to change our judgment of manners, and excite

sentiments of approbation or blame, love or hatred, different

from those to which the mind from long custom has been

familiarized. And where a man is confident of the rectitude of

that moral standard, by which he judges, he is justly jealous of

it, and will not pervert the sentiments of his heart for a

moment, in complaisance to any writer whatsoever.

      Of all speculative errors, those, which regard religion,

are the most excusable in compositions of genius; nor is it ever

permitted to judge of the civility or wisdom of any people, or

even of single persons, by the grossness or refinement of their

theological principles. The same good sense, that directs men in

the ordinary occurrences of life, is not harkened to in religious

matters, which are supposed to be placed altogether above the

cognizance of human reason. On this account, all the absurdities

of the pagan system of theology must be overlooked by every

critic, who would pretend to form a just notion of ancient

poetry; and our posterity, in their turn, must have the same

indulgence to their forefathers. No religious principles can ever

be imputed as a fault to any poet, while they remain merely

principles, and take not such strong possession of his heart, as

to lay him under the imputation of bigotry or superstition. Where

that happens, they confound the sentiments of morality, and alter

the natural boundaries of vice and virtue. They are therefore

eternal blemishes, according to the principle above mentioned;

nor are the prejudices and false opinions of the age sufficient

to justify them.

      It is essential to the ROMAN catholic religion to inspire a

violent hatred of every other worship, and to represent all

pagans, mahometans, and heretics as the objects of divine wrath

and vengeance. Such sentiments, though they are in reality very

blameable, are considered as virtues by the zealots of that

communion, and are represented in their tragedies and epic poems

as a kind of divine heroism. This bigotry has disfigured two very

fine tragedies of the FRENCH theatre, POLIEUCTE and ATHALIA;

where an intemperate zeal for particular modes of worship is set

off with all the pomp imaginable, and forms the predominant

character of the heroes. 'What is this,' says the sublime JOAD to

JOSABET, finding her in discourse with MATHAN, the priest of

BAAL, 'Does the daughter of DAVID speak to this traitor? Are you

not afraid, lest the earth should open and pour forth flames to

devour you both? Or lest these holy walls should fall and crush

you together? What is his purpose? Why comes that enemy of God

hither to poison the air, which we breath, with his horrid

presence?' Such sentiments are received with great applause on

the theatre of PARIS; but at LONDON the spectators would be full

as much pleased to hear ACHILLES tell AGAMEMNON, that he was a

dog in his forehead, and a dear in his heart, or JUPITER threaten

JUNO with a sound drubbing, if she will not be quiet.

     RELIGIOUS principles are also a blemish in any polite

composition, when they rise up to superstition, and intrude

themselves into every sentiment, however remote from any

connection with religion. It is no excuse for the poet, that the

customs of his country had burthened life with so many religious

ceremonies and observances, that no part of it was exempt from

that yoke. It must for ever be ridiculous in PETRARCH to compare

his mistress LAURA, to JESUS CHRIST. Nor is it less ridiculous in

that agreeable libertine, BOCCACE, very seriously to give thanks

to GOD ALMIGHTY and the ladies, for their assistance in defending

him against his enemies.



         











                OF THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS

                              

                            

                              

                         David Hume

                              

                            1741

                              

                          



                              

     NOTHING is more apt to surprize a foreigner, than the

extreme liberty, which we enjoy in this country, of

communicating whatever we please to the public, and of

openly censuring every measure, entered into by the king or

his ministers. If the administration resolve upon war, it is

affirmed, that, either wilfully or ignorantly, they mistake

the interests of the nation, and that peace, in the present

situation of affairs, is infinitely preferable. If the

passion of the ministers lie towards peace, our political

writers breathe nothing but war and devastation, and

represent to pacific conduct of the government as mean and

pusillanimous. As this liberty is not indulged in any other

government, either republican or monarchical; in H/OLLAND\

and V/ENICE\,  more than in F/RANCE\ or S/PAIN\; it may very

naturally give occasion to a question, <How it happens that>

G/REAT\ B/RITAIN\ <alone enjoys this peculiar privilege>?

     The reason, why the laws indulge us in such a liberty

seems to be derived from our mixed form of government, which

is neither wholly monarchical, nor wholly republican. It

will be found, if I mistake not, a true observation in

politics, that the two extremes in government, liberty and

slavery, commonly approach nearest to each other; and that,

as you depart from the extremes, and mix a little of

monarchy with liberty, the government becomes always the

more free; and on the other hand, when you mix a little of

liberty with monarchy, the yoke becomes always the more

grievous and intolerable. In a government, such as that of

F/RANCE\, which is absolute, and where law, custom, and

religion concur, all of them, to make the people fully

satisfied with their condition, the monarch cannot entertain

any <jealousy> against his subjects, and therefore is apt to

indulge them in great <liberties> both of speech and action.

IN a government altogether republican, such as that of

H/OLLAND\, where there is not magistrate so eminent as to

give <jealousy> to the state, there is no danger in

intrusting the magistrates with large discretionary powers;

and though many advantages result from such powers, in

preserving peace and order, yet they lay a considerable

restraint on men's actions, and make every private citizen

pay a great respect to the government. Thus it seems

evident, that the two extremes of absolute monarchy and of a

republic, approach near to each other in some material

circumstances. In the <first>, the magistrate has no

jealousy of the people: in the <second>, the people have

none of the magistrate: Which want of jealousy begets a

mutual confidence and trust in both cases, and produces a

species of liberty in monarchies, and of arbitrary power in

republics.

     To justify the other part of the foregoing observation,

that, in every government, the means are most wide of each

other, and that the mixtures of monarchy and liberty render

the yoke either more easy or more grievous; I must take

notice of a remark in T/ACITUS\ with regard to the R/OMANS\

under the emperors, that they neither could bear total

slavery nor total liberty, <Nec totam sevitutem, nec totam

libertatem pati possunt>. This remark a celebrated poet has

translated and applied to the E/NGLISH\, in his lively

description of queen E/LIZABETH\'s policy and government,



     <Et fit aimer son joug a 'l Anglois indompte,

     Qui ne peut ni servir, ni vivre en liberte>.



     According to these remarks, we are to consider the

R/OMAN\ government under the emperors as a mixture of

despotism and liberty, where the despotism prevailed; and

the E/NGLISH\ government as a mixture of the same kind,

where the liberty predominates. The consequences are

conformable to the foregoing observation; and such as may be

expected from those mixed forms of government, which beget a

mutual watchfulness and jealousy. The R/OMAN\ emperors were,

many of them, the most frightful tyrants that ever disgraced

human nature; and it is evident, that their cruelty was

chiefly excited by their <jealousy>, and by their observing

that all the great men of R/OME\ bore with impatience the

dominion of a family, which, but a little before, was no

wise superior to their own. On the other hand, as the

republican part of the government prevails in E/NGLAND\,

though with a great mixture of monarchy, it is obliged, for

its own preservation, to maintain a watchful <jealousy> over

the magistrates, to remove all discretionary powers, and to

secure every one's life and fortune by general and

inflexible laws. No action must be deemed a crime but what

the law has plainly determined to be such: No crime must be

imputed to a man but from a legal proof before his judges;

and even these judges must be his fellow-subjects, who are

obliged, by their own interest, to have a watchful eye over

the encroachments and violence of the ministers. From these

causes, it proceeds, that there is as much liberty, and

even, perhaps, licentiousness in G/REAT\ B/RITAIN\, as there

were formerly slavery and tyranny in R/OME\.

     These principles account for the great liberty of the

press in these kingdoms, beyond what is indulged in any

other government. It is apprehended, that arbitrary power

would steal in upon us, were we not careful to prevent its

progress, and were there not an easy method of conveying the

alarm from one end of the kingdom to the other. The spirit

of the people must frequently be rouzed, in order to curb

the ambition of the court; and the dread of rouzing this

spirit must be employed to prevent that ambition. Nothing so

effectual to this purpose as the liberty of the press, by

which all the learning, wit, and genius of the nation may be

employed on the side of freedom, and every one be animated

to its defence. As long, therefore, as the republican part

of our government can maintain itself against the

monarchical, it will naturally be careful to keep the press

open, as of importance to its own preservation.

     It must however be allowed, that the unbounded liberty

of the press, though it be difficult, perhaps impossible, to

propose a suitable remedy for it, is one of the evils,

attending those mixt forms of government.



                           

  











          OF THE DELICACY OF TASTE AND PASSION

                              

                          

                              

                   

                         David Hume

                              

                            1741

                              





     /SOME\ People are subject to a certain <delicacy> of

<passion>, which makes them extremely sensible to all the

accidents of life, and gives them a lively joy upon every

prosperous event, as well as a piercing grief, when they

meet with misfortunes and adversity. Favours and good

offices easily engage their friendship; while the smallest

injury provokes their resentment. Any honour or mark of

distinction elevates them above measure; but they are as

sensibly touched with contempt. People of this character

have, no doubt, more lively enjoyments, as well as more

pungent sorrows, than men of cool and sedate tempers: But, I

believe, when every thing is balanced, there is no one, who

would not rather be of the latter character, were he

entirely master of his own disposition. Good or ill fortune

is very little at our disposal: And when a person, that has

this sensibility of temper, meets with any misfortune, his

sorrow or resentment takes entire possession of him, and

deprives him of all relish in the common occurrences of

life; the right enjoyment of which forms the chief part of

our happiness. Great pleasures are much less frequent than

great pains; so that a sensible temper must meet with fewer

trials in the former way than in the latter. Not to mention,

that men of such lively passions are apt to be transported

beyond all bounds of prudence and discretion, and to take

false steps in the conduct of life, which are often

irretrievable.

     There is a <delicacy> of <taste> observable in some

men, which very much resembles this <delicacy> of <passion>,

and produces the same sensibility to beauty and deformity of

every kind, as that does to prosperity and adversity,

obligations and injuries. When you present a poem or a

picture to a man possessed of this talent, the delicacy of

his feeling makes him be sensibly touched with every part of

it; nor are the masterly strokes perceived with more

exquisite relish and satisfaction, than the negligences or

absurdities with disgust and uneasiness. A polite and

judicious conversation affords him the highest

entertainment; rudeness or impertinence is as great a

punishment to him. In short, delicacy of taste has the same

effect as delicacy of passion: It enlarges the sphere both

of our happiness and misery, and makes us sensible to pains

as well as pleasures, which escape the rest of mankind.

     I believe, however, every one will agree with me, that,

notwithstanding this resemblance, delicacy of taste is as

much to be desired and cultivated as delicacy of passion is

to be lamented, and to be remedied, if possible. The good or

ill accidents of life are very little at our disposal; but

we are pretty much masters what books we shall read, what

diversions we shall partake of, and what company we shall

keep. Philosophers have endeavoured to render happiness

entirely independent of every thing external. That degree of

perfection is impossible to be <attained>: But every wise

man will endeavour to place his happiness on such objects

chiefly as depend upon himself: and <that> is not to be

<attained> so much by any other means as by this delicacy of

sentiment. When a man is possessed of that talent, he is

more happy by what pleases his taste, than by what gratifies

his appetites, and receives more enjoyment from a poem or a

piece of reasoning than the most expensive luxury can

afford.

     Whatever connexion there may be originally between

these two species of delicacy, I am persuaded, that nothing

is so proper to cure us of this delicacy of passion, as the

cultivating of that higher and more refined taste, which

enables us to judge of the characters of men, of

compositions of genius, and of the productions of the nobler

arts. A greater or less relish for those obvious beauties,

which strike the senses, depends entirely upon the greater

or less sensibility of the temper: But with regard to the

sciences and liberal arts, a fine taste is, in some measure,

the same with strong sense, or at least depends so much upon

it, that they are inseparable. In order to judge aright of a

composition of genius, there are so many views to be taken

in, so many circumstances to be compared, and such a

knowledge of human nature requisite, that no man, who is not

possessed of the soundest judgment, will ever make a

tolerable critic in such performances. And this is a new

reason for cultivating a relish in the liberal arts. Our

judgment will strengthen by this exercise: We shall form

juster notions of life: Many things, which please or afflict

others, will appear to us too frivolous to engage our

attention: And we shall lose by degrees that sensibility and

delicacy of passion, which is so incommodious.

     But perhaps I have gone too far in saying, that a

cultivated taste for the polite arts extinguishes the

passions, and renders us indifferent to those objects, which

are so fondly pursued by the rest of mankind. On farther

reflection, I find, that it rather improves our sensibility

for all the tender and agreeable passions; at the same time

that it renders the mind incapable of the rougher and more

boisterous emotions.

     <Ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes,

          Emollit mores, nec sinit isse feros>.

     For this, I think there may be assigned two very

natural reasons. In the <first> place, nothing is so

improving to the temper as the study of the beauties, either

of poetry, eloquence, music, or painting. They give a

certain elegance of sentiment to which the rest of mankind

are strangers. The emotions which they excite are soft and

tender. They draw off the mind from the hurry of business

and interest; cherish reflection; dispose to tranquillity;

and produce an agreeable melancholy, which, of all

dispositions of the mind, is the best suited to love and

friendship.

     In the <second> place, a delicacy of taste is

favourable to love and friendship, by confining our choice

to few people, and making us indifferent to the company and

conversation of the greater part of men. You will seldom

find, that mere men of the world, whatever strong sense they

may be endowed with, are very nice in distinguishing

characters, or in marking those insensible differences and

gradations, which make one man preferable to another. Any

one, that has competent sense, is sufficient for their

entertainment: They talk to him, of their pleasure and

affairs, with the same frankness that they would to another;

and finding many, who are fit to supply his place, they

never feel any vacancy or want in his absence. But to make

use of the allusion of a celebrated French[2] author, the

judgment may be compared to a clock or watch, where the most

ordinary machine is sufficient to tell the hours; but the

most elaborate alone can point out the minutes and seconds,

and distinguish the smallest differences of time. One that

has well digested his knowledge both of books and men, has

little enjoyment but in the company of a few select

companions. He feels too sensibly, how much all the rest of

mankind fall short of the notions which he has entertained.

And, his affections being thus confined within a narrow

circle, no wonder he carries them further, than if they were

more general and undistinguished. The gaiety and frolic of a

bottle companion improves with him into a solid friendship:

And the ardours of a youthful appetite become an elegant

passion.





                     





                         

                                

            

                                

                           David Hume

                                

                              1742

                                

                                

                            

                                  

                         OF ESSAY WRITING





  

     The elegant part of mankind, who are not immersed in the

animal life, but employ themselves in the operations of the mind,

may be divided into the <learned> and <conversible>. The learned

are such as have chosen for their portion the higher and more

difficult operations of the mind, which require leisure and

solitude, and cannot be brought to perfection, without long

preparation and severe labour. The conversible world join to a

sociable disposition, and a taste of pleasure, an inclination to

the easier and more gentle exercises of the understanding, to

obvious reflections on human affairs, and the duties of common

life, and to the observation of the blemishes or perfections of

the particular objects, that surround them. Such subjects of

thought furnish not sufficient employment in solitude, but

require the company and conversation of our fellow-creatures, to

render them a proper exercise for the mind: and this brings

mankind together in society, where every one displays his

thoughts and observations in the best manner he is able, and

mutually gives and receives information, as well as pleasure.

     The separation of the learned from the conversible world

seems to have been the great defect of the last age, and must

have had a very bad influence both on books and company: for what

possibility is there of finding topics of conversation fit for

the entertainment of rational creatures, without having recourse

sometimes to history, poetry, politics, and the more obvious

principles, at least, of philosophy? Must our whole discourse be

a continued series of gossipping stories and idle remarks? Must

the mind never rise higher, but be perpetually



     Stun'd and worn out with endless chat

     Of Will did this, and Nan said that?[2]



This would be to render the time spent in company the most

unentertaining, as well as the most unprofitable part of our

lives.

     On the other hand, learning has been as great a loser by

being shut up in colleges and cells, and secluded from the world

and good company. By that means, every thing of what we call

<Belles Lettres> became totally barbarous, being cultivated by

men without any taste of life or manners, and without that

liberty and facility of thought and expression, which can only be

acquired by conversation. Even philosophy went to wrack by this

moaping recluse method of study, and became as chimerical in her

conclusions as she was unintelligible in her stile and manner of

delivery. And indeed, what could be expected from men who never

consulted experience in any of their reasonings, or who never

searched for that experience, where alone it is to be found, in

common life and conversation?

     'Tis with great pleasure I observe, that men of letters, in

this age, have lost, in a great measure, that shyness and

bashfulness of temper, which kept them at a distance from

mankind; and, at the same time, that men of the world are proud

of borrowing from books their most agreeable topics of

conversation. 'Tis to be hoped, that this league betwixt the

learned and conversible worlds, which is so happily begun, will

be still farther improved, to their mutual advantage; and to that

end, I know nothing more advantageous than such <Essays> as these

with which I endeavour to entertain the public. In this view, I

cannot but consider myself as a kind of resident or ambassador

from the dominions of learning to those of conversation; and

shall think it my constant duty to promote a good correspondence

betwixt these two states, which have so great a dependence on

each other. I shall give intelligence to the learned of whatever

passes in company, and shall endeavour to import into company

whatever commodities I find in my native country proper for their

use and entertainment. The balance of trade we need not be

jealous of, nor will there be any difficulty to preserve it on

both sides. The materials of this commerce must chiefly be

furnished by conversation and common life: the manufacturing of

them alone belongs to learning.

     As 'twould be an unpardonable negligence in an ambassador

not to pay his respects to the sovereign of the state where he is

commissioned to reside; so it would be altogether inexcusable in

me not to address myself, with a particular respect, to the fair

sex, who are the sovereigns of the empire of conversation. I

approach them with reverence; and were not my countrymen, the

learned, a stubborn independent race of mortals, extremely

jealous of their liberty, and unaccustomed to subjection, I

should resign into their fair hands the sovereign authority over

the republic of letters. As the case stands, my commission

extends no farther, than to desire a league, offensive and

defensive, against our common enemies, against the enemies of

reason and beauty, people of dull heads and cold hearts. From

this moment let us pursue them with the severest vengeance: let

no quarter be given, but to those of sound understandings and

delicate affections; and these characters, 'tis to be presumed,

we shall always find inseparable.

     To be serious, and to quit the allusion before it be worn

thread-bare, I am of opinion, that women, that is, women of sense

and education (for to such alone I address myself) are much

better judges of all polite writing than men of the same degree

of understanding; and that 'tis a vain pannic, if they be so far

terrified with the common ridicule that is levelled against

learned ladies, as utterly to abandon every kind of books and

study to our sex. Let the dread of that ridicule have no other

effect, than to make them conceal their knowledge before fools,

who are not worthy of it, nor of them. Such will still presume

upon the vain title of the male sex to affect a superiority above

them: but my fair readers may be assured, that all men of sense,

who know the world, have a great deference for their judgment of

such books as ly within the compass of their knowledge, and

repose more confidence in the delicacy of their taste, though

unguided by rules, than in all the dull labours of pedants and

commentators. In a neighbouring nation, equally famous for good

taste, and for gallantry, the ladies are, in a manner, the

sovereigns of the <learned> world, as well as of the

<conversible>; and no polite writer pretends to venture upon the

public, without the approbation of some celebrated judges of that

sex. Their verdict is, indeed, sometimes complained of; and, in

particular, I find, that the admirers of Corneille, to save that

great poet's honour upon the ascendant that Racine began to take

over him, always said, that it was not to be expected, that so

old a man could dispute the prize, before such judges, with so

young a man as his rival. But this observation has been found

unjust, since posterity seems to have ratified the verdict of

that tribunal: and Racine, though dead, is still the favourite of

the fair sex, as well as of the best judges among the men.

     There is only one subject, on which I am apt to distrust the

judgment of females, and that is, concerning books of gallantry

and devotion, which they commonly affect as high flown as

possible; and most of them seem more delighted with the warmth,

than with the justness of the passion. I mention gallantry and

devotion as the same subject, because, in reality, they become

the same when treated in this manner; and we may observe, that

they both depend upon the very same complexion. As the fair sex

have a great share of the tender and amorous disposition, it

perverts their judgment on this occasion, and makes them be

easily affected, even by what has no propriety in the expression

nor nature in the sentiment. Mr. Addison's elegant discourses of

religion have no relish with them, in comparison of books of

mystic devotion: and Otway's tragedies are rejected for the rants

of Mr. Dryden.

     Would the ladies correct their false taste in this

particular; let them accustom themselves a little more to books

of all kinds: let them give encouragement to men of sense and

knowledge to frequent their company: and finally, let them concur

heartily in that union I have projected betwixt the learned and

conversible wor1ds. They may, perhaps, meet with more

complaisance from their usual followers than from men of

learning; but they cannot reasonably expect so sincere an

affection: and, I hope, they will never be guilty of so wrong a

choice, as to sacrifice the substance to the shadow.















                           OF TRAGEDY

                                

                                

                           David Hume

                                

                              1757

                                

                                

                            





     It seems an unaccountable pleasure, which the spectators of

a well-written tragedy receive from sorrow, terror, anxiety, and

other passions, that are in themselves disagreeable and uneasy.

The more they are touched and affected, the more are they

delighted with the spectacle; and as soon as the uneasy passions

cease to operate, the piece is at an end. One scene of full joy

and contentment and security is the utmost, that any composition

of this kind can bear; and it is sure always to be the concluding

one. If, in the texture of the piece, there be interwoven any

scenes of satisfaction, they afford only faint gleams of

pleasure, which are thrown in by way of variety, and in order to

plunge the actors into deeper distress, by means of that contrast

and disappointment. The whole heart of the poet is employed, in

rouzing and supporting the compassion and indignation, the

anxiety and resentment of his audience. They are pleased in

proportion as they are afflicted, and never are so happy as when

they employ tears, sobs, and cries to give vent to their sorrow,

and relieve their heart, swoln with the tenderest sympathy and

compassion.

     The few critics who have had some tincture of philosophy,

have remarked this singular phenomenon, and have endeavoured to

account for it.

     L'Abb Dubos, in his reflections on poetry and painting,

asserts, that nothing is in general so disagreeable to the mind

as the languid, listless state of indolence, into which it falls

upon the removal of all passion and occupation. To get rid of

this painful situation, it seeks every amusement and pursuit;

business, gaming, shews, executions; whatever will rouze the

passions, and take its attention from itself. No matter what the

passion is: Let it be disagreeable, afflicting, melancholy,

disordered; it is still better than that insipid languor, which

arises from perfect tranquillity and repose.

     It is impossible not to admit this account, as being, at

least in part, satisfactory. You may observe, when there are

several tables of gaming, that all the company run to those,

where the deepest play is, even though they find not there the

best players. The view, or, at least, imagination of high

passions, arising from great loss or gain, affects the spectator

by sympathy, gives him some touches of the same passions, and

serves him for a momentary entertainment. It makes the time pass

the easier with him, and is some relief to that oppression, under

which men commonly labour, when left entirely to their own

thoughts and meditations.

     We find that common liars always magnify, in their

narrations, all kinds of danger, pain, distress, sickness,

deaths, murders, and cruelties; as well as joy, beauty, mirth,

and magnificence. It is an absurd secret, which they have for

pleasing their company, fixing their attention, and attaching

them to such marvellous relations, by the passions and emotions,

which they excite.

     There is, however, a difficulty in applying to the present

subject, in its full extent, this solution, however ingenious and

satisfactory it may appear. It is certain, that the same object

of distress, which pleases in a tragedy, were it really set

before us, would give the most unfeigned uneasiness; though it be

then the most effectual cure to languor and indolence. Monsieur

Fontenelle seems to have been sensible of this difficulty; and

accordingly attempts another solution of the phaenomenon; at

least makes some addition to the theory above mentioned.[2]

     'Pleasure and pain,' says he, ' which are two sentiments so

different in themselves, differ not so much in their cause. From

the instance of tickling, it appears, that the movement of

pleasure, pushed a little too far, becomes pain; and that the

movement of pain, a little moderated, becomes pleasure. Hence it

proceeds, that there is such a thing as a sorrow, soft and

agreeable: It is a pain weakened and diminished. The heart likes

naturally to be moved and affected. Melancholy objects suit it,

and even disastrous and sorrowful, provided they are softened by

some circumstance. It is certain, that, on the theatre, the

representation has almost the effect of reality; yet it has not

altogether that effect. However we may be hurried away by the

spectacle; whatever dominion the senses and imagination may usurp

over the reason, there still lurks at the bottom a certain idea

of falsehood in the whole of what we see. This idea, though weak

and disguised, suffices to diminish the pain which we suffer from

the misfortunes of those whom we love, and to reduce that

affliction to such a pitch as converts it into a pleasure. We

weep for the misfortune of a hero, to whom we are attached. In

the same instant we comfort ourselves, by reflecting, that it is

nothing but a fiction: And it is precisely that mixture of

sentiments, which composes an agreeable sorrow, and tears that

delight us. But as that affliction, which is caused by exterior

and sensible objects, is stronger than the consolation which

arises from an internal reflection, they are the effects and

symptoms of sorrow, that ought to predominate in the

composition.'

     This solution seems just and convincing; but perhaps it

wants still some new addition, in order to make it answer fully

the phaenomenon, which we here examine. All the passions, excited

by eloquence, are agreeable in the highest degree, as well as

those which are moved by painting and the theatre. The epilogues

of Cicero are, on this account chiefly, the delight of every

reader of taste; and it is difficult to read some of them without

the deepest sympathy and sorrow. His merit as an orator, no

doubt, depends much on his success in this particular. When he

had raised tears in his judges and all his audience, they were

then the most highly delighted, and expressed the greatest

satisfaction with the pleader. The pathetic description of the

butchery, made by Verres of the Sicilian captains, is a

masterpiece of this kind: But I believe none will affirm, that

the being present at a melancholy scene of that nature would

afford any entertainment. Neither is the sorrow here softened by

fiction: For the audience were convinced of the reality of every

circumstance. What is it then, which in this case raises a

pleasure from the bosom of uneasiness, so to speak; and a

pleasure, which still retains all the features and outward

symptoms of distress and sorrow?

     I answer: This extraordinary effect proceeds from that very

eloquence, with which the melancholy scene is represented. The

genius required to paint objects in a lively manner, the art

employed in collecting all the pathetic circumstances, the

judgment displayed in disposing them: the exercise, I say, of

these noble talents, together with the force of expression, and

beauty of oratorial numbers, diffuse the highest satisfaction on

the audience, and excite the most delightful movements. By this

means, the uneasiness of the melancholy passions is not only

overpowered and effaced by something stronger of an opposite

kind; but the whole impulse of those passions is converted into

pleasure, and swells the delight which the eloquence raises in

us. The same force of oratory, employed on an uninteresting

subject, would not please half so much, or rather would appear

altogether ridiculous; and the mind, being left in absolute

calmness and indifference, would relish none of those beauties of

imagination or expression, which, if joined to passion, give it

such exquisite entertainment. The impulse or vehemence, arising

from sorrow, compassion, indignation, receives a new direction

from the sentiments of beauty. The latter, being the predominant

emotion, seize the whole mind, and convert the former into

themselves, at least tincture them so strongly as totally to

alter their nature. And the soul, being, at the same time, rouzed

by passion, and charmed by eloquence, feels on the whole a strong

movement, which is altogether delightful.

     The same principle takes place in tragedy; with this

addition, that tragedy is an imitation; and imitation is always

of itself agreeable. This circumstance serves still farther to

smooth the motions of passion, and convert the whole feeling into

one uniform and strong enjoyment. Objects of the greatest terror

and distress please in painting, and please more than the most

beautiful objects, that appear calm and indifferent.[3] The

affection, rousing the mind, excites a large stock of spirit and

vehemence; which is all transformed into pleasure by the force of

the prevailing movement. It is thus the fiction of tragedy

softens the passion, by an infusion of a new feeling, not merely

by weakening or diminishing the sorrow. You may by degrees weaken

a real sorrow, till it totally disappears; yet in none of its

graduations will it ever give pleasure; except, perhaps, by

accident, to a man sunk under lethargic indolence, whom it rouzes

from that languid state.

     To confirm this theory, it will be sufficient to produce

other instances, where the subordinate movement is converted into

the predominant, and gives force to it, though of a different,

and even sometimes though of a contrary nature.

     Novelty naturally rouzes the mind, and attracts our

attention; and the movements, which it causes, are always

converted into any passion, belonging to the object, and join

their force to it. Whether an event excite joy or sorrow, pride

or shame, anger or good-will, it is sure to produce a stronger

affection, when new or unusual. And though novelty of itself be

agreeable, it fortifies the painful, as well as agreeable

passions.

     Had you any intention to move a person extremely by the

narration of any event, the best method of encreasing its effect

would be artfully to delay informing him of it, and first to

excite his curiosity and impatience before you let him into the

secret. This is the artifice practised by Iago in the famous

scene of Shakespeare; and every spectator is sensible, that

Othello's jealousy acquires additional force from his preceding

impatience, and that the subordinate passion is here readily

transformed into the predominant one.

     Difficulties encrease passions of every kind; and by rouzing

our attention, and exciting our active powers, they produce an

emotion, which nourishes the prevailing affection.

     Parents commonly love that child most, whose sickly infirm

frame of body has occasioned them the greatest pains, trouble,

and anxiety in rearing him. The agreeable sentiment of affection

here acquires force from sentiments of uneasiness.

     Nothing endears so much a friend as sorrow for his death.

The pleasure of his company has not so powerful an influence.

     Jealousy is a painful passion; yet without some share of it,

the agreeable affection of love has difficulty to subsist in its

full force and violence. Absence is also a great source of

complaint among lovers, and gives them the greatest uneasiness:

Yet nothing is more favourable to their mutual passion than short

intervals of that kind. And if long intervals often prove fatal,

it is only because, through time, men are accustomed to them, and

they cease to give uneasiness. Jealousy and absence in love

compose the <dolce peccante> of the Italians, which they suppose

so essential to all pleasure.

     There is a fine observation of the elder Pliny, which

illustrates the principle here insisted on. <It is very

remarkable>, says he, <that the last works of celebrated artists,

which they left imperfect, are always the most prized, such as

the Iris of Aristides, the Tyndarides of Nicomachus, the Medea of

Timomachus, and the Venus of Apelles. These are valued even above

their finished productions: The broken lineaments of the piece,

and the half-formed idea of the painter are carefully studied;

and our very grief for that curious hand, which had been stopped

by death, is an additional encrease to our pleasure>.'[4]

     These instances (and many more might be collected) are

sufficient to afford us some insight into the analogy of nature,

and to show us, that the pleasure, which poets, orators, and

musicians give us, by exciting grief, sorrow, indignation,

compassion, is not so extraordinary or paradoxical, as it may at

first sight appear. The force of imagination, the energy of

expression, the power of numbers, the charms of imitation; all

these are naturally, of themselves, delightful to the mind: And

when the object presented lays also hold of some affection, the

pleasure still rises upon us, by the conversion of this

subordinate movement into that which is predominant. The passion,

though, perhaps, naturally, and when excited by the simple

appearance of a real object, it may be painful; yet is so

smoothed, and softened, and mollified, when raised by the finer

arts, that it affords the highest entertainment.

     To confirm this reasoning, we may observe, that if the

movements of the imagination be not predominant above those of

the passion, a contrary effect follows; and the former, being now

subordinate, is converted into the latter, and still farther

encreases the pain and affliction of the sufferer.

     Who could ever think of it as a good expedient for

comforting an afflicted parent, to exaggerate, with all the force

of elocution, the irreparable loss, which he has met with by the

death of a favourite child ? The more power of imagination and

expression you here employ, the more you encrease his despair and

affliction.

     The shame, confusion, and terror of Verres, no doubt, rose

in proportion to the noble eloquence and vehemence of Cicero: So

also did his pain and uneasiness. These former passions were too

strong for the pleasure arising from the beauties of elocution;

and operated, though from the same principle, yet in a contrary

manner, to the sympathy, compassion, and indignation of the

audience.

     Lord Clarendon, when he approaches towards the catastrophe

of the royal party, supposes, that his narration must then become

infinite]y disagreeable; and he hurries over the king's death,

without giving us one circumstance of it. He considers it as too

horrid a scene to be contemplated with any satisfaction, or even

without the utmost pain and aversion. He himself, as well as the

readers of that age, were too deeply concerned in the events, and

felt a pain from subjects, which an historian and a reader of

another age would regard as the most pathetic and most

interesting, and, by consequence, the most agreeable.

     An action, represented in tragedy, may be too bloody and

atrocious. It may excite such movements of horror as will not

soften into pleasure; and the greatest energy of expression,

bestowed on descriptions of that nature, serves only to augment

our uneasiness. Such is that action represented in the <Ambitious

Stepmother>, where a venerable old man, raised to the height of

fury and despair, rushes against a pillar, and striking his head

upon it, besmears it all over with mingled brains and gore. The

English theatre abounds too much with such shocking images.

     Even the common sentiments of compassion require to be

softened by some agreeable affection, in order to give a thorough

satisfaction to the audience. The mere suffering of plaintive

virtue, under the triumphant tyranny and oppression of vice,

forms a disagreeable spectacle, and is carefully avoided by all

masters of the drama. In order to dismiss the audience with

entire satisfaction and contentment, the virtue must either

convert itself into a noble courageous despair, or the vice

receive its proper punishment.

     Most painters appear in this light to have been very unhappy

in their subjects. As they wrought much for churches and

convents, they have chiefly represented such horrible subjects as

crucifixions and martyrdoms, where nothing appears but tortures,

wounds, executions, and passive suffering, without any action or

affection. When they turned their pencil from this ghastly

mythology, they had commonly recourse to Ovid, whose fictions,

though passionate and agreeable, are scarcely natural or probable

enough for painting.

     The same inversion of that principle, which is here insisted

on, displays itself in common life, as in the effects of oratory

and poetry. Raise so the subordinate passion that it becomes the

predominant, it swallows up that affection which it before

nourished and encreased. Too much jealousy extinguishes love: Too

much difficulty renders us indifferent: Too much sickness and

infirmity disgusts a selfish and unkind parent.

     What so disagreeable as the dismal, gloomy, disastrous

stories, with which melancholy people entertain their companions?

The uneasy passion being there raised alone, unaccompanied with

any spirit, genius, or eloquence, conveys a pure uneasiness, and

is attended with nothing that can soften it into pleasure or

satisfaction.

                                  

                               











          OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES



                              David Hume



                                 1742



                               





  

     Nothing requires greater nicety, in our enquiries concerning

human affairs, than to distinguish exactly what is owing to

<chance>, and what proceeds from <causes>; nor is there any

subject, in which an author is more liable to deceive himself by

false subtilties and refinements. To say, that any event is

derived from chance, cuts short all farther enquiry concerning

it, and leaves the writer in the same state of ignorance with the

rest of mankind. But when the event is supposed to proceed from

certain and stable causes, he may then display his ingenuity, in

assigning these causes; and as a man of any subtilty can never be

at a loss in this particular, he has thereby an opportunity of

swelling his volumes, and discovering his profound knowledge, in

observing what escapes the vulgar and ignorant.

     The distinguishing between chance and causes must depend

upon every particular man's sagacity, in considering every

particular incident. But, if I were to assign any general rule to

help us in applying this distinction, it would be the following,

<What depends upon a few persons is, in a great measure, to be

ascribed to chance, or secret and unknown causes: What arises

from a great number, may often be accounted for by determinate

and known causes>.

     Two natural reasons may. be assigned for this rule. <First>,

If you suppose a dye to have any biass, however small, to a

particular side, this biass, though, perhaps, it may not appear

in a few throws, will certainly prevail in a great number, and

will cast the balance entirely to that side. In like manner, when

any <causes> beget a particular inclination or passion, at a

certain time, and among a certain people; though many individuals

may escape the contagion, and be ruled by passions peculiar to

themselves; yet the multitude will certainly be seized by the

common affection, and be governed by it in all their actions.

     <Secondly>, Those principles of causes, which are fitted to

operate on a multitude, are always of a grosser and more stubborn

nature, less subject to accidents, and less influenced by whim

and private fancy, than those which operate on a few only. The

latter are commonly so delicate and refined, that the smallest

incident in the health, education, or fortune of a particular

person, is sufficient to divert their course, and retard their

operation; nor is it possible to reduce them to any general

maxims or observations. Their influence at one time will never

assure us concerning their influence at another; even though all

the general circumstances should be the same in both cases.

     To judge by this rule, the domestic and the gradual

revolutions of a state must be a more proper subject of reasoning

and observation, than the foreign and the violent, which are

commonly produced by single persons, and are more influenced by

whim, folly, or caprice, than by general passions and interests.

The depression of the lords, and rise of the commons in England,

after the statutes of alienation and the encrease of trade and

industry, are more easily accounted for by general principles,

than the depression of the Spanish, and rise of the French

monarchy, after the death of Charles V. Had Harry IV, Cardinal

Richlieu and Louis XIV been Spaniards; and Philip II, III, and

IV, and Charles II been Frenchmen, the history of these two

nations had been entirely reversed.

     For the same reason, it is more easy to account for the rise

and progress of commerce in any kingdom, than for that of

learning; and a state, which should apply itself to the

encouragement of the one, would be more assured of success, than

one which should cultivate the other. Avarice, or the desire of

gain, is an universal passion, which operates at all times, in

all places, and upon all persons: But curiosity, or the love of

knowledge, has a very limited influence, and requires youth,

leisure, education, genius, and example, to make it govern any

person. You will never want booksellers, while there are buyers

of books: But there may frequently be readers where there are no

authors. Multitudes of people, necessity and liberty, have

begotten commerce in Holland: But study and application have

scarcely produced any eminent writers.

     We may, therefore, conclude, that there is no subject, in

which we must proceed with more caution, than in tracing the

history of the arts and sciences; lest we assign causes which

never existed, and reduce what is merely contingent to stable and

universal principles. Those who cultivate the sciences in any

state, are always few in number: The passion, which governs them,

limited: Their taste and judgment delicate and easily perverted:

And their application disturbed with the smallest accident.

Chance, therefore, or secret and unknown causes, must have a

great influence on the rise and progress of all the refined arts.

     But there is a reason, which induces me not to ascribe the

matter altogether to chance. Though the persons, who cultivate

the sciences with such astonishing success, as to attract the

admiration of posterity, be always few, in all nations and all

ages; it is impossible but a share of the same spirit and genius

must be antecedently diffused throughout the people among whom

they arise, in order to produce, form, and cultivate, from their

earliest infancy, the taste and judgment of those eminent

writers. The mass cannot be altogether insipid, from which such

refined spirits are extracted. 'There is a God within us,' says

OVID, 'who breathes that divine fire, by which we are

animated.'[2] Poets, in all ages, have advanced this claim to

inspiration. There is not, however, any thing supernatural in the

case. Their fire is not kindled from heaven. It only runs along

the earth; is caught from one breast to another; and burns

brightest, where the materials are best prepared, and most

happily disposed. The question, therefore, concerning the rise

and progress of the arts and sciences, is not altogether a

question concerning the taste, genius, and spirit of a few, but

concerning those of a whole people; and may, therefore, be

accounted for, in some measure, by general causes and principles.

I grant, that a man, who should enquire, why such a particular

poet, as Homer for instance, existed, at such a place, in such a

time, would throw himself headlong into chimaera, and could never

treat of such a subject, without a multitude of false subtilties

and refinements. He might as well pretend to give a reason, why

such particular generals, as Fabius and Scipio, lived in Rome at

such a time, and why Fabius came into the world before Scipio.

For such incidents as these, no other reason can be given than

that of Horace:

  

     <Scit genius, natale comes, qui temperat astrum,

     Naturae Deus humanae, mortalis in unum...

     ...Quodque caput, vultu mutabilis, albus et ater>.

  

     But I am persuaded, that in many cases good reasons might be

given, why such a nation is more polite and learned at a

particular time, than any of its neighbours. At least, this is so

curious a subject, that it were a pity to abandon it entirely,

before we have found whether it be susceptible of reasoning, and

can be reduced to any general principles.

     My first observation on this head is, <That it is impossible

for the arts and sciences to arise, at first, among any people

unless that people enjoy the blessing of a free government>.

     In the first ages of the world, when men are as yet

barbarous and ignorant, they seek no farther security against

mutual violence and injustice, than the choice of some rulers,

few or many, in whom they place an implicit confidence, without

providing any security, by laws or political institutions,

against the violence and injustice of these rulers. If the

authority be centered in a single person, and if the people,

either by conquest, or by the ordinary course of propagation,

encrease to a great multitude, the monarch, finding it

impossible, in his own person, to execute every office of

sovereignty, in every place, must delegate his authority to

inferior magistrates, who preserve peace and order in their

respective districts. As experience and education have not yet

refined the judgments of men to any considerable degree, the

prince, who is himself unrestrained, never dreams of restraining

his ministers, but delegates his full authority to every one,

whom he sets over any portion of the people. All general laws are

attended with inconveniencies, when applied to particular cases;

and it requires great penetration and experience, both to

perceive that these inconveniencies are fewer than what result

from full discretionary powers in every magistrate; and also to

discern what general laws are, upon the whole, attended with

fewest inconveniencies. This is a matter of so great difficulty,

that men may have made some advances, even in the sublime arts of

poetry and eloquence, where a rapidity of genius and imagination

assist their progress, before they have arrived at any great

refinement in their municipal laws, where frequent trials and

diligent observation can alone direct their improvements. It is

not, therefore, to be supposed, that a barbarous monarch,

unrestrained and uninstructed, will ever become a legislator, or

think of restraining his <Bashaws>, in every province, or even

his <Cadis> in every village. We are told, that the late Czar,

though actuated with a noble genius, and smit with the love and

admiration of European arts; yet professed an esteem for the

Turkish policy in this particular, and approved of such summary

decisions of causes, as are practised in that barbarous monarchy,

where the judges are not restrained by any methods, forms, or

laws. He did not perceive, how contrary such a practice would

have been to all his other endeavours for refining his people.

Arbitrary power, in all cases, is somewhat oppressive and

debasing; but it is altogether ruinous and intolerable, when

contracted into a small compass; and becomes still worse, when

the person, who possesses it, knows that the time of his

authority is limited and uncertain. 'Habet subjectos tanquam

suos; viles, ut alienos.'[3] He governs the subjects with full

authority, as if they were his own; and with negligence or

tyranny, as belonging to another. A people, governed after such a

manner, are slaves in the full and proper sense of the word; and

it is impossible they can ever aspire to any refinements or taste

of reason. They dare not so much as pretend to enjoy the

necessaries of life in plenty or security.

     To expect, therefore, that the arts and sciences should take

their first rise in a monarchy, is to expect a contradiction.

Before these refinements have taken place, the monarch is

ignorant and uninstructed; and not having knowledge sufficient to

make him sensible of the necessity of balancing his government

upon general laws, he delegates his full power to all inferior

magistrates. This barbarous policy debases the people, and for

ever prevents all improvements. Were it possible, that, before

science were known in the world, a monarch could possess so much

wisdom as to become a legislator, and govern his people by law,

not by the arbitrary will of their fellow-subjects, it might be

possible for that species of government to be the first nursery

of arts and sciences. But that supposition seems scarcely to be

consistent or rational.

     It may happen, that a republic, in its infant state, may be

supported by as few laws as a barbarous monarchy, and may entrust

as unlimited an authority to its magistrates or judges. But,

besides that the frequent elections by the people, are a

considerable check upon authority; it is impossible, but, in

time, the necessity of restraining the magistrates, in order to

preserve liberty, must at last appear, and give rise to general

laws and statutes. The Roman Consuls, for some time, decided all

causes, without being confined by any positive statutes, till the

people, bearing this yoke with impatience, created the

<decemvirs>, who promulgated the <twelve tables>; a body of laws,

which, though, perhaps, they were not equal in bulk to one

English act of parliament, were almost the only written rules,

which regulated property and punishment, for some ages, in that

famous republic. They were, however, sufficient, together with

the forms of a free government, to secure the lives and

properties of the citizens, to exempt one man from the dominion

of another; and to protect every one against the violence or

tyranny of his fellow-citizens. In such a situation the sciences

may raise their heads and flourish: But never can have being

amidst such a scene of oppression and slavery, as always results

from barbarous monarchies, where the people alone are restrained

by the authority of the magistrates, and the magistrates are not

restrained by any law or statute. An unlimited despotism of this

nature, while it exists, effectually puts a stop to all

improvements, and keeps men from attaining that knowledge, which

is requisite to instruct them in the advantages, arising from a

better police, and more moderate authority.

     Here then are the advantages of free states. Though a

republic should be barbarous, it necessarily, by an infallible

operation, gives rise to Law, even before mankind have made any

considerable advances in the other sciences. From law arises

security: From security curiosity: And from curiosity knowledge.

The latter steps of this progress may be more accidental; but the

former are altogether necessary. A republic without laws can

never have any duration. On the contrary, in a monarchical

government, law arises not necessarily from the forms of

government. Monarchy, when absolute, contains even something

repugnant to law. Great wisdom and reflection can alone reconcile

them. But such a degree of wisdom can never be expected, before

the greater refinements and improvements of human reason. These

refinements require curiosity, security, and law. The <first>

growth, therefore, of the arts and sciences can never be expected

in despotic governments.

     There are other causes, which discourage the rise of the

refined arts in despotic governments; though I take the want of

laws, and the delegation of full powers to every petty

magistrate, to be the principal. Eloquence certainly springs up

more naturally in popular governments: Emulation too in every

accomplishment must there be more animated and enlivened: And

genius and capacity have a fuller scope and career. All these

causes render free governments the only proper <nursery> for the

arts and sciences.

     The next observation, which I shall make on this head, is,

<That nothing is more favourable to the rise of politeness and

learning, than a number of neighbouring and independent states,

connected together by commerce and policy>. The emulation, which

naturally arises among those neighbouring states, is an obvious

source of improvement: But what I would chiefly insist on is the

stop, which such limited territories give both to <power> and to

<authority>.

     Extended governments, where a single person has great

influence, soon become absolute; but small ones change naturally

into commonwealths. A large government is accustomed by degrees

to tyranny; because each act of violence is at first performed

upon a part, which, being distant from the majority, is not taken

notice of, nor excites any violent ferment. Besides, a large

government, though the whole be discontented, may, by a little

art, be kept in obedience; while each part, ignorant of the

resolutions of the rest, is afraid to begin any commotion or

insurrection. Not to mention, that there is a superstitious

reverence for princes, which mankind naturally contract when they

do not often see the sovereign, and when many of them become not

acquainted with him so as to perceive his weaknesses. And as

large states can afford a great expence, in order to support the

pomp of majesty; this is a kind of fascination on men, and

naturally contributes to the enslaving of them.

     In a small government, any act of oppression is immediately

known throughout the whole: The murmurs and discontents,

proceeding from it, are easily communicated: And the indignation

arises the higher, because the subjects are not apt to apprehend

in such states, that the distance is very wide between themselves

and their sovereign. 'No man,' said the prince of Cond, 'is a

hero to his <Valet de Chambre>.' It is certain that admiration

and acquaintance are altogether incompatible towards any mortal

creature. Sleep and love convinced even Alexander himself that he

was not a God: But I suppose that such as daily attended him

could easily, from the numberless weaknesses to which he was

subject, have given him many still more convincing proofs of his

humanity.

     But the divisions into small states are favourable to

learning, by stopping the progress of <authority> as well as that

of <power>. Reputation is often as great a fascination upon men

as sovereignty, and is equally destructive to the freedom of

thought and examination. But where a number of neighbouring

states have a great intercourse of arts and commerce, their

mutual jealousy keeps them from receiving too lightly the law

from each other, in matters of taste and of reasoning, and makes

them examine every work of art with the greatest care and

accuracy. The contagion of popular opinion spreads not so easily

from one place to another. It readily receives a check in some

state or other, where it concurs not with the prevailing

prejudices. And nothing but nature and reason, or, at least, what

bears them a strong resemblance, can force its way through all

obstacles, and unite the most rival nations into an esteem and

admiration of it.

     Greece was a cluster of little principalities, which soon

became republics; and being united both by their near

neighbourhood, and by the ties of the same language and interest,

they entered into the closest intercourse of commerce and

learning. There concurred a happy climate, a soil not unfertile,

and a most harmonious and comprehensive language; so that every

circumstance among that people seemed to favour the rise of the

arts and sciences. Each city produced its several artists and

philosophers, who refused to yield the preference to those of the

neighbouring republics: Their contention and debates sharpened

the wits of men: A variety of objects was presented to the

judgment, while each challenged the preference to the rest: and

the sciences, not being dwarfed by the restraint of authority,

were enabled to make such considerable shoots, as are, even at

this time, the objects of our admiration. After the Roman

<christian>, or <catholic> church had spread itself over the

civilized world, and had engrossed all the learning of the times;

being really one large state within itself, and united under one

head; this variety of sects immediately disappeared, and the

Peripatetic philosophy was alone admitted into all the schools,

to the utter depravation of every kind of learning. But mankind,

having at length thrown off this yoke, affairs are now returned

nearly to the same situation as before, and Europe is at present

a copy at large, of what Greece was formerly a pattern in

miniature. We have seen the advantage of this situation in

several instances. What checked the progress of the Cartesian

philosophy, to which the French nation shewed such a strong

propensity towards the end of the last century, but the

opposition made to it by the other nations of Europe, who soon

discovered the weak sides of that philosophy? The severest

scrutiny, which Newton's theory has undergone, proceeded not from

his own countrymen, but from foreigners; and if it can overcome

the obstacles, which it meets with at present in all parts of

Europe, it will probably go down triumphant to the latest

posterity. The English are become sensible of the scandalous

licentiousness of their stage, from the example of the French

decency and morals. The French are convinced, that their theatre

has become somewhat effeminate, by too much love and gallantry;

and begin to approve of the more masculine taste of some

neighbouring nations.

     In China, there seems to be a pretty considerable stock of

politeness and science, which, in the course of so many

centuries, might naturally be expected to ripen into some thing

more perfect and finished, than what has yet arisen from them.

But China is one vast empire, speaking one language, governed by

one law, and sympathizing in the same manners. The authority of

any teacher, such as Confucius, was propagated easily from one

corner of the empire to the other. None had courage to resist the

torrent of popular opinion. And posterity was not bold enough to

dispute what had been universally received by their ancestors.

This seems to be one natural reason, why the sciences have made

so slow a progress in that mighty empire.[4]

     If we consider the face of the globe, Europe, of all the

four parts of the world, is the most broken by seas, rivers, and

mountains; and Greece of all countries of Europe. Hence these

regions were naturally divided into several distinct governments.

And hence the sciences arose in Greece; and Europe has been

hitherto the most constant habitation of them.

     I have sometimes been inclined to think, that interruptions

in the periods of learning, were they not attended with such a

destruction of ancient books, and the records of history, would

be rather favourable to the arts and sciences, by breaking the

progress of authority, and dethroning the tyrannical usurpers

over human reason. In this particular, they have the same

influence, as interruptions in political governments and

societies. Consider the blind submission of the ancient

philosophers to the several masters in each school, and you will

be convinced, that little good could be expected from a hundred

centuries of such a servile philosophy. Even the Eclectics, who

arose about the age of Augustus, notwithstanding their professing

to chuse freely what pleased them from every different sect, were

yet, in the main, as slavish and dependent as any of their

brethren since they sought for truth not in nature, but in the

several schools; where they supposed she must necessarily be

found, though not united in a body, yet dispersed in parts. Upon

the revival of learning, those sects of Stoics and Epicureans,

Platonists and Pythagoricians, could never regain any credit or

authority; and, at the same time, by the example of their fall,

kept men from submitting, with such blind deference, to those new

sects, which have attempted to gain an ascendant over them.

     The <third> observation, which I shall form on this head, of

the rise and progress of the arts and sciences, is, <That though

the only proper Nursery of these noble plants be a free state;

yet may they be transplanted into any government; and that a

republic is most favourable to the growth of the sciences, a

civilized monarchy to that of the polite arts>.

     To balance a large state or society, whether monarchical or

republican, on general laws, is a work of so great difficulty,

that no human genius, however comprehensive, is able, by the mere

dint of reason and reflection, to effect it. The judgments of

many must unite in this work: Experience must guide their labour:

Time must bring it to perfection: And the feeling of

inconveniencies must correct the mistakes, which they inevitably

fall into, in their first trials and experiments. Hence appears

the impossibility, that this undertaking should be begun and

carried on in any monarchy; since such a form of government, ere

civilized, knows no other secret or policy, than that of

entrusting unlimited powers to every governor or magistrate, and

subdividing the people into so many classes and orders of

slavery. From such a situation, no improvement can ever be

expected in the sciences, in the liberal arts, in laws, and

scarcely in the manual arts and manufactures. The same barbarism

and ignorance, with which the government commences, is propagated

to all posterity, and can never come to a period by the efforts

or ingenuity of such unhappy slaves.

     But though law, the source of all security and happiness,

arises late in any government, and is the slow product of order

and of liberty, it is not preserved with the same difficulty with

which it is produced; but when it has once taken root, is a hardy

plant, which will scarcely ever perish through the ill culture of

men, or the rigour of the seasons. The arts of luxury, and much

more the liberal arts, which depend on a refined taste or

sentiment, are easily lost; because they are always relished by a

few only, whose leisure, fortune, and genius fit them for such

amusements. But what is profitable to every mortal, and in common

life, when once discovered, can scarcely fall into oblivion, but

by the total subversion of society, and by such furious

inundations of barbarous invaders, as obliterate all memory of

former arts and civility. Imitation also is apt to transport

these coarser and more useful arts from one climate to another,

and make them precede the refined arts in their progress; though

perhaps they sprang after them in their first rise and

propagation. From these causes proceed civilized monarchies;

where the arts of government, first invented in free states, are

preserved to the mutual advantage and security of sovereign and

subject.

     However perfect, therefore, the monarchical form may appear

to some politicians, it owes all its perfection to the

republican; nor is it possible, that a pure despotism,

established among a barbarous people, can ever, by its native

force and energy, refine and polish itself. It must borrow its

laws, and methods, and institutions, and consequently its

stability and order, from free governments. These advantages are

the sole growth of republics. The extensive despotism of a

barbarous monarchy, by entering into the detail of the

government, as well as into the principal points of

administration, for ever prevents all such improvement.

     In a civilized monarchy, the prince alone is unrestrained in

the exercise of his authority, and possesses alone a power, which

is not bounded by any thing but custom, example, and the sense of

his own interest. Every minister or magistrate, however eminent,

must submit to the general laws, which govern the whole society,

and must exert the authority delegated to him after the manner,

which is prescribed. The people depend on none but their

sovereign, for the security of their property. He is so far

removed from them, and is so much exempt from private jealousies

or interests, that this dependence is scarcely felt. And thus a

species of government arises, to which, in a high political rant,

we may give the name of <Tyranny>, but which, by a just and

prudent administration, may afford tolerable security to the

people, and may answer most of the ends of political society.

     But though in a civilized monarchy, as well as in a

republic, the people have security for the enjoyment of their

property; yet in both these forms of government, those who

possess the supreme authority have the disposal of many honours

and advantages, which excite the ambition and avarice of mankind.

The only difference is, that, in a republic, the candidates for

office must look downwards, to gain the suffrages of the people;

in a monarchy, they must turn their attention upwards, to court

the good graces and favour of the great. To be successful in the

former way, it is necessary for a man to make himself <useful>,

by his industry, capacity, or knowledge: To be prosperous in the

latter way, it is requisite for him to render himself

<agreeable>, by his wit, complaisance, or civility. A strong

genius succeeds best in republics: A refined taste in monarchies.

And consequently the sciences are the more natural growth of the

one, and the polite arts of the other.

     Not to mention, that monarchies, receiving their chief

stability from a superstitious reverence to priests and princes,

have commonly abridged the liberty of reasoning, with regard to

religion, and politics, and consequently metaphysics and morals.

All these form the most considerable branches of science.

Mathematics and natural philosophy, which only remain, are not

half so valuable.

     Among the arts of conversation, no one pleases more than

mutual deference or civility, which leads us to resign our own

inclinations to those of our companion, and to curb and conceal

that presumption and arrogance, so natural to the human mind. A

good-natured man, who is well educated, practises this civility

to every mortal, without premeditation or interest. But in order

to render that valuable quality general among any people, it

seems necessary to assist the natural disposition by some general

motive. Where power rises upwards from the people to the great,

as in all republics, such refinements of civility are apt to be

little practised; since the whole state is, by that means,

brought near to a level, and every member of it is rendered, in a

great measure, independent of another. The people have the

advantage, by the authority of their suffrages: The great, by the

superiority of their station. But in a civilized monarchy, there

is a long train of dependence from the prince to the peasant,

which is not great enough to render property precarious, or

depress the minds of the people; but is sufficient to beget in

every one an inclination to please his superiors, and to form

himself upon those models, which are most acceptable to people of

condition and education. Politeness of manners, therefore, arises

most naturally in monarchies and courts; and where that

flourishes, none of the liberal arts will be altogether neglected

or despised.

     The republics in Europe are at present noted for want of

politeness. <The good-manners of a Swiss civilized in

Holland>,[5] is an expression for rusticity among the French. The

English, in some degree, fall under the same censure,

notwithstanding their learning and genius. And if the Venetians

be an exception to the rule, they owe it, perhaps, to their

communication with the other Italians, most of whose governments

beget a dependence more than sufficient for civilizing their

manners.

     It is difficult to pronounce any judgment concerning the

refinements of the ancient republics in this particular: But I am

apt to suspect, that the arts of conversation were not brought so

near to perfection among them as the arts of writing and

composition. The scurrility of the ancient orators, in many

instances, is quite shocking, and exceeds all belief. Vanity too

is often not a little offensive in authors of those ages;[6] as

well as the common licentiousness and immodesty of their stile,

<Quicunque impudicus, adulter, ganeo, manu, ventre>, pene, <bona

patria laceraverat>, says Sallust in one of the gravest and most

moral passages of his history. <Nam fuit ante Helenam Cunnus

teterrima belli Causa>, is an expression of Horace, in tracing

the origin of moral good and evil. Ovid and Lucretius[7] are

almost as licentious in their stile as Lord Rochester; though the

former were fine gentlemen and delicate writers, and the latter,

from the corruptions of that court, in which he lived, seems to

have thrown off all regard to shame and decency. Juvenal

inculcates modesty with great zeal; but sets a very bad example

of it if we consider the impudence of his expressions.

     I shall also be bold to affirm, that among the ancients,

there was not much delicacy of breeding, or that polite deference

and respect, which civility obliges us either to express or

counterfeit towards the persons with whom we converse. Cicero was

certainly one of the finest gentlemen of his age; yet I must

confess I have frequently been shocked with the poor figure under

which he represents his friend Atticus, in those dialogues, where

he himself is introduced as a speaker. That learned and virtuous

Roman, whose dignity, though he was only a private gentleman, was

inferior to that of no one in Rome, is there shewn in rather a

more pitiful light than Philalethe's friend in our modern

dialogues. He is a humble admirer of the orator, pays him

frequent compliments, and receives his instructions, with all the

deference which a scholar owes to his master.[8] Even Cato is

treated in somewhat of a cavalier manner in the dialogues <de

finibus>.

     One of the most particular details of a real dialogue, which

we meet with in antiquity, is related by Polybius;[9] when

Philip, king of Macedon, a prince of wit and parts, met with

Titus Flaminius, one of the politest of the Romans, as we learn

from Plutarch,[10] accompanied with ambassadors from almost all

the Greek cities. The Aetolian ambassador very abruptly tells the

king, that he talked like a fool or a madman (lhrein). 'That's

evident,' says his majesty, 'even to a blind man'; which was a

raillery on the blindness of his excellency. Yet all this did not

pass the usual bounds: For the conference was not disturbed; and

Flaminius was very well diverted with these strokes of humour. At

the end, when Philip craved a little time to consult with his

friends, of whom he had none present, the Roman general, being

desirous also to shew his wit, as the historian says, tells him,

'that perhaps the reason, why he had none of his friends with

him, was because he had murdered them all'; which was actually

the case. This unprovoked piece of rusticity is not condemned by

the historian; caused no farther resentment in Philip, than to

excite a Sardonian smile, or what we call a grin; and hindered

him not from renewing the conference next day. Plutarch[11] too

mentions this raillery amongst the witty and agreeable sayings of

Flaminius.

     Cardinal Wolsey apologized for his famous piece of

insolence, in saying, 'Ego et Rex meus', <I and my king>, by

observing, that this expression was conformable to the Latin

idiom, and that a Roman always named himself before the person to

whom, or of whom he spake. Yet this seems to have been an

instance of want of civility among that people. The ancients made

it a rule, that the person of the greatest dignity should be

mentioned first in the discourse; insomuch, that we find the

spring of a quarrel and jealousy between the Romans and

Aetolians, to have been a poet's naming the Aetolians before the

Romans, in celebrating a victory gained by their united arms over

the Macedonians.[12] Thus Livia disgusted Tiberius by placing her

own name before his in an inscription.[13]

     No advantages in this world are pure and unmixed. In like

manner, as modern politeness, which is naturally so ornamental,

runs often into affectation and foppery, disguise and

insincerity; so the ancient simplicity, which is naturally so

amiable and affecting, often degenerates into rusticity and

abuse, scurrility and obscenity.

     If the superiority in politeness should be allowed to modern

times, the modern notions of <gallantry>, the natural produce of

courts and monarchies, will probably be assigned as the causes of

this refinement. No one denies this invention to be modern:[14]

But some of the more zealous partizans of the ancients, have

asserted it to be foppish and ridiculous, and a reproach, rather

than a credit, to the present age.[15] It may here be proper to

examine this question.

     Nature has implanted in all living creatures an affection

between the sexes, which, even in the fiercest and most rapacious

animals, is not merely confined to the satisfaction of the bodily

appetite, but begets a friendship and mutual sympathy, which runs

through the whole tenor of their lives. Nay, even in those

species, where nature limits the indulgence of this appetite to

one season and to one object, and forms a kind of marriage or

association between a single male and female, there is yet a

visible complacency and benevolence, which extends farther, and

mutually softens the affections of the sexes towards each other.

How much more must this have place in man, where the confinement

of the appetite is not natural; but either is derived

accidentally from some strong charm of love, or arises from

reflections on duty and convenience? Nothing, therefore, can

proceed less from affectation than the passion of gallantry. It

is <natural> in the highest degree. Art and education, in the

most elegant courts, make no more alteration on it, than on all

the other laudable passions. They only turn the mind more towards

it; they refine it; they polish it; and give it a proper grace

and expression.

     But gallantry is as <generous> as it is <natural>. To

correct such gross vices, as lead us to commit real injury on

others, is the part of morals, and the object of the most

ordinary education. Where <that> is not attended to, in some

degree, no human society can subsist. But in order to render

conversation, and the intercourse of minds more easy and

agreeable, good-manners have been invented, and have carried the

matter somewhat farther. Wherever nature has given the mind a

propensity to any vice, or to any passion disagreeable to others,

refined breeding has taught men to throw the biass on the

opposite side, and to preserve, in all their behaviour, the

appearance of sentiments different from those to which they

naturally incline. Thus, as we are commonly proud and selfish,

and apt to assume the preference above others, a polite man

learns to behave with deference towards his companions, and to

yield the superiority to them in all the common incidents of

society. In like manner, wherever a person's situation may

naturally beget any disagreeable suspicion in him, it is the part

of good-manners to prevent it, by a studied display of

sentiments, directly contrary to those of which he is apt to be

jealous. Thus, old men know their infirmities, and naturally

dread contempt from the youth: Hence, well-educated youth

redouble the instances of respect and deference to their elders.

Strangers and foreigners are without protection: Hence, in all

polite countries, they receive the highest civilities, and are

entitled to the first place in every company. A man is lord in

his own family, and his guests are, in a manner, subject to his

authority: Hence, he is always the lowest person in the company;

attentive to the wants of every one; and giving himself all the

trouble, in order to please, which may not betray too visible an

affectation, or impose too much constraint on his guests.[16]

Gallantry is nothing but an instance of the same generous

attention. As nature has given <man> the superiority above

<woman>, by endowing him with greater strength both of mind and

body; it is his part to alleviate that superiority, as much as

possible, by the generosity of his behaviour, and by a studied

deference and complaisance for all her inclinations and opinions.

Barbarous nations display this superiority, by reducing their

females to the most abject slavery; by confining them, by beating

them, by selling them, by killing them. But the male sex, among a

polite people, discover their authority in a more generous,

though not a less evident manner; by civility, by respect, by

complaisance, and, in a word, by gallantry. In good company, you

need not ask, Who is the master of the feast? The man, who sits

in the lowest place, and who is always industrious in helping

every one, is certainly the person. We must either condemn all

such instances of generosity, as foppish and affected, or admit

of gallantry among the rest. The ancient Muscovites wedded their

wives with a whip, instead of a ring. The same people, in their

own houses, took always the precedency above foreigners, even[17]

foreign ambassadors. These two instances of their generosity and

politeness are much of a piece.

     Gallantry is not less compatible with <wisdom> and

<prudence>, than with <nature> and <generosity>; and when under

proper regulations, contributes more than any other invention, to

the <entertainment >and <improvement> of the youth of both sexes.

Among every species of animals, nature has founded on the love

between the sexes their sweetest and best enjoyment. But the

satisfaction of the bodily appetite is not alone sufficient to

gratify the mind; and even among brute-creatures, we find, that

their play and dalliance, and other expressions of fondness, form

the greatest part of the entertainment. In rational beings, we

must certainly admit the mind for a considerable share. Were we

to rob the feast of all its garniture of reason, discourse,

sympathy, friendship, and gaiety, what remains would scarcely be

worth acceptance, in the judgment of the truly elegant and

luxurious.

     What better school for manners, than the company of virtuous

women; where the mutual endeavour to please must insensibly

polish the mind, where the example of the female softness and

modesty must communicate itself to their admirers, and where the

delicacy of that sex puts every one on his guard, lest he give

offence by any breach of decency.

     Among the ancients, the character of the fair-sex was

considered as altogether domestic; nor were they regarded as part

of the polite world or of good company. This, perhaps, is the

true reason why the ancients have not left us one piece of

pleasantry that is excellent, (unless one may except the Banquet

of Xenophon, and the Dialogues of Lucian) though many of their

serious compositions are altogether inimitable. Horace condemns

the coarse railleries and cold jests of Plautus: But, though the

most easy, agreeable, and judicious writer in the world, is his

own talent for ridicule very striking or refined? This,

therefore, is one considerable improvement, which the polite arts

have received from gallantry, and from courts, where it first

arose.

     But, to return from this digression, I shall advance it as a

<fourth> observation on this subject, of the rise and progress of

the arts and sciences, <that when the arts and sciences come to

perfection in any state, from that moment they naturally, or

rather necessarily decline, and seldom or never revive in that

nation, where they formerly flourished>.

     It must be confessed, that this maxim, though conformable to

experience, may, at first sight, be esteemed contrary to reason.

If the natural genius of mankind be the same in all ages, and in

almost all countries, (as seems to be the truth) it must very

much forward and cultivate this genius, to be possessed of

patterns in every art, which may regulate the taste, and fix the

objects of imitation. The models left us by the ancients gave

birth to all the arts about 200 years ago, and have mightily

advanced their progress in every country of Europe: Why had they

not a like effect during the reign of Trajan and his successors;

when they were much more entire, and were still admired and

studied by the whole world? So late as the emperor Justinian, the

Poet, by way of distinction, was understood, among the Greeks, to

be Homer; among the Romans, Virgil. Such admiration still

remained for these divine geniuses; though no poet had appeared

for many centuries, who could justly pretend to have imitated

them.

     A man's genius is always, in the beginning of life, as much

unknown to himself as to others; and it is only after frequent

trials, attended with success, that he dares think himself equal

to those undertakings, in which those, who have succeeded, have

fixed the admiration of mankind. If his own nation be already

possessed of many models of eloquence, he naturally compares his

own juvenile exercises with these, and being sensible of the

great disproportion, is discouraged from any farther attempts,

and never aims at a rivalship with those authors, whom he so much

admires. A noble emulation is the source of every excellence.

Admiration and modesty naturally extinguish this emulation. And

no one is so liable to an excess of admiration and modesty, as a

truly great genius.

     Next to emulation, the greatest encourager of the noble arts

is praise and glory. A writer is animated with new force, when he

hears the applauses of the world for his former productions; and,

being roused by such a motive, he often reaches a pitch of

perfection, which is equally surprizing to himself and to his

readers. But when the posts of honour are all occupied, his first

attempts are but coldly received by the public; being compared to

productions, which are both in themselves more excellent, and

have already the advantage of an established reputation. Were

Molire and Corneille to bring upon the stage at present their

early productions, which were formerly so well received, it would

discourage the young poets, to see the indifference and disdain

of the public. The ignorance of the age alone could have given

admission to the <Prince of Tyre>; but it is to that we owe <The

Moor>: Had <Every man in his humour> been rejected, we had never

seen <Volpone>.

     Perhaps, it may not be for the advantage of any nation to

have the arts imported from their neighbours in too great

perfection. This extinguishes emulation, and sinks the ardour of

the generous youth. So many models of Italian painting brought

into England, instead of exciting our artists, is the cause of

their small progress in that noble art. The same, perhaps, was

the case of Rome, when it received the arts from Greece. That

multitude of polite productions in the French language, dispersed

all over Germany and the North, hinder these nations from

cultivating their own language, and keep them still dependent on

their neighbours for those elegant entertainments.

     It is true, the ancients had left us models in every kind of

writing, which are highly worthy of admiration. But besides that

they were written in languages, known only to the learned;

besides this, I say, the comparison is not so perfect or entire

between modern wits, and those who lived in so remote an age. Had

Waller been born in Rome, during the reign of Tiberius, his first

productions had been despised, when compared to the finished odes

of Horace. But in this island the superiority of the Roman poet

diminished nothing from the fame of the English. We esteemed

ourselves sufficiently happy, that our climate and language could

produce but a faint copy of so excellent an original.

     In short, the arts and sciences, like some plants, require a

fresh soil; and however rich the land may be, and however you may

recruit it by art or care, it will never, when once exhausted,

produce any thing that is perfect or finished in the kind.



                                

                             