





Free Trade or, The Meanes To Make Trade Florish. Wherein, The

Causes of the Decay of Trade in this Kingdome, are discovered:



And the Remedies also to remoove the same, are represented.



Propertius, nauita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator: Enumerat

miles vulnera, pastor oues.



London, Printed by John Legatt, for Simon Waterson, dwelling in

Paules Church-yard at the Signe of the Crowne. 1622









by Edward Misseldon









To the Prince. Sir



    Your Highnes is no lesse Happy to bee the Sonne of so great a

King, then to be the Heire apparent of so many Kingdomes. In the

one, rare endowments of Majesty and Magnanimity, are Yours by

generation: In the other, a Royall Monarchy by inheritance and

succession. The one doth fit You for the other, and Your Royall

Fathers footsteps for them both. In those are Peerelesse prints:

You cannot cast Your Eie, but they are present to You, and

represented in You. You see in His Religion, Piety: in His Sacred

Person, Tranquility: in His Government, Policy. In every one of

these, all these: and all in You. In that last, His Majesty hath

carried a quick Eie, over the Commerce of this Kingdome: because

it hath relation both to the Revenue of the Crowne, and the

Common-wealth of all His Kingdomes. It is said in Exechiels

Vision, that One wheele ran within the other, which hath and

Emphasis in that tongue, {Hebrew phrase omitted} and surely

matters of State and of Trade, are involved and wrapt up

together. Which latter, because it is at this time in agitation,

and there are, not without cause, many Quaere's about the Causes

of the generall decay thereof; hath caused me to put my selfe on

this Enquiry, to philosophize if I could, in these Causes and

Remedies. Not that I would seeme with Phormio, to reade a Lecture

to Hannibal: No, I have only mustered and marshalled these men

into their Rancks and Order; it is Yours to Command them. Great

Philip of Macedon, suffered a mean musition say unto him, Absit,

ut haec tu me melius scias. But for my part, I dare not in any

thing, put such an absit, to a Prince so absolute. Every thing

mooves it selfe to its Center. These little lucubrations present

themselves to your Highnes, as unto their proper Orb. For as they

looke up to the King, or as they looke downe to the Kingdome; In

both they looke on You, with a double aspect. You are the Joy of

the King, and Hope of all these Kingdomes. The Only Sonne Your

are, of the Only King: An happy Seer, of a blessed Sire: A

Princely Consul, of the Privy Councel: A watchman, A worthy, of

David and of Jacob.

    These Meditation of mine, are very meane: an unfit object for

a Princes sight: unlesse as You are a God on Earth; in this also

Your represent the God of Heaven; to accept in your Princely

pardon and patience, {Greek phrase omitted}. The Cause is great,

your Wisedom's deep, and my Lord the King is as an Angell of God.

Your His, He is Christ, and Christ is Gods.

    Oh God, be thou still the King and Christ, of this Christ our

King: Evangelize unto this Angel: double the Spirit of our Eliah,

on Our Elisha: that He may flourish like our Palme Tree, and grow

up like our Cedar of Albion. Give thy Judgements to the King, and

thy Justice to the Kings Sonne: And let all the People offer

these sweet Odours to Thee the God of Heaven, and pray for the

life of the King and His Sonne.

    So prayeth, for His Majestie, And your Highnesse,



    Edward Misselden, Merchant



    From my House at Hackney on Whitson Eve, the 8 of June In the

yeare of Grace, MDCXXII. And of the King of Peace, XXIV.



Cap. I.



The Causes of the want of Money in England.



    It having pleased God to give mee my birth and being in this

good Land, and under the reigne of so great a King; whose peace

and piety, whose prudence and policy, whose rare endowments of

Nature and literature, absit omnis adulatio, doe lend to the

Christioan and Pagan world such a glorious lustre, as that the

other great lights in the Spheares thereof do seeme eclipsed: I

could not but thinke it my bounden duty, in all humble

acknowledgement to Almight God, and devouted service to so mighty

a King, to endevour to expresse the same, in some publique

service for the publique good.

    The rather for that there seem's to be a necessitie imposed

upon all men, as much as they can, to performe this duety;

according to that gnerall precept, Feare God, Honour the King: As

if a man could not feare God, unlesse he honour the King: nor

honour the King, without the feare of God.

    And no marvell, when God himselfe setteth these duties in the

frontispice or topof both the Tables of the Decalogue: The one

Explicit in the first Table, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God:

The other Implicit in the second Table, Thou shalt honour the

King: as if he were {Greek phrase omitted}, A Law and another

Law: yea the whole Law comprised in these two: and these two

termed the great Commandements, to give a deepe impression and a

lively expression of so great a dutie.

    Yea, he doth honour kings with this own title, as if hee

would part with, & impart to them, some of his owne honour. I

have saide yee are Gods: to which that of the Poet may seeme

{Greek word omitted} to have an elegant allusion, Divisum

imperium cum Ioue Caesar habet.

    And this is it I confesse that hath raised and rowsed mine

affections, to seeke out a subject, wherein I might set my self a

task, & as it is in the proverb, might {Greek phrase omitted}, to

performe some acceptable service, to so great a King, & so good a

kingdome.

    But what need I seeke that which seeketh all men? For what is

at this time more enquired after then the Causes of the decay of

Trade? And what can be more fit for my meditation, then that

wherein I have had education? And what hath more relation to

matter of State, then Commerce of Merchants? For when Trade

flourisheth, the Kings revenue is augmented, Lands and Rents

improved, Navigation is encreased, the poore employed. But if

Trade decay, all these decline with it. Neverthelesse when I

looke upon the face of the great body politique of this weale

publique, and therein consider the high wisedome of His sacred

Majestie, as the intellectual part of this Micorcosme, or alter

orbis as Ceasar calles it: the prudence and providence of His

Nobles, as the Eyes thereof; the great decay of Trade, the Nerves

thereof: together with the parliamentation and consultation of

all the parts together about these Causes and Remedies: I feare I

shall seeme {Greek phrase omitted}, to light a Candle in the

Sunne, to offer my service in that, about which the choicest wits

of the Kingdome are now in consultation.

    But having had experience of His Majesties gracious

interpretation of small services of his subjects employed for the

publique: though others much more sufficient are sent before, yet

could I not but expostulate with my selfe, what if I also runne

after, and cast in my {Greek phrase omitted}, into this great

Treasury.

    Therefore if herein, any observations of mine, either

Forreign or domestique, may administer any thing worthy the

information of that Great common and yet not common Sense, I

shall esteeme my part most happily acted, to have employed my

private paines for the publique good. The rather, for that, as

there are many Causes discussed and discoursed of at this time,

of the decay of Trade; so also are there many remedies: wherein

if either the Causes be mistaken, or the remedies ill applied;

the present sicknesse of the Trade, may be brought from a disease

in fieri to an habituated and in facto, as the Phisitians Schoole

hath it.

    To find the cause of things, is a worke of Philosophy, and

much felicitie: to finde out a fit remedy, is of high eminency:

But to apply the remedy, is a matter of State and Policy. And

this leadeth mee to the Method of my discourse: which parts it

selfe in twaine: viz. Into a double Quaere, of the Deformation

and Reformation of Trade. In the former may be considered, the

Causes and Effects thereof. In the Causes, the matter of forme of

Trade. The master of Trade, is either Naturall or Artificial. The

Natural matter of Commerce is Merchandize: which Merchants from

the end of Trade have stiled Commodities. The Artificial matter

of Commerce is Money, which hath obtained the title sinews of

warre and of State.

    Old Jacob blessing his Grandchildren, crost his hands; and

laide his right hand on the yonger, and his left hand on the

elder: And Money, though it be in nature and time after

Merchandize, yet forasmuch as it is now in use become the chiefe,

I will take leave of Method, to handle it in the first place.

    First therefore for the want of Money in this Kingdome, many

reasons may bee assign'd. Whereof some are Immediate, some

mediate or remote. The Immediate reasons of the want of money,

are either such as hinder the Importation; of such as cause the

exportation thereof. And both therse are occasioned by the

under-valueation of his Majesties Caoine, to that of our

Neighbour Countries. For who wil procure licence in Spaine to

bring Realles into England, to sell them here at ten in the

hundred gaine, which is lesse then the Exchange from thence will

yeeld; when hee may have for the same five and twenty in the

hundred in Holland? Here five Reals of eight, which make twenty

shillings sterling, will commonly yeeld two and twenty shillings

or thereabouts: and the same in Holland will yeeld forty two

shillings & sixe pence Flemish, which is five and twenty

shillings sterling. And how can we choose but want money in

England, when the Jacobus pieces, are Currant at so high a rate

in Holland? For there they goe at twelve guilders eight stivers

the piece, which is one and fortie shillings and four pence

Flemish, which is four and twentie shillings & nine pence

sterling. And after this rate His Majesties other Coines of gold

& silver are there of respective value. For although by the

Placcaets or Proclamations of those parts, the Jacobus pieces,

and other species of gold and silver, are there set at

indifferent rates answerable to their valuation here with us

respectively, which they there call permissie gelt, Proclamation

money: yet they have other devices to raise money, and draw it

away at their pleasures. As either by their Banckes, when the

Banckiers will for their occasions give a greater price for mony

then the Proclamation suffereth, & then it is called Banck gelt:

or else by slacke paymasters, that for their owne advantage in

the raising of money, will pretend not to make present payment of

their debts, unlesse you take their money at a higher rate, then

either the Proclamation, or the Banck money. Which being paid and

received, produceth a third kinde, which they call Currant gelt.

And so by the Connivence of the Magistrate, the same goeth from

man to man, and at last becommeth currant at an excessive value.

So they have Permission or Proclamation Money, and Banck Money,

and Currant Money, and all to draw dry the Currant of His

Majesties Coine.

    And thus the Hepatitis of this great Body of our being

opened, & such profusion of the life blood let out; and the liver

or fountaine obstructed, and weakened, which should succour the

same; needes must this great Body languish, and at length fall

into a Marasmum.

    I am not ignorant that there hath beene great abuse in the

culling of His Majesties Coyne, here at home, and in melting the

heavy money into plate: And that there is a great superfluitie of

Plate generally in private mens hands more then is necessary, and

farre beyond any example of former times, which must needes also

cause scarcitie of money: yet on the other side I cannot deny,

but that it is better to have the same in Plate, as a treasure of

the Kingdome; then turned into Coine, & so turned out of the

Kingdome, by the under-value thereof.

    Now the Mediat or remote reasons of the want of money in

England, are either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique are

generall, or special. The general remote cause of our want of

money, is the great excesse of this Kingdom, in consuming the

Commodities of Forreine Countries, which prove to us

discommodities, in hindering us of so much treasure, which

otherwise would bee brought in, in lieu of those toyes. For now a

dayes most men live above their callings, and promiscously step

forth Vice versa, into one anothers Rankes. The Countrey mans Eie

is upon the Citizen: the Citizen upon the Gentleman: the

Gentleman upon the Nobleman. And by this meanes wee draw unto us,

and consume amongst us, that great abundance of the Wines of

Spaine, of France, of the Rhene, of the Levant, the Lawnes and

Cambricks of Hannault and the Netherlands, the Silkes of Italie,

the Sugars & Tobaco of the West Indies, the Spices of the East

Indies: All which are of no necessitie unto us, & yet are bought

with ready mony, which otherwise would be brought over in

treasure if these were not. A Common-wealth is like unto a

family, the father or master whereof ought to sell more then he

buyeth according to old Catoe's counsell, Patrem familias

vendacem non emacem esse oportet. Otherwise his expence being

greater then his revenue, he must needs come behinde hand. Even

so a Common-wealth that excessively spendeth the forreine

Commodities deere, and unttereth the native fewer and cheape,

shal enrich other Common-wealths, but beggar it selfe. Where on

the contrary, if it vented fewer of the forreine, and more of the

Native, the residue must needs returne in treasure.

    The speciall remote cause of our want of money, is the great

want of our East-India stocke here at home. Which is a matter of

very great consequence, and causeth the body of this

Common-wealth to be wounded sore, through the sides of many

particular members thereof. For the stocke of the East India

Company being of great value, and collected and contracted from

all the other particular Trades of the Common-wealth; and a great

part thereof having beene Embargued and detained now for more

then five yeeres last past; and that not by a profest Enemie,

against whom we might have been warn'd and arm'd, but by a

friend, a neighbour, a next neighbour, one obliged to our King

and Nation more then to all the Kings on earth: this losse I say,

is not onley thus unkind, but is the more intollerable, in that

the Common-wealth hath lost the use and employment of the Stocke

it selfe, and all the encrease of Trade which the same might have

produced, in the severall Trades of the Subjects, whereby

abundance of treasure might have beene brought into this land in

all this time.

    It is said of Belisarius that Great and famous Commander of

the Romanes, that even Rome it selfe owed to him twice her life:

and yet at last was so unkinde to Belisarius as to put out both

his eyes, and exposed him to beg in a little Cotage built without

the gates, where hee often repeated this sentence to those that

passed by, Date obolum Belisario, quem inuidia, non culp

caecauit. And certainely our Nation may challenge as much or more

of these unkinde friends, the Belisarius ever did or could of

Rome: and they shew themselves no lesse unkinde, to deprive us of

the light and life of this Trade of ours, and suffer this Nation

to use so muc importunitie for their owne.

    Homer reports of Patroclus, that he would needs put on

Achilles armour, and ride on Achilles horse, but Achilles speare

hee durst not touch, and thereby was knowne to Hector, with whom

he fought, not to be Achilles, and so lost his life. These

friends of ours have sometimes put on, sometimes put off, I had

almost said, put out the Kings colours: They have sayled in His

subjects shippes, but that Histam fidei they have not used, or

abused rather; whereby they have beene discovered to the Indians,

not to be the subjects of the faith's Defender, as sometimes they

would have faigned, though to an evill purpose.

    The Romanes were wont to weepe, at the sight of Caesars blood

kept in an handkercher. Caesars subjects blood is kept, not in

handkerchiefes but in sheetes, written within and without, the

memory whereof maketh the people mourne. The cry thereof is gone

up: the King will remember it, the King of Kings will avenge it.

    Constantinus the Great, the father of Constantius, was wont

often to protest, that he made more account of one Christian then

of all his Coffers filled with treasure. And the Comfort of this

Nation is, to bee the subjects of such a Sovertainge, who as

constantly as ever did Constantinus, hath againe and againe

profest, Not to account himselfe more rich or happie, then in the

prosperitie of his subjects.

    Thus much of the Domestique remote causes of the want of

money in England: the forreine causes follow. Which are either in

respect of the warres in christendome, or the Trades out of

Christendome. The warres in Christendome are forreine remote

causes of the want of money, either by causing the exportation,

as the warres of Christians: or hindering the importation

thereof, as the warres of Pirates. I will take the warres of

Germanie for an urgent instance of the former: which have raised

the Riecksdaller from two Markes Lubish, to twentie markes

Lubish, in many place of Germany: whereby abundance of money is

drawne unto the Mintes of those Countries, from all the other

Mines and parts of Christendome.

    And for the latter, I will instance the warres of the Pirats

of Argier and Tunis, which hath robbed this Common-wealth of an

infinite value: the crueltie whereof many feele with griefe,

others heare with pittie, but the grivance remaine's. Needs must

Christendome, and in it England, feele the want of money, when

either it is violently intercepted by Turkish Pirats, the Enimies

of God and man; or the instruments surprised, as men, ships, and

merchandize, which are the channels to convey it to us. And

heathenish policie it is, or hellish rather, put upon the Princes

and people of Christendome by the Grand Seignour, to hold with

them an outward forme to amitie, and in the meane time by his

vassals, use a cunning and covert hostilitie.

    The other forreine remote cause of the want of money, are the

Trades maintained out of Christendome to Turky, Persia and the

East Indies. Which trades are maintained for the most part with

ready money, yet in a different manner from the trades of

Christendome within it selfe. For although the trades within

Christendome are diven with ready monies, yet those monies are

still contained and continued within the bounds of Christendome.

There is indeede a fluxus and refluxus, a flood and ebbe of the

monies of Christendome traded within it selfe: for sometimes

there is more in one part of Christendome, sometimes there is

lesse in another, as one countrey wanteth, and another aboundeth:

It commeth and goeth, and whirleth about the Circle of

Christendome, but is still contained with the compasse thereof.

but the money that is traded out of Christendome into the parts

aforesaid, is continually issued out and never returneth againe.

It is true, those trades tend to an admirable encrease of the

stocke of Christendome in wares: which if they were purchased

with the wares of Christendome, according to the true nature of

Commerce, the benefit were farre more excellent. For Commercium

is quasi Commutatio mercium, a change of wares for wares, not

money for wares. And it is Libera commeandi facultas, abiis qui

merces ultro citroque conuehunt.

    Or if the Common-wealth of Christendome were like to that of

Utopia, where gold and silver are of lesse esteem then Iron, it

were a brave exchange to lose money to get wares. For the riches

of former ages did not consist re pecuniaria but pecuaria. Whence

pecunia, as Plinie affirmeth, was so called a pecude, quia pecus

suit pecuniae fundamentum, & antiquitus pecunia pecudis effigie

signabatur. But when Immooveable and Immutable things came also

to be in Commerce amongst men, as well as those things which were

mooveable and fit for change, then came money in use, as the rule

and square whereby things might receive estimation & value.

Therefore the Civilians affirme that Numus est {Greek phrase

omitted} dictus, quod instiutum sit Civile. According to that of

Aristotle. {Greek phrase omitted} Numus non est a natura sed a

lege. And thence it is that money in our tongue is derived of

moneta, quasi numi nota.

    Or if there were a necessitie to Christendome, to use those

forreine wares: or that the meanes whereby they are to be

procured, were without the losse of treasure: or lastly that the

same tended to the encrease of the treasure thereof theexchage

were excellent. But first there isno such necessitie: for that's

necessarie to doe a thing without which it cannot be done: And

that's necessarie to the being of a Common-wealth, without which

it cannot subsist. But thankes to God, Christendome is richly

furnished within it selfe, with all things fit for life and

maintenance: whether we respect vitall use, as foode and raiment:

or physicall, as vegetables and mineral: or politicall, as gold,

silver, and infinite varietie of merchandize. Nor are those wares

procured without the losse of treasure, no nor with lesse

treasure. For as those wares have cost lesse in price, since some

late discoveries; so are they encreased in their quantities, by

the ample trade of all parts of Christendome thither, more then

before: and then who knowth not that a lesse quantitie deare, and

a greater quantitie cheape, is all one in respect of the value.

Nor is the treasure lessened by changing the course of trade into

those parts. For the new trades found out, are furnished with a

new supply of money, and the old nevertheless issue out as much

treasure as before: by reason that the same are enlarged and

become now as great, apart, as heretofore they were, together,

when the new trades were included in the old. So that now so much

more of the treasure of Christendome is wasted, as those old and

new trades are encreased, which is to an infinite value.

    Not lastly, is the treasure of Christendome encreased by

those forreine trades, for the more the stock of Christendome is

thereby encreased in wares, the more it decreaseth in treasure:

which the parts of Christendome must needs feele by Sympathy and

compassion.

    And this, that prudent and politique Emperour Charles the

fifth perceived in his time, who upon a question betwixt the

Spaniards and Portugalles about this matter, the Emperour used

words to this effect: You Portugalles for a suretie, are Enemies

to all Christendome; for you carry nothing out of it but coine,

which is hurt to all Countries.



Cap. II.



The Causes of the decay of Trade, in the Merchandize of England



    Such are the causes of the matter of trade considered in the

want of money, themerchandize followeth. Merchandize is that

naturall matter of Commerce, whereby men busie themselves in

buying and selling, chopping and changing, to the encrease of

Artes, and enriching of Common-wealths: according to that of the

Poet {Greek phrase omitted}, Bona lis mortalibus haec est.

    And to the end there should be a Commerce amongst men, it

hath pleased God to invite as it were, one Countrey to traffique

with another, by the variety of things which the one hath, and

the other hath not: that so that which is wanting to the one,

might be supplied by the other, that all might have sufficient.

    Which thing the very windes and seas proclaime, in giving

passage to all nations: the windes blowing sometimes towards one

Country, sometimes toward another; that so by this divine

justice, every one might be supplyed in things necessary for life

and maintenance.

    And this, Seneca thought to be a principall benefit of

nature, Quod & vento gentes locis disipatas miscuit, & sua omnia

in regiones ita descripsit, ut necessarium mortalibus esset inter

ipsos Commercium. Nature by the benefit of the wind, hath so

mixed people, dispersed in divers places, and so distributed her

gifts in divers Countries, that there should be a necessity of

Commerce amongst men. Which agreeth with that of Aristotle, Est

translatio rerum omnium caepta ab initio, ab eo quod est secudum

naturam, cum homines haberent plura quam sufficerent, partim

etiam pauciora, negotiatione suppleri id quod natura deest, quo

commode omnibus sufficiat.

    And that we doe not goe out of the Christian world for an

example hereof, let us consider the state of the Netherlands, in

what a miserable case those people were, if they received not

supply from all other Nations. They have nothing of their owne,

and yet they seeme to possesse all things in the supply they

receive from all the world.

    And surely if any Kingdome under the Sunne can subsist of it

selfe, none hath more cause to blesse God, then this Iland of

ours, which Almighty God hath richly adorn'd with variety of

allthings necessary for mans life and welfare. As with Corne, and

our Wine: Cattle, Wooll, Cloth, Tynne, Iron, Lead, Saffran, Waxe,

Hoppes, Hydes, Tallow, Flaxe, Fowle, Fish, and many othres:

whereby, thanks bee to God, the people of this Land, have not

onely sufficient for their owne mainenance, but doe abundantly

supply the wants of all other Nations.

    Now the Trade and Commerce of this Kingdome within it selfe,

and with Forreine Nations, consisting of so many rich

Commodities; let us consider them all joyntly, and then some

principall of them apart.

    Jointly considered, the causes of the decay of Trade in them,

may be said either to be Deficient or Efficient. Deficient,

either in the generall want of money in the Kingdome; or the

particular want of the East India stocke. I shewed before, what

were the causes of the want of money: & that the disaster upon

the East India Trade is a remote cause thereof: but these are

both causes of the decay of trade. For money is the vitall spirit

of trade, and if the spirits faile, needs must the body faint.

And as the body of trade seemeth to be dead without the life of

money: so doe also the members of the Common-wealth, without

their means of trade. We say, that an Artizan or workeman, cannot

worke without tooles or instruments: no more can a Merchant trade

without money or meanes. And in the want of so great a stocke, as

is that of the East India Company, the Body of this Common-wealth

hath lost the use of many of it principall members; by whose

industry, art, and action the Commerce thereof might wonderfully

have been encrea'st. The losse whereof, to him that is not

wilfully blinde, is apparently sensible in the Drapery of the

kingdome, whereby the poore are set on worke: and in all the

other trades of the kingdome, whereby the subjects are employed:

and hath begot that great and generall dampe and deadnesse in all

the trades of the kingdome, which we unhappily feele at this day.

    The Efficient causes of the decay of trade jointly

considered, are either Usuary, or unnecessary suits in law. In

the former I am prevented, and my labour spared, by him that

wrote a little treatise against usury: which it seeme's for

modesty he refuseth to owe: though I could wish, that those that

deserve of the publique were knowne to the publique: least they

be served as sometimes Batillus served Virgil, and so be forc'd

too late to proclaime, Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit alter

Honores.

    I have a word onely to adde to his Usury, that it is not an

Usury of ten in the hundred only, that wringeth this

Common-wealth, but an extorsion also of 20-30-40, nay of Cento

per Cento per Anno, as the Italians speake, given and taken on

pledges and pawnes, and that on poore peoples labours, in London

especially: which is a biting Usury indeed, and a fearefull

crying sinne before God.

    Unnecessary suites of Law are also Efficient causes of the

decay of trade. Wherein certainely this Kingdome exceedeth all

other kingdomes in the world. As the Justice of this kingdom is

the Diadem of the King, and doth stabilire Regis thronum, and

tribuere cuique suum: whereby men may five Caesar Caesar's, and

meum and tuum one to another: so is the Justice of the King, in

the sacred person of His Majestie, amongst other His Royall

Vertues, and Embleme and represation of highest Majesty: and it

is an incomparable happinesse of this kingdome, to have such a

Malchizedec, a King of Justice, a King of Peace.

    Neither may I forget that Royall testimony hereof, which is

worthy to be written in letters of gold, and thankefully to be

remembered of every tongue and pen; whereof amongst others more

worthy, it was also my happinesse to be oculatus and auritus

testis: when His Majesty in a Star-chamber assembly, lifting His

eye toward heaven, and laying His hand on His Sonnes head, made

such a solemne protestation of His sincerity in Justice, as may

serve for a matter of admiration and imitation, to all the Kings

on earth. Those that went before, and they that followed after:

Those that heard it then, and they that heard of it since; said

it was {Greek phrase omitted} Nec vox hominem sonat, o Deus

certe!

    If such then be the Justice of the King and the kingdome, how

is it then that Trade is hindered by suits of Law. Herein

Columellae's counsell is remarquable, Principi providendum est,

ne legibus fundata civitas, legibus evertatur. There cannot be

too much Justice, ther may be too much Law. For the use of

Justice is excellent, in conteining men within the bonds of

civility and honesty: in preserving men from injurie: and in

maintaining every mans right & propriety. But the abuse there of

is a most pernitious and dangerous surfeit in the body of every

Common-wealth.

    And this is our case in this Weale-publike; no Kingdome hath

better Lawes; no kingdome so full fraught with tedious,

needlesse, endlesse, suits of Law. For now this Litigandi {Greek

word omitted}, and waxeth so fast, and groweth so great, that

suites of Law doe seem immortall: time doth increase them, and

lenght of time would not determine them, if the wisedome of those

Grave Fathers of the Law, did not put an end to the malice of the

Litigants: as is now, worthily observed in Chancery, to his

honour and memorie that hath so happily begun the same.

    By the groweth and greatnesse of which suites, I say, a great

number of His Majesties good and loving subjects are vexed,

imprisoned, impoverished and overthrowne: and whilst the

Litigants strive together, another taketh away the fish, and as

it is in the Apologue, leaveth to either of them an empty shell.

And thus mens time and meanes being spent in Law, which should be

employed in Trade, trade is neglected, and the Common-wealth

deprived, of the benefit that might be purchased and procured

thereby.

    Amd thus much for the decay of Trade considered joyntly. It

followeth now to consider them apart, in some principall parts

thereof. Which may be reduced, to such as tend to the

Fortification of the Kingdome, or Maintenance of Trade. The

former are Ordinance and Munition: the too-too common exportation

whereof, hath taught us wofull experience of an invaluable

inconvenience thereby, which every man is sensible of: and

therefore I neede not presse it: I wish it did not oppresse us.

    The latter, I will referre to things essentiall, for the

preservation of mans life, as Victus and Vestitus: yet such of

them also as doe aford wondrous variety of Trade, and may be

termed the Nourceries thereof, as the Fishing and Clothing of

this Kingdome. For on these two, all sorts of Trades and

Tradesmen, have some dependance.

    The inconvenience in this former, is that Encroaching of

Strangers, in Fishing upon our Coasts: whereby not onely the

bread is taken out of the subjects mouth, but that infinite

wealth, which God hath made proper and peculiar unto Us, is

become common unto them. Whereby also, their Navigation is

wonderfully encrea'st their Mariners are multiplied, and

exceeding great Trades maintained into all parts of the Christian

world. And victuals commonly yeelding ready money, and

tolleration of exportation thereof, the same hath redounded to an

infinite enriching of their Countries with Treasure, exhausted

out of these Mines of our's.

    I am not ignorant that a learned man of that side, pressing

hard in a Treatise entituled Mare liberum, the Community and

Freedome of the Sea against the Portugall Trade into the East

Indies: doth cunningly and obliquely, under the covert terms of

Populi Romani littus, defend and maintaine, in the fifth chapter

thereof, their fishing upon our Coasts. For thus hee concludeth,

Nemo igitur potest apopulo Romano ad littus marius accedere

prohiberi, & retia siccare, & alia facere, quae semel onmes

hominibus in perpetuum sibi licere voluerunt. And again, Exteris

ius piscandi, ubique immune esse debet.

    To part of which Treatise, there is an answere entituled, De

Dominio Maris, to which I referre those that desire further

satisfaction in this matter. But in my judgement, which I submit

to better judgement, the Author of Mare liberum, though otherwise

very learned, strayneth his Arguments for that purpose beyond

their strength. For Jus is said to be scriptum, or Non scriptum.

And by both these, the proprieties of the Seas may be proved, to

belong to those Princes and Countries, to which they are next

adjacent.

    For Custome, the examples of our Neighbour Countries round

about us are frequent. As of Coeldine, Groeneland, Norway, and

Frisland, under the King of Denmark. Tunny fishing under the Duke

of Medina. The Gulfe of Venice that Seignory. And many others I

might instance: In all which there is no liberty of fishing, but

by speciall priviledge had from those Princes to whom the same

belongeth. Which being so we may wel conclude with the Poet, Cum

ventum ad verum est, sensus moresque repugnant.

    For the Law it selfe, it is not hard to produce some of his

owne Authors against himselfe. As the Emperour Leo: of whome he

thus speaketh, Voluit {Greek word omitted}, hoc est, vestibula

maritima eorum esse propria, qui oram habitarent; ibique eos ius

piscandi habere.

    Also Rodericus Suarius, whose testimony because he was a

Spaniard, he produceth against the Portugals in the end of his

fifth Chapter; whom, if hee had pleased, hee might also have

cited thus speaking: Redditus piscariarum consueti, ut est

gabella, seu aliud tributum solui conseuetum, de his quae in mari

piscatores faciunt, seu a mercantoribus de his wuae emunt aut

vendunt, Principibus conceduntur.

    To which I will onely adde that of Bartolus, whom the

Civilians call Juris Lucernam, thus speaking: Ut Insulae in mari

proxime adiacenties, sic & mare ipsum ad Centum usque milliaria

pro territorio districtuque illius regionis cui proxime

appropinquat, assignatur.

    The rest that the Author of Mare liberum enforceth, of the

Community and freedome of the Sea to all Nations, he

understandeth of matters in question, betweene the Portugals and

those of his Nation, concerning their East India Trade, and not

of their fishing upon our Coasts. Which Question in my judgement,

being out of question, were better determined by action then

disputation: It being a Royalty of the King, and a Regall

priviledge of this Kingdome, assigned by Almighty God.

    From the Fishing come wee to the Clothing or Drapery of this

Kingdome: the consideration wherof is of very high consequence,

and concerneth both the Soveraigne and the Subject, Noble and

Ignoble; even all sorts, and calling and conditions of men in

this Common-wealth. For this is said to bee a Flower of the Kings

Crowne, the Dowry of the Kingdome, the chiefe Revenue of the

King. This is a bound to fortifie, and a bond to knit the

subjects together in their severall societies. This is the Gold

of our Ophir, the Milke & Hony of our Canaan, the Indies of

England: and therefore desire's and deserve's to be had in an

everlasting remembrance.

    The Draperies of this Kingdome are termed Old and New. By the

Old; are understood Broad Clothes, Bayes and Kersies: By the New;

Perpetuanoes, Serges, Sayes, and other Manufactures of wooll.

    The causes then of the decay of trade in these Draperies, are

either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique causes, are some

Past, some Present. Those Past, are apparent in the late

disturbance of the Cloth-Trade, which is so obvious to every man,

that I had rather passe by it, then presse upon it, because it is

past: and I would to God that so were the effects of it also. In

charitie we may thinke it was good in the purpose, though it

prooved ill in the practice. For thereby the Draperies of this

Kingdome, are much diminished, and the forreine advanced and

advantaged. The quantitites of which last, were formerly few or

none, but now they exceede our highest numbers issued out of the

land: as by a collection thereof, which my selfe made in those

parts, by His Majesties speciall parts, by His Majesties

specially command, in the time of Secretary Winwoods service, may

appeare.

    These present, may be discern'd in the Cloth-trade, either

under the Clothier, or under the Merchant. Under the Clothier,

either by ill making or false sealing the Cloth.

    For the making of good and true Cloth, many excellent lawes

have bin invented & enacted by the wisdome of the Parliaments of

this land, from time to time. And the Statute of 4 of the King

Cap. 2 doth seeme to bee an Epitome or Compendiary of all the

former Statutes in this kinde. In this Stature is prescribed, the

true breadth, and length, and waight, that may conduce to the

making of a true and perfect Cloth, Kersie or Manufacture. If a

Clothier make a Cloth of lesse waight, then is set downe in the

said Statute, he offendeth in Quantitie: If of lesse breadth, or

length, or of forbidden kindes of wooll, hee offendeth in

Qualitie. If a Clothier offend in neither of these by his owne

act, yet he may offend in both, by his instruments or workemen:

Either by the Weavers, in not putting in the stuffe at the

making; or by the Tuckers in pulling out the stuffe after the

making thereof.

    A Cloth also may be well made, & yet false sealed. A Cloth

may be said to be lawfully made, when it is truly sealed. For

although it may be impossible to make some Clothes, just of those

quantities and quanlities prescribed by the Statute; as the

Clothiers terme is, A man cannot cast a cloth in a mould: yet I

hope, they will give me leave to say, that it is possible that a

Cloth may bee true sealed, though false made. And then a Cloth

ill made, and true sealed, whereby the buyer may see what he hath

for his money, may bee said to bee a good or lawfull Cloth

according to the Statute.

    Now the execution of the Statute for Searching and Sealing of

Clothes, seemeth to be referred to two sorts of men: which are

either the Aulnager or Seacher. the former may seeme originally

to have beene an Officer appointed for that purpose, as well as

by the Notation of the name, as by some Ancient Statutes. For

Aulne, and Aulnage, and Aulnagier, are all French words, taken

from the measuring of Cloth. And thence it is, that in that

tongue they are wont to say Auner draps to measure Clothes, by a

Trope taken from the Instrument by which they are measured.

    But because the care of the Aulnage is committed to so Noble

and Honourable a Personage, that will not suffer any abuse in the

execution of that office: and the said Statute of 4 Jacobi, and

the former Statutes of 39 and 43 Elizabethae, doe referre the

Searching and Sealing of Clothes, to certaine Overseers or

Searchers, so called by the said Statutes, I will proceede unto

them.

    And forasmuch as Execution is the life of the law, as His

Majestie in his high wisedome admonisheth: and the Prudence and

providence of the State, have beene very great in devising and

enacting such good lawes from time to time, as might tend to the

encreae and advancement of the Drapery of this Kingdome: If

therefore now any think bee amisse therein, it must needs come

through the want of execution of those lawes. Hinc illae

lachrymae! This Bonum according to His Majesties Regall rule, is

not Bene. For these Overseers and Searchers beeing silly

Countreymen, and generally not expert in the mystery of making of

Cloth: in the Search whereof, there is as much neede of skill as

in the making: for how should they finde the fault, that know not

how it is committed? These Searchers I say, thus being ignorant

and unskilfull in their offices, and negligent also, (in which

last, it hath been againe and againe confest, that they have set

the seales of their office, to Clothes they never search't nor

saw) needs must there be a great abuse, in the execution of those

good lawes.

    Nay I would I could not say, how much our Nation hath beene

upbraided by the people of forreine parts with this abuse, that

the Searchers Seales of England are bought and sold as in a

market, and put on the Clothes by the Tuckers, and other the

servants of the Clothiers, as if the same had beene lawfully

Searched and Sealed according to the Statute; when as the

Searchers Eye never so much as beheld the Clothes.

    Wherein the people of the Netherlands are so exact, that you

shall never find any of their Countrey Clothes false search't or

sealed. For you sahll nave a Seale set upon the Cloth when it

commeth from the Weavers: anothe whenit commeth from the Tuckers:

another when it commeth from the Dyers: and that by men of good

quality, appointed for tha purpose in every City and Towne where

Cloth is made, termed Curemasters: so called from the Care they

ought, and doe performe, in the execution of their office:

wherein indeed they are so strict, that you shall never finde any

of the seales aforesaid, set to any manner of false or defective

Cloth.

    For indeed the Searcher being a sworne Officer, ought to be

as witnes without exception betwixt man and man: that when a man

seeth the Searchers seale set upon the Cloth, it should serve as

a true Certificat of the true making thereof. It is a great

impiety before God and Man, to be a false witnesse in any case:

but these Searchers are false witnesse ipso facto, when they doe

testifie to the world by their seales, that those Clothes are

good and true, which indeede are utterly false. And which

aggravateth the matter yet more, that the Kings Seale of Armes,

which is testis omni exceptione major, should also be set to

Clothes thus falsely searched and sealed; whereby not only the

Kings subjects, but the strangers also in forreine parts are

deceived, is a very grosse and grievous abuse.

    Amongst other abuses of this kinde, one precedent come's to

my minde, of ten Clothes bought not long since by a Merchant, of

a Clothier of Wiltshire. Which Clothes were all Sealed by the

Searchers of that place, for good & true, according to the

Statute. but being tried by the Merchant Buyer, and afterwards by

the Sworne measurer of the Citie of London, were found so

defective in length, breadth and waight, that where these ten

Clothes cost but 60 lib. or thereabouts, the faults in these ten

Clothes came to neere 20 lib which ws one third part of the value

of the Cloth. And it being a notable comtempt of the law, the

Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privie Councell were

informed thereof; who were pleased to send down a Messenger into

that County, and fetch't up both the Clothier and Searchers, who

worthily under-went the Condigne Censure of the Lords.

    Under the Merchant also the Cloth-trade suffereth both at

Home and Abroad. At Home, by Exporting the Materials, either of

Woolles or Wool-sels from the Sea-coasts of England, and the

Kingdome of Ireland: or by Over-lading the Cloth-trade, either

with any generall or speciall charge.

    The latter I cannot pretermit: for as the chiefe waight of

the Cloth-trade lyeth on the Merchants-Adventures; so also is the

burthen of charge most felt under that trade. For the Impositions

and Imprest money by them laid upon the Cloth, for defraying the

charge of their Government, and payment of their Debts; hath

driven many good Merchants out of the trade, and given the

Clothiers occasion to complaine of want of Buyers, and thrust the

trade it selfe more and more into the Strangers hands.

    And abroad, by the unfit place of Residence, which the

Merchants-Adventurers are fallen upon in Holland. Whither they

goe with great perill of Shippe and Goods: And where they come

farre short of that they hoped for; and of that quicke and ample

vent of their Cloth they found in Zeeland. The Agitation of which

remoove; is vehemently suspected to have moved the Merchants of

Holland, to procure Priviledges of the States Generall to

Incorporate themselves, and keep Courts, to confront the

Merchants-Adventurers; which they never did before: To have

drawne the Taring of Cloth into Holland, where the Buyers are in

some sort, Judges & Parties; which before was in the Mart-towne,

where the Seller was present: And lastly to have hastned the

great Imposition in Holland. All which are matters of moment, and

concerne the Cloth-trade very much, and whereof the English

Factors there residing doe generally complaine: Yet These I

rather instance then urge: leaving the further Overture thereof

to their own relation.

    Now the forreine causes of the decay of the Drapery of

England: are either generall, as the warres in Germany: or

speciall as the great Imposition lately laide upon our Cloth in

Holland.

    By the former, the Course of Trade is stopt and hindered,

that Merchants cannot passe without perill from place to place:

and the monies become so variable, that when a Merchant hath sold

his Cloth, and hopeth to have gained something thereby; by that

time that the terme for payment is expired, he receiveth lesse in

value then the Clothes cost, by the raising and rising of the

monies.

    By the latter, the Merchants of the Netherlands are

discouraged, wherby many of them have given over their trades,

which heretofore they followed in ample manner, unto Muscovy, the

East-Countries and other places, in our English Clothes bought of

the Merchants-Adventurers from time to time.



Cap. III.



Of governed Trade, and therein of Monopoly.



    Hitherto the Matter of Trade hath beene considered in Money

and Merchandize: the Forme followeth, and that either in respect

of Government, or want of Government in trade. Government is a

representation of the Majestie and Authoritie of the King. The

subject that is honoured with Government, is invested with part

of the Kings Honour. The Trades of this Kingdome which by His

Majesties especiall Grace and Favour are reduced under Order and

Government into Corporations, Companies, and Societies, doe

certainly much Advance and Advantage the Commerce of this

Common-wealth, and farre excell the trades of any other forreine

Merchants in their ungoverned trades.

    But as the Use of Government is excellent for the restraint

of unskilfull and disorderly trade: so the Abuse thereof is as

inconvient, if at any time the same be too strict, and come

within the compasse of a Monopoly. And because the name and

nature of Monopoly, is more talk't of, then well understood of

many; and some thinke that the reducing of trade into Order and

Government, is a kinde of Monopolizing and restraint of trade: I

have thought it not unseasonable to bestow some specaill paines

in the diligent investigation thereof. Not that I would have the

trade of the Kingdome, so circumscribed or appropriated to any,

that others of His Majesties subjects should be deprived of the

libertie thereof; but that upon equall and reasonable termes,

trading under Order and Government, without that ill tincture of

Monopoly, the Kings high way of trade should be opened unto all.

    The name therefor of Monopoly in our English tongue, is

derived, as the learned know, of the Greeke word {Greek word

omitted}: whence also the Latine word Monopolium is borrowed.

Some derive it of {Greek word omitted} Solus, & {Greek word

omitted} Versor, to converse alone. Others of {Greek word

omitted} Solus, and, {Greek word omitted} Civitas, quasi unica

negotiatio in Civitate. But all these agree in one meaning of the

word, that is Singularis Negotiatio, a diverting of Commerce from

the naturall course and use thereof, into the hands of some few,

to their benefite, and others projudice. I also find many

definition of Monopolies: and a g reat question among the

Civilans, whether a Monopoly may bee exercised of one alone; and

whether it consist aswell in Locatio Conductio, as they speak, as

in Emptio Venditio. Which last is out of question with all. And

of the former I find an instance in Artistotle of Thales Milesius

his Monopoly: who by his knowledge in Astrology, foreseeing one

yeare in the winter, that there would be great plentie of oiles

the next yeare, hired before hand all the places and engines for

making of oile through both the Ilands of Melazo & Chius, and

afterwards let out the same againe at this owne place he maketh

also mention of another, who bought up all the Iron in Sicilia,

which afterwards he sold againe, and made one hundred talents of

that which cost him but fiftie. Amongst others I will take the

definition of Althusius for all the rest. Monopolium, saith he,

Est Commercium emendi, vendendi, permutadiue, a pancis veluno

etiam usurpatum, reliquis ciutbus preceptum, quo pretia augetur

cum lucro negotiantis, & reliquorum damno. That is Monopoly is a

kinde of Commerce, in buying, selling, changing or bartering,

usurped by a few, and sometimes but by one person, and

fore-stalled from all others, to the Gaine of the Monopolist, and

to the Detriment of other men.

    The parts then of a Monopoly are twaine. The restraint of the

liberty of Commerce to some one or few: and the setting of the

price at the pleasure of the Monopolian to his private benefit,

and the prejudice of the publique. Upon which two hinges every

Monopoly turneth. And these two parts are respectively repugnant

to the two fundamental requisites of all good Lawes: to with,

Equity and Utility. For it against Equity, that one member of a

Common-wealth should be more free, then another of equall ranke

and condition. And what can be more contrary to Publique Utility,

then that some one or few persons, should sway the price of any

thing usefull to the Common-wealth to their owne enriching, and

the common losse of other men? And here it is to bee well

observed, that unlesse these two parts concurre in a Monopoly: it

cannot truely and properly be so called, nor ought it so to bee

accounted. And therefore Althusius following Decianus, saith well

of that restraint of the common liberty, which we call Suit of

Mill: which compelleth men to use this or that Mill to grinde

corne, and none other: that it doth only Sapere Monopolium,

Savour of Monopoly: but that it is not truely and properly a

Monopoly. For that case of Suit of Mill, unlesse there be a

greater tolle or recompence exacted for grinding, then at other

Milles, it falleth onely within the first part of a Monopoly, to

wit, of the restraint of the publicke liberty; but not within

compasse of the other part, the setting of the price. but for

this restraint of the publique liberty of Commerce, it may be so

ordered by the wisedome of the State, that it may be both Lawfull

and Beneficiall to the Common-wealth. Which assertion, because it

may seeme strange to some, I will make evident by good Authority

and Examples. Peter Martyr that famous light of the Churches of

the Gospell, defendeth the restraint of Solomon, that none shold

buy Horses of Egypt without his licence, to be Lawfull. And of

this kinde is the Preemption of Tinne here in England, granted by

His Majesties gracious letters Patents do somefew, with restraint

of all others: which I dare boldly affirme is not onely Lawfull,

but very Beneficiall also to this Commonwealth. For thereby our

Thrice Noble Prince receiveth a good revenue, and the Tinne of

this Land is sold for many thousand pounds a yeare more in

Forrein parts, then otherwise it would, to the great increase of

the Common stocke of this Kingdome. Also the Law of this Realme

alloweth, that if any man invent a new Art, beneficiall to the

Common wealth, he may have a Patent to use that Arte soley, with

restraint of all others for seven years: as well in recompence of

his industry, as for the incouragement of others, to study and

invent things profitable for the publique symbiosis. The Statues

of the Kingdome restraine from the exercise of sundry Crafts, all

such as have not served an apprentishood unto the art which they

would exercise: to the ende that those artes might be brought to

better perfection, and the things made, might be good and

serviceable for those that buy and use them.

    The restraint of the Publique Liberty, is sometimes exercised

by 

Private Authority: sometimes by Publique. Which distinction is

made by the Emperour Zeno. Iubemus ne quis prosua authoritate,

vel sacro elicito rescripto, etc. Monopolium audeat exercere.

    The former, is practised when any one or more, have by their

owne private contracts, gotten any Commoditie or matter of

Commerce, wholly into their owne hands. Of this kinde are the

examples above cited out of Aristotle.

    The latter, is when by Publique Authority, the liberty of the

subject is restrained: which is done, sometimes by the

Prerogative of the King: sometimes by Act of Parliament.

    The former, by dispensing with a generall Law in some point,

and applying the dispensation to some one or fewe, with restraint

of others. The latter, by prohibiting all, but some one or few

persons to use the benefit of the Law in some point or other.

    For dispensing with the Lawes, it is without question, that

the King hath power to dispence with a Penall Law, when it

prohibiteth that which is not Malum in se. For the Parliament

having made a Statute with intent of the Publique good: yet the

same by reason of something not foreseen at the making of the

Law, may prove very prejudiciall in the Execution. And then the

Malum prohibitum, as the Lawyers speake, may be dispenced with by

the King. Thus the Parliament having prohibited the exportation

of white Clothes undre'st above the price of four pound the

Cloth: the observation of that Statute was found by experience to

be very prejudiciall to the Trade, and free vent of the Cloth in

forreine parts. Whereupon Q. Elizabeth, granted a Speciall

Licence to the Fellowship of the Merchant Adventurers, to

transport all sorts of white Clothes undre'st, with a Non

obstante to that Statute. And although all other men stood lyable

to the Statute stil, and were restrained, yet the Utility that

hereby arose to the Common-wealth, did farre exceed the restraint

of the Publique Liberty. For within few yeares after the granting

of this Licence, the vent of Cloth in forreine parts increased to

twice as much, as formerly it was during the strict observation

of the Statute. Other like dispensations of Statutes, I might

instance: as that of the 28 H.8. concerning the retailing of

Gasgoigne Wines at two pence a quart: which is dispenced with, by

a licence to the Company of the Vintners: but these may suffice

for every mans understanding of this kinde of restraint.

    For Prohibition by Act of Parliament: such is the Act whereby

all the subjects of this Realme, excepting such as are of the

Corporation of the Muscovy Company, are forbidden to trade into

any part of Russia. Also that of 3 Jacob concerning Artizan

Skinnes, whereby all but the Company, are forbidden to buy and

retail some sorts of Skinnes. In these and the like, the

Parliament maketh restraint of the Common liberty of Commerce,

and the same restraint is againe released, not unto all, but to

some persons or Corporations by Speciall exception and proviso of

the Act of Parliament.

    The latter kind of restraint by Publique Authority, is when

that which seemeth by the Lawe to be free to all is by some

Patent or Proclamation of the Prince, prohibited to all, saving

some certaine Corporations, or persons specially excepted and

authorized in the same Patent or Proclamation. Of this kind are

generally reputed all Corporations of Merchants, which are not

confirmed by Act of Parliament. Which are generally reputed to

carry with them a restraint to others, of that liberty, which the

Law doth seeme to offer to all in point of Commerce. Whence it is

that so many pleade the Freedome of subjects, and presse, or

rather oppresse that plea of equity, hat it is equall that all

subjects should bee a like free to be Merchants in all Trades. To

whom I answere, that first there is no good Equality in it,

because it is against the Publique Utility that all should bee

Merchants at their pleasure. For that's not equall, that may

seeme profitable to one, and bee hurtful to many. Atque ipso

utilitas iusti prop matter & aequi, as Horace speaketh. And yet

what point of equity is broken, when the freedome of Societies is

so carried, that it is open to all men upon equall termes; that

is to say, either by service or purchase? Otherwise it were very

unequall, that one man should serve for his freedome, or buy the

same: and another man should have it for nothing. If this point

were well thought upon, I prosume the Gracious Grants and

priviledges of His Majestie, conferred upon Societies, would not

seeme so much a restraint of the Common liberty, as a prudent

ordering and accommodating thereof unto the Publique Utility. For

it hath ever beene a Policy of this State, to reduce the Trades

of Merchants of this Kingdome into Corporations and Societies,

for the advancement of Trade, by the benefit of order and

government: well foreseeing that there cannot be any greater Bane

to a Well-governed Common-wealth, then Ill-governed and

disorderly Trade. Whereof I shall have fitter occasion to speake

in the next Chapter, when I come to treat of the Incoveniences of

the want of government in Trade. So that in this case the

generall rule must be this; that such a restraint of the Publique

Liberty, as is before mentioned, is alwayes to be allowed, when

the same is recompenced with a Publique Utility. According to

that of Tacitus, Omne magnum exemplum habet is se aliquid iniqui,

quod utilitate publica contra singulos compensatur. Also the

liberty that the Law seemeth to give the subjects in Trade, is to

be understood, of imployment Within the Kingdome, not Without the

Kingdome. For what liberty can a Nationall Law, give to a Forrein

Trade under a Forreine Jurisdiction, when the liberty or

restraint thereof dependeth upon those Forreine Princes and

States where that Trade is tollerated? Therfore the Law may give

the subject Liberty Within the Land, but it is the King that must

enable men to trade Without the Land. For all the Trade of the

Merchants of this Kingdome into Forreine Countries, is grounded

upon the Amity of the King, and the Treaties of Peace contracted

by the King, with the Kings and Rulers of those forreine parts,

at his owne charge, and by His owne Authoritie, without the

assistance of His Parliament. And therefore it holdeth good

conguity, that the King by His like Authority, may have the

disposing and ordering of such His contracts at his owne

pleasure.

    The second part of Monopoly remaineth, of the setting of the

price at the pleasure of the Monopolist, to his private gaine,

and the publique losse. This Gothofredus calleth the forme of a

Monopoly. And in truth it is the very Soule and Accomplishment

thereof. And he or they that have this power over the price of

the thing they negotiate, may well be said according to the

notation of Monopoly, from {Greek word omitted} and {Greek word

omitted}, to converse alone. For in so doing, they so live, as

none can live by them, in respect of their singular gaine in this

kinde: Contrary to that honest Poverbiall rule of the Dutch, that

men must Leuen ende laeten Leuen: So live as other men may Live

by them. But here I cannot but discharge all those Corporations

of this Kingdome, of this part of Monopoly, which afford to every

particular trader thereof, the managing of his owne stocke, in

buying and selling as hee can, without any combination with

others. In which it is an impossible as unusual, for any to have

command of the rice of their Commodities: because there is such a

multitude of Traders of them; and every man is at liberty to buy

or sell, without any rule by any generall order, or meanes to

hold one price. But the greatest suspition of Monopoly in

Corporations, is in such as Trade, in Joint Stockes. Whereof if

there be any that tradeth in a Joint Stocke, and hath the Sole

buying or selling of any Commodity, and buy and sell the same

Jointly, as by one person or common factor, such is guilty of

Monopoly.

    For particular men, they may also commit Monopolizing: either

by procuring Patents by misinformation of the State, for the Sole

Importing or Exporting, buying or selling at their owne prises,

to the restraint of the Common Liberty, and the Publique Utility

of the Kingdome: or else when some one or few, without any

Authority, doe joine together to engrosse and buy in a Commodity,

and sell it out againe at their owne price. Of the former kinde,

are those Catalogue of crying Monopolies, which his Majestie in

His high Wisdome and Grace damned in His Princely Proclamation of

the tenth of July last, in the XIX year of His Majesties most

happy Reigne over this Kingdome: Many of which were abused in the

Practice, from which they appeared to be in the Institution. And

here a pretty question occurreth. When a Patent is granted to a

certaine person or persons, so as hee or they have power to

licence others to exercise some kinde of Commerce solely, and

consequently with command of the price: that question is, who is

then the Monopolian, whether the Patentees, or their Assignes? In

this case I suppose, that both the one and the other commit

Monopoly. For first, the Patentees make their price at their

pleasure upon their Assignes, and they againe upon the Subjects.

So that here is Mnnopoly upon Monopoly: like your Salt upon Salt,

Interest upon Interest, or the Decompositum in Grammer.

    In the latter, some sorts of Trades-men in London, are said

to offend. Which being matters of Generall note, and willing to

avoid offence, I will passe by such particulars. And this shall

suffice for the Definition and Distribution of Monopoly.



Cap. IIII.



Of want of Government in Trade.



    Such is the Forme of Trade considered in the Strict Use or

Abuse of Government, by way of Monopoly. It now remaineth briefly

to shew the Too Loose Use thereof, by Ungoverned Trade.

    It is a Maxime in the Mathematiques, that Rectum est Index

sui & obliqui. And the want of Government, cannot better be

demonstrated,then by the benefit of Government it selfe. For

thereby the Common-wealth hath beene much advantaged, both in the

encrease of the native Commodities of the Kingdome, and the

advancement of their use and price in Forreine parts: and also in

keeping the forreine wares at a moderate rate within this

Kingdome. This will be yet more perspicuous, if we cast our eye

first upon the several Societies of Merchants which trade under

Government: and then on those which trade without Government. For

Contraria juxta se posita, magis elucescunt.

    In the first place therefore consider we that Ancient and

heretofore famous fellowship of the Merchants-Adventurers of

England. Hath it not by their politique rule and order, eaten out

the Societie of the Hans-townes of Germanie and the Merchants of

the Entercourse of the Low Countries, in those trades, which a

long time they enjoyed in this land? And whereas those of the

Hans, vented in Germany, only a matter of sixe thousand of our

Clothes yeerely and at low prices: and held this Realme as it

were beholding unto them for their shipping: yea upon some

discontent for denying of them priviledges, durst offer some

hostilitie in the time of Edward the fourth. Whereas the

Merchants-Adventurers by their Charters, granted from time to

time by the Princes of this Realme, and favoured by Parliaments

successively; by their orderly mannaging of their trade, have

supplanted the trade of the Hanses in Germany: and brought the

said Six thousand vented by them in Germany, unto Thirtie

thousand Clothes yeerely & at great prises. And it is worthy to

be remembred to their Honour, that service which the

Merchants-Adventurers did to the State in Anno 88 when they

supplied the Navie Royall with a whole ships lading of Powder and

Shot from Hamburgh: which came luckily even in articulo temporis,

when there was a very great want thereof. These also have from

time to time employed and bred up many worthy Masters of ships

and Mariners; and built many Tall, warlike and Serviceable

shippes: which as they themselves also, are at all times ready to

doe service to the King & State upon all occasions. None of all

which they had ever beene able to have done as particular men, in

a loose, distracted, and disorderly trade.

    Great benefit also hath arisen from the East-land Company:

who have wonne like ground of the Hanses of the Baltique Sea: and

doe employ in that trade a great number of proper Shippes and

Men.

    The Levant Company likewise by their trade under Government,

hath built a great strength of warlike, Tall & Lusty Shipping,

which they employ in that trade: and by their industry have wonne

from the Italians the trade of the Levant: the Commodities

whereof were before brought into this Realme by Argosies to the

encrease of forreine shipping, and at deare rates: and is now

reduced to the Natives of this Kingdome, to the encrease of

Shipping, and the benefit of the Publike. Which without

Government and good order, had been impossible for them to have

done.

    The French Company also, though but lately reduced to Order,

have reformed many abuses in that trade, in maintaining the

Native Commodities of this Kingdome in much better estimation,

and in keeping the Forreine at moderate prices: and in employing

greater shipping, then at any time before. Which were impossible

for them to effect Singly, without Societie.

    Lastly, for the East-India Company, whereof I am prevented to

say what I might, by two severall discourses published in print,

the one by that worthy and rarely qualified Gentleman Sir Dudley

Digges Knight, the other by that discreete Merchant Mr. Thomas

Mun: yet this I say, that this Great and Noble Societie by the

benefite of Government, hath set on foot a bery mightie Trade,

farre beyond any other Company of this Kingdome: and accordingly

hath excelled in greatnesse of shipping, and making Mariners of

land-men, beyond the example of any other Corporation: & had not

Envie thought that Trade too great a Treasure for this Kingdome

doubtlesse they had in Encrease of trade, excelled all the

Companies of Merchants in this Common-wealth.

    But here the ordinary objection encountereth me, that in

Germany, Spaine, France, Italie, and the Netherlands, there are

no such Companies, nor restrains of Merchants, as here in

England: and yet that those Countries thrive better in their

trades, than we in ours. I answer, that if it be granted, that

they have no such Companies nor restraints of any, and that they

thrive better in their trades then we; yet it will not follow,

that this their better thriving is because every man is at

libertie to be a Merchant at his pleasure. This is the fallacy

which the Logicians call {Greek phrase omitted}, Non causa pro

causa. For if that were the cause, why then should not our

Spanish Trade, that hath no Company nor restraint, prosper better

then the other Trades which are Governed in Companies; whereas to

speak as the truth is, This Trade & These Merchants, are the most

miserable of all the other Trades and Tradesmen of this Kingdome,

and all through want of Government: thorough whose sides the

Common-wealth suffereth, and hath already lost many Millions in

value of the wealth of the Weale-publique, as I shall shew anone.

But to the Assumption, I deny that the Merchants of those

forreine Countries, trade without Government. For Germany hath

ancietly had one Society, or Corporation of Merchants inall their

Sea-townes, called the Society, or Corporation of the Hans before

noted: as their houses of Staple yet standing at Bridges in

Flanders, Antwerpe in Brabant, Novogrode in Russia, Bergen in

Norway, and the Steelyard in London can witnes. Which Trade of

theirs flourished, as long as it continued under Government: but

having lost their Priviledes, partly by their owne Stragling, and

partly being overtop't by the flourishing of the

Merchants-Adventurers Trade, their Trade is now almost quite

fallen to the ground.

    For Spaine and Portugall: all men know that their Sea Trade

is little, saving to the East and West Indies. And those Trades

are carried with Government, and farre more restraint then ours.

    For France, there are not (that I know) any Companies of

Merchants for forreine parts. Which I take to be the cause, why

those Merchants shipping, is of so small burthen, and of as

little sufficiency for service. Which is an effect of a stragling

ungoverned Trade.

    For Italy, that consiseth of so many severall Jurisdictions,

that it were impossible to make a generall Corporation for any

one kinde of Sea-Trade. For example, were it not in vaine for

Genoa to make a Corporation & Orders for Trade, whilest Florence

held a contrary course? It were certainly all one, as to have a

Company of Merchants for Spaine at London, and the West-parts

left loose to Trade without Order or Government, which were a

meere mockery. But the Trade in many parts of Italy, being

carried by Families, and every Family being as it were one

Person, there is a kind of Government in their Trades, and the

same performed with merveilous credite, policie, and judgement.

    The Lowe Countries, by that Union which is of the several

Townes and Provinces unto the States Generall (which

neverthelesse is as much, and endureth as long, as every severall

Province and Towne listeth,) have of late yeares erected their

East India Company, and the like for Guiny, and are in hand with

the like for the West Indies. Also the Cloth-buyers, the

principall Merchants of Holland, have lately obtained Octroy so

termed, which is Priviledges and Immunities of the States, to

assemble themselves, and to keepe Courts, and make Orders for

their Trade; and principally to confront & oppose the

Merchants-Adventurers Trade, upon some differences, lately fallen

out betwixt those Cloth-buyers and the said Company about the

residence before noted. For their other Trades of Germany,

Poland, England, Grance and Spaine, they rather with then finde

it possible, to joine the severall Townes in one Rule and Order.

And who so converseth with that Nation, shal finde that they very

much complaine of the disorders of their Trades, for want of that

kinde of Government, which many of them take notice of here in

England: and some of them of late have desired instructions from

hence in that behalfe. Besides all this, these people as they are

borne and bred in an United Country, so doth their nature and

disposition encline much to an Union and Communion in Trade.

Insomuch as oftentimes they are able to worke their feates by

Confederacy and Combination, against an Incorporation in our

Nation. For they wisely consider, that their interest is involved

in the Publique: where, in our Nation, men commonly preferre

their Particular, to the Common good.

    And thus having and answering the objections against

Corporations, of Merchants and Governed Trades, and shewed the

many and manifold benefits arising to the Common-wealth thereby:

It is now easie to shew the Injury and Incovenience to this

Common-wealth by the want of Government in Trade. Those that

Trade without Order and Government, are like unto men, that makes

Holes in the bottome of that Ship, wherein themselves are

Passengers. For want of Government in Trade, openeth a gap and

letteth in all sorts of unskilfull and disorderly persons: and

these not only sinke themselves and others with them; but also

marre the Merchandize of the land, both in estimation and

goodnesse: then which there can bee nothing in Trade more

rejudiciall to the Publique Utility. And to make good these

particulars, I take this for a ground: Nemonascitur artifex.

Which as it is true in the occupaitons of Artizans: so is it much

more true in the Trades of Merchants: wherein there is so great

variety of difficult points to bee learned, before a man can

learne his Stucke, as the Dutch-men speak, or be his Crafts

master. And how can the Merchant, that hath no skill in his

Commodity, looke to it, that the Maker performe his part? Or how

can a falsified Commodity, hold his estimation and use? The ill

experience whereof, is not more remarqueable in any of His

Majesties subjects, then in those that trade into the Dominions

of the King of Spaine, without Order or Government in Trade. For

at the beginning of His Majesties most happy Raigne over this

Kingdome, this Trade by His Majesties Princely favour, was made a

Corporation and Society of Merchants, and flourished under

Government. And then thenew Draperies, and other the Native

Commodities of the Kingdome were maintained in their estimation

and goodnesse at Home and Abroad: But soone after by the clamour

of some who preferred their owne liberty, to the utility of the

publique, and by some misinformation given the Parliament of that

time, this Company after it had flourished two years, was

dissolved, and ever since exposed to confusion and disorder in

Trade, and is become a receptacle and Rendes-vous for every

Shopkeeper, Stragler, and Unskilful person: and may serve for a

lively representation of the hopes that may be expected, by such

a loose trade, as many now a daies so much desire, not rightly

conceiving or considering the benefits of Government, nor the

Inconveniencies that doe perpetually accompany trade in the want

thereof. Which in the Effects will be more perspicious, to which

in their Order we now proceede.



Cap. V.



Of the Effects of the former Causes as they concerne the King



    Such were the Causes considered in the Matter and Forme of

trade. The Effects follow: which doe either concerne the King or

the Common-wealth.

    Such as are the Causes, such also must needs be the Effects

arising from the same: and those doe either respect the King in

point of Honour, or in point of Revenue: and both in the Matter

and Forme of Trade.

    In point of Honour, there is a relation to the King from the

Matter of Trade, considered Generally, or Specially.

    Generally, in the general neglect of all trades, by temerous,

rash, and litigious suites of law: whereby the Peace of the

Kingdome is disturbed, the Justice thereof abused, and in both

the King dishonoured.

    Or Specially in some speciall Commerce of this Kingdome,

abused by the Kings Subjects, or Strangers. By the Kings

Subjects, in the Drapery of the Kingdome, when His Majesties

Seale of Armes, which, as I said, shall be dishonoured by false

Cloth and other Manufactures, that are unworthily honoured

therewith: and whereby, those that buy the same both within and

without the Land, are perswaded the same is good and true, when

the same is utterly false: which is a great indignity offered to

the King.

    By Strangers, in the East India Action, and the matter of

Fishing. In the East India Action certainely the Kings Honour is

interessed; not onely to protect his subjects against the

Injuries done them by the Dutch in the East Indies; but also to

maintaine the Glory and Revowne, of His Sacred Fame, which hath

heretofore beene Illustrious even unto the Heathen: which some

have dared to doe what they could to obscure. The Fishing hath

aslo reference to the Kings Honour: for it is a Royalty of the

Crowne, which the King in Honour cannot but protect.

    There is also an Effect that extendeth it selfe to the Kings

Honour in the Forme of Trade, as it is too strict, or too loose.

Too strict, in respect of Monopolies, wherein the Prerogative of

the King is abused, and therein His Honour also, by those that

thereby seeke to priviledge and Patronize things unlawfull.

    Too loose, in the disorderly Trade of the subjects out of

Government. For those Strangers that have not beene in our

Countrey, nor seene the Order of His Majesties Government, must

needes Ex Ungue Leonem, guesse at the Soveraigne by the Subject:

And like to Archimedes who drew the whole pourtraiture of

Hercules body, by his footstep onley found in Mount Olympus,

proportion the Royall and Regall Government of His Majestie at

home, by the deportment of his subjects abroad. And as the

Orderly Trade of Merchants is an Honour to the King, when the

same is contained within the listes of Government; so the

contrary cannot choose but produce a quite contrary effect.

    In point of Revenue the Kings treasure is diminished, in the

Mater also and Forme of Trade. In the Matter of Trade, either in

the Generall course of Trade, or in some Particulars. In the

Generall, the great want of money, and decay of Trade throughout

all callings and conditions of men, must needes cause a great

diminution of His Majesties Revenue, both in His Customes and

Supplies. For the Customes, those perpetually rise and fall with

Trade: And for Supplies, the subjects being impoverished through

want of Money and decay of Trade, are disabled to doe that

service to His Majestie, which otherwise they would be willing,

and heretofore have beene able to performe, in flourishing times

of Trade. And if our experience hereof had beene in the {Greek

word omitted} and not in the {Greek word omitted}, in the

Contemplation only, and not in Action: we had been much more

happy in this Kingdom and Nation.

    In the particular course of Trade, it shall content me to

instance onely the East India Action, and the Fishing, before

referred to the Kings Honour, here to his Revenue. By the East

India Action there is a very great losse to the King in His

Customes, by the losse of all the Customes which that Trade would

have produced in all this time: and of the Encrease also of

Trade, which that employment had brought with it, which would

have yeelded to His Majesty a great Increase of Customes

answerable to the same. Of both which if we had not beene

deprived, certainly His Majesties Ferme of His Customes had

yeelded Many Thousand pounds a yeare, more then now they have

done.

    By the Fishing, the Customes and Tolles which are undoubtedly

due to His Majesty for the Strangers Fishing upon our Coasts,

together with the encrease of Trade, and consequently of Customes

thereby also, wold amount to so great a value, that I cannot

wonder enough, that the same hath beene neglected all this while.

    And lastly in the Forme of Trade, the Kings Revenue is

mightily diminished, when by the disorder of Trade, the very

course of Trade inverted, and therein the Kings Customes and

Subsidies also.



Cap. VI.



Of the Effects of the former Causes as they concerne the

Common-wealth.



    From the King, come to the Kingdome. Wherein there are also

manifold Effects of the precedent Causes, both in the Matter and

Forme of Trade.

    And although in the very same things, wherein the Honour and

Revenue of the King are invested, the Wealth of the Common-wealth

is also interessed; yet the same may otherwise be distinguished,

that so they may be made the more perspicuous and cleere to every

mans judgement.

    The Effects then that arise out of the Matter of Trade and

fall upon the Kingdome, may be saide to be either Active or

Passive. Active, when they are done by our Selves: Passive, when

they are done to us by others. Active, in the use of Law, either

Too much, or Too little. Too much, in Suits of Law, whereby one

subject vexeth another: which make this peaceable Kingdome seeme

to bee at Warre within it selfe. For whilest men are thus at

Deadly feude in Law, by the losse of their Times, and Trades, and

States, the thrift of the Commonwealth must needes be neglected.

Too little, In the Non-execution of Lawes, which tend either to

the enlargement of Clothing, or the restraint of the Excesse of

the Kingdome. theformer is, either in respect of the Ill searchng

and Sealing of Cloth, or in the Transportation of the Materials

of our Cloth before mentioned. In the former of these, the

Merchants Adventurers can give you an account of Ten thousand

pounds a year at least losse to this Common-wealth, by the Tare

or abatements upon the Cloth in forreine parts, for the false

making and sealing thereof: Besides the other Effects of the

decay of the Drapery it selfe, and other Trades depending

thereon, the losse whereof is unvaluable. In the latter, every

man is sensible of the losse to the Common-wealth, in robbing it

of the Materials: whereby not onely our Draperies are Impaired,

but the Forreine also are thereby much Improved.

    Also the want of restraint of the Excesse of the Kingdome, in

Usuary and Prodigality: the one being a Viper in a Kingdome that

gnaweth through the bowels thereof: the other a Canker that

fretteth and wasteth the stocke, in spending the forreine wares,

more then it venteth of our owne: both and either doe produce

intollerable effects in a wel ordered Kingdome and Common-wealth.

    Or Passive, in the ill Effects that fall upon the Kingdome,

in things done to us by others. And that either by Friends or

Foes. the former is done by Imposition, or Usurpation. By

Imposition, in the Merchants Adventurers Trade in Holland: where

there is lately taxed upon a Pack Cloth 9 Gilders, and upon a

long Cloth 18 Gilders, and upon a fine Cloth 14 Gilders, which is

18, 36 and 48 shillings of our money. And yet neverthelesse they

free their own Countrey Cloth of all manner of charge; nay, they

give encouragement to the makers thereof by many Priviledged and

Immunities: whereby it is more then manifest that they do what in

them lyeth, to Plant their owne Draperies, and to supplant ours,

to the infinit disadvantage of this Kingdome.

    By Usurpation, those Friends of ours, deprive us of our East

India Trade and Fishing, which here again occurre, and offer

themselves for this purpose also. By the former, the

Common-wealth hath not onley been dispossest all this while of so

great a stock, as is that of the East India Company, but of the

employment and excrease of Trade also, that thereby in all this

time would have accrewed unto this Kingdome. And it is to be

feared, that their policy is not onely to derpive the Company of

their Stocke, but the Kingdome also of the Trade: which they

thinke too great and glorious a Fortune for this Common-welath to

enjoy, and the onley hope of their's. And hence it is that the

Restituion is so hard to be had, because they think by detaining

it, and spinning out the time, they shall in time weary and weare

us out of that Trade: And so in the meane while, by Plowing up

htose Indian Seas and Soyle with our Heifers, they may at last

Reape all the Harvest, and possesse and dispossesse at their owne

pleasure, to the wonderfull enriching of their Common-wealth, and

the impoverishing of ours.

    By the latter, to wit, their Fishing upon our Coasts, the

Common-wealth looseth that which they gaine: which is merveilous

increase of Trade, of Shippes, and Marriners. Whereby their

Navigation is mightily Strengthened, their Marriners multiplyed,

and their Trade encreased: Of all which this Common-wealth is

deprived, and their's enriched.

    By Foes also this Common-wealth is lamentably Passive, in the

cruelty done by Turkish Pirats upon Men and Shippes, and Goods.

The griefe is lamentable, the losse intollerable.

    Lastly, there are ill Effects that fal upon the Common-wealth

in the Forme of Trade: and that in respect of Monopolies, or

Ungoverned Trade. Byt the former, this Common-wealth is deprived

of that true liberty of Trade, which belongeth to all the

subjects: when the Commodity of some few, is preferred to the

publique good.

    By the latter, which is most remarquable in the Trade of His

Majesties subjects into the Domminos of the King of Spaine, and

the Mediterrean Sea; the Trade of this Kingdome consisting in

Bayes, Perpetuanoes, Kersies, Waxe, Tinne, Lead, and other the

Native Commodities of this Kingdome, is betrayed into the hands,

both of those with whom we are in Amitie, and others that are

with us in Enmity. The one taketh advantage of our

unmerchant-like courses for lacke of Order: The other, of our

Shippes sent foorth stragling for lacke of Fleets: and both

through want of Government in Trade. Whereby the Perpetuanoes and

other new Draperies have by little and little bin made worse and

worse, so that now they are become quite out of use, the Trade

lost, the Traders ruinated, the Manufactures by other Nations

supplied, the Navigation hindered, by the losse of many worthy

men, and Serviceable Shippes: In all which, the Decay of Trade is

exceeding Great, the Common-wealth's losse Infinite.



Cap. VII.



Of the Remedy for all the former Causes of decay of Trade.



    Having shewed the many and manifold Causes of the decay of

Trade in the Matter and Forme thereof: It remaineth now to

present the Remedy. Which according to the precedent Method, I

will apply unto all the particulers in their order. Onely the

Remedies for the Effects, I shall present in the Causes: for the

Causes being removed, the Effects must needs cease, according to

the common Maxime in Philosophy, Sublata causa tollitur effectus.

    In my former distribution I considered the Causes of the

decay of Trade, in the Matter and Forme thereof: and in the

Matter I insisted on Money and Merchandize. The Causes of the

want of money, I shewed some to be Immediat; some Mediat or

remote. the Immediat Causes, I noted to be such, as either hinder

the Importation; or such as cause the Exportation; and both in

the Under-valuation of His Majesties Coine. The Remedy offer's it

selfe, which is double. First, how it may be got: and next how it

may be kept. The former may be done two wayes: By Raising of the

Kings Coine; and by making current Forreine Coines at equall

value. The latter, also may be done two wayes: By another manner

of Execution of the Statute for Employments then heretofore:

wherein there is some reason not to expresse my selfe as I might:

And by His Majesties Princely and Prudent Negotiation, with the

Princes of our Neighbour Countries, the States of the united

Provinces especially, to keepe a more constant course in the

values of their Coines. Neither of which can be done by the Par

of Exchange, which is now again in agitation, and hath taken more

then twenty yeeres to bring it to perfection. Wherein, absit

invidia verbo, that I say, there is neither Parity, nor

Purity.For it is not the rate of Exchanges, but the value of

monies, here lowe, elsewhere high, which cause their Exportation:

nor doe the Exchanges, but the plenty or scarcity of monies cause

their values. Or if I should grant that to be the cause which is

not: yet it doth not follow, that because the Stranger, like

enough, would be a deliverer heere of money at a high rate, that

therefore the English must take it. And then the consequence will

be ill: for if the rate be such as the Taker like not, then the

Deliverer is yet more thrust upon the exportation. But this I

leave to those to whom this project is committed, with this, that

this opinion seemes to be ciusden farinae, with another of his,

in his Canker of Englands Commonwealth, in these words: "And it

were to be wished, that our Cloth were sold at so deare a rate,

and according to the price of forreine Commodities, that thereby

other nations would take upon them to make our Clothes

themselves: which might easily bee remedied, by selling our

woolles the dearer, whereof they must make them." Which seemes to

have in it much more Dutch then English, to deprive this Kingdome

of so Royall a Manufacture, whereby so many thousands of poore

families, ae maintained in the same: as if hee would cure one

Canker with another, contrary to our Saviours Argument, that

Satan cannot cast out Satan. But I returne to mine owne Station:

and therein to answer the objections that doe occurre the raising

of Money: which are wont to be principally, either the continuall

Raising of it, to follow the Rising of forreine Coine; or else

the inevitable losse that thereby will fall, Generally upon all

men in the endearing of all things; and Particularly upon

Landlords and Creditors, in their rents and contracts.

    For the continuall Raising of the Coine, that will be

needlesse, if the meanes be sufficient for executing the Statute

for employments, whereby the Money may be kept within the land

when we have it. And for the dearnesse of things, which the

Raising of Money bringeth with it, that will be abundantly

recompensed unto all in the plenty of Money, and quickning of

Trade in every mans hand. And that which is equall to all, when

hee that buye's deare shall sell deare, cannot bee said to be

injurius unto any. And it is much better for the Kingdome, to

have things deare with plenty of Money, whereby men may live in

their severall callings: then to have things cheape with want of

Money, which now makes every man complaine.

    Lastly, for Landlords and Creditors, their losse is easie to

be prevented by Proviso, that the Contracts made before the

raising of the Monies shall be paide at the value the Money went

at, when the Contracts were made: according to the disposition of

the Civill Law in this case: Valor monetae considerandus &

inspiciendus est a tempore contractus, non autem a tempore

solutionis.

    The raising also of the Coine, would raise the price of

Plate: whereby either there would bee lesse superfluity that way,

or else more old Plate, which perhaps in some mens hands is kept

up for Treasure, would be brought out, to be molten into Coine.

    The Mediate or Remote Causes of the want of Money, I observed

to bee either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique, Generall or

Speciall. The Generall, the great Excesse of the Kingdome, in

consuming the Commodities of forreine Countries in such

abundance, to our own losse. And amongst those, the great excesse

in Tobacco is none of the least: which if it might seeme good to

the High Wisdome of His Majestie, to restraine, or at least to

give a tolleration of the Virginia and Barmudo's only: there

might be a great deale of Pietie and Policy shewed in this

Remedy. For in the one respect, it would tend to a great

enriching of that plantation, which so happily succeedeth through

Gods blessing: and in the other it would advantage the King and

the Kingdome, in the redresse of the disorder of the Spanish

Trade, and in bringing in Treasure in stead of that Toye, more

then the Rent that is now raised to His Majestie for the same.

    The Superfluity of other Commodities may bee restrained by

lawes Vestiary and Sumptuary, according to the example of Germany

& other our Neighbor Countries.

    The Speciall Remote Cause of our want of Money, I noted to

bee the want of our East India Stocke in the Common-wealth. the

Remedy whereof, is in the Princely Power and Gratious Favour of

His Majestie to apply at His pleasure to this Languishing body.

And if HIs Sacred Majestie will vouchsafe to apply His Gratious

Mouth, to this Mount: His waking Eye, to this Eye: His powerfull

Hand to this Hand: then surely this fainted Body will receive

Breath and Life, from the powerfull influence of so Great a

Majestie, and revive also the many other fainting Trades, that

are fallen in it. The Forreine Remote Causes, I observed to be

the Warres in Christendome, or the Trades maintained with ready

Money Out of Christendome. The former, either cause the

Exportation of Money, as do the Warres of Christians: or hinder

the Importation thereof, as doe the Warres of Pirats. A Remedy in

the former of these I know none, besides that blessed disposition

in His Majesty to spare no Cost to make Peace: which hath made

His Fame shine as farre as the Sunne shineth, and shall last as

long as the Sunne and Moone endureth: and as sure as the Lord is

faithfull, will be remembred on His Posterity for ever: Besides

this I say, I know none, but Patience and Prayer: that God would

avert the heavy Judgments at this day on the Christian world, and

give us grace to cnsider Our peace, in this Our day thereof. A

Remedy in the latter, may be either by reducing of the stragling

trade of His Majesties subjects into the Dominions of the King of

Spaine, into Government; whereby they also might goe in Fleetes,

as other governed Companies doe, and the better defend themselves

against so Common and Cruel an enimy: or else by seeking

restitution of our wrongs in this kinde, where it may be had: so

farre as it may concurre with the Honour of the Kng, to whose

Great and Princes judgement, I submit the same.

    The Remedy for the Exportation of Money out of Christendome

by the Trades before mentioned, dependeth much on the good

Conclusion hoped for, betweene the Dutch and our Nation. Whereby

not only the Indian Commodities, which in those Trades are the

principall, may be bought much better cheape, and consequently

spare a great deale of the Treasure now issued out for the same:

but also, the Native Commodities of either Country, and as much

as may bee of every Country, may be brought into Trade and Traine

with the Indians, and advanced in their use and price: that so at

last in stead of Money for Wares, we may give Wares for Wares

according to the Law and nature of Commerce. And this good

conclusion betweene the Dutch and Us, is the rather to bee

wished, and the more to be hastened, because the subtilty of the

Indians is great, intaking advantage of this unhappy Faction, or

rather Fraction, that is fallen betwixt us. For those that have

travelled the Indies, and observed those people can tell, that

the Indians doe ascribe so much to the light of their

understanding, that they doe account the rest of the world blinde

in Comparison of them. Only they vouchsafe to the people of

Europe this honour, to call them One Eyed Men. Which aslo

Masseius taketh notice of, in his History of the Indies, that

those people dare beyond modesty thus to brag; Chineses duos

habere oculos; Europeaos unum; & quod hominum est reliquum,

caecutire. That the Chineses have two Eies, the Europeans one,

and all the rest of the people of the world are blinde. And

indeed they doe approove themselves to be Quicke-sighted enough:

for they are the Antipodes of Christians, and are in scituation

farthest remote from them, and yet can finde the Meanes, to pry

into the mines and Treasrue of the Christian world. And therefore

I say, it is high time that the Dutch and We lest Darting at one

another, and so joine together, that as with one Hand, and one

Heart, and if they will needs have it so, with that one Eie, we

may collect and contract our sharpest sence & fight into it; that

as it is said, some Monoculists, by the sharpnesse of the sence

drawne to one Eie, see better with that, then both:we may at last

put this remedy in practise, that we seem no longer blind men, to

those Indian people. But herein on both parts, are we humbly to

impore His Majesties Regall Intercession, that these differences,

betwixt the Dutch and Us, may no longer Hang in Suspence, but at

last be drawne to that happy and hopefull Period wee have so long

looked & longed for. That so the Majesty of the King, arising

like the Glory of the Sun-rising upon this our Horizon, may

dispell and disperse all the tempestuous Mists and Fogges, that

have obscured the same; and lend such a glorious Light and Life

unto this Orbe of ours, that They & We, like lovers and friends

fallen at oddes, may be redintegrated, renewed, and reunited, in

unfaigned Amitie and Unity, tha the name of Hostilitie betwixt

Them and Us, be never hereafter told in Gath, nor publish't in

the Streets of Ashcalon: And that the Publike complaints as well

of their Owne people, as Ours, may no longer come under the view

and censure of the world.

    Another Remedy of this kinde, may bee His Majesties gratious

protection of the Persian Trade now so happily set on foote: that

so neither the Envy of any, at Home; nor the Power or Policy of

any abroad, supplant us in the same. Whereby the Cloth and Tinne,

and other the Native Commodities of this Kingdome, may be brought

into Use and Commerce amongst the Persians also. Which through

Gods blessing, and his Majesties Royall Assistance, may be a

means to draw the whole Trade of the Persian silke into this

Kingdom, and make it the Magazin thereof, for the supply of other

Nations: to the weakning of the Turkes power, the increase of

Trade in this Common-wealth, and with it His Majesties Customes,

the Navigation, and employment of the poore: to the Great Honour

of the King, and enriching of all His Kingdomes.

    And so much for the Remedies about the matter of Trade in

Money, the Merchandize followeth. Which I considered Jointly or

Apart. The things that hindred the whole Trade, I noted to be

Deficient, as the want of Money, or the East India Stocke, which

have their Remedy before: or Efficient, as Usury and Litigious

Suits of law, to the Remedies whereof we now proceede. The Remedy

for Usury, may be plenty of Money. For then, men will have no

such cause to take Money at interest, as when Money is scant. For

as it is the scarcitie of Money that maketh the high rates of

interest: so the plentie of Money will make the rates Low, better

then any Statute for that purpose. For although in the

Netherlands, it is lawfull for a man to take twenty in the

hundred if he can get it (wherein it seemes the Author of the

Tract against Usuary was misinformed) yet there, commonly money

is let at 6 and 7 in the hundred, by reason of the plenty of

Money.

    Or there is another Remedy for Usury, in giving liberty to

the subjects if so it may seeme good to His Majesties High

Wisedome) to buy and sell, and to transport Billes of debt from

man to man: according to the Custome of Germany and the Low

Countries. Which is found to be an excellent meanes to supply

mens wants in course of trade; and tendeth also to the enlarging

thereof. And for the Extorsion upon the poore above noted: if a

stocke of Money were raised in manner of a Lumbard, or otherwise

in London, and in the Countries whre much poore depend on

Clothing; and else-where where there is cause, whereby the

multitudes of poore wherewith the Kingdom swarmeth, might be from

time to time supplied for a small consideration; it would

certainly give great encouragement to the poore to labour, it

would set on worke many fatherless children that are ready to

sterve, it would benefit the Common-wealth by their labours, and

it would be an acceptable worke to Almighty God, so to supply

their wants, and not to suffer the faces of the poore to be

ground by the extorsion of any. And I am perswaded, that every

good man would be willing, either to give, or to lend, toward the

raising of a stocke of Money for this purpose.

    For Litigious suits of Law, if men bestowed halfe that study

and cost in trade, which now adies is spent in temerous and rash

suits of Law; surely the benefite that thence would arise to the

Common-wealth, would equall or exceede in value, that which is

spent in Law, which I thinke cannot be valued. The Remedy

requireth great consideration for such is the Cause.

    That the suites of Law in this Kingdome are now infinitely

increast, to that they were in elder times, I thinke it is out of

question: the Quaere is about the cause thereof. Litigious suits

of Law, may seeme anciently to have beene restrained, either by

Sureties, or Fines, or both. Of the Former there is yet a defaced

print in the Common-Pledges of Doe and Roe. Which were of old the

names of true and reall sureties, but are now become formall

only, and saigned names of Course and Solemnity. Whence also it

is, that in staed of Reall sureties in London, saigned sureties

are devised fromt he dwelling of the party Plaintife: As for

example: if the plaintife dwell in Cheape-side: they enter for

his Sureties upon the Record of Court, John Cheape, and Richard

Side. And in like manner whresoever else the Plaintife dwelleth.

    Of the Latter, to wit of Fines, the use of them both in the

Kings Bench & Common-Pleas, continueth unto this day. In the

Kings Bench the Fines are not so ancient for those began in the 8

yeare of His Majesties Happy raigne over this Kingdome: neither

are they of like value to those of the Common-Pleas. Whereof His

Majesties made then a Graunt to certaine Patentees for terme of

yeares. But in the Common-Pleas, the Fines upon Originall Writs,

are held by the learned in the Law, to bee as ancient as the

Common-Law it selfe.

    Now whether the use of Sureties, or the Institution of Fines,

were invented for the restraint of Ligitious suits of Law: or the

Disuse and inequality of them, tendeth to the encrease thereof; I

humbly leave that, to the wisedome and judgement of the Reverend

Judges, and others learned in the Law: least I seeme {Greek

phrase omitted}. Neverthelesse there seems to me, to be a print

of them, in the Lawes and Customes of Forreine Nations. For

which, if you please, let us heare Maimon a great Rabbi. Hebraei,

litigiosum hominum genus, saith he, duplum rependere coegerunt,

qui debitum scienter denegaret.

    Also Festus Pomeius, cited by Bodin. Romani, decimam partem

eius rei, quae in controversiam veniret in privatis, aut

trouersiam veniret in privatis, aut quintam in publicis iudiciis,

imperiabant, Ac licet Romanie in Republica libera, Vectigalia &

tributa imperare fibi difficilime paterentur, Vectigalia tamen

Iudiciaria patienter tulerunt.

    Also Hootoman. Romani Sacramentum constituerunt, certam viz.

pecuniae summanm, ut qui indicio vicisset, suum sacramentum

auferret, victi aute ad aerarium rediret.

    And lastly Bodin. Carolus IX. Vectigal Iudiciarium ad

cohibendam litigatorum hominum indomitam atque effrenatam

licentiam imperauit. Quo vix ullum afflictis aerarii opibus

utilius, & Galliae Imperio litium innumerabili multitudine

appresso, splendidius cogitari poterat.

    There is also in France an excellent restraine of Law suits,

by a Law Merchant, establihsed in Roan, Lions, and Tholosa:

whereby the other higher Courts of Justice are eased of those

Knotty questions that often fall out in matters of Commerce,

which are harder to bee determined by the learned in the Law, and

not so hard for Merchants and men of Trade.

    Like to which, is that of the Court of Conscience, and the

office for Pollicies of Assurance in London. The one granted by

an Act of Parliament, in the 3 yeare of His Majesties happy

Raigne, the other by the Stature of 43 Eliz. And both are

executed by Merchants and men of Trade: though in the latter the

Statute joineth certaine Civill and Common Lawyers with them in

Commission, to assist them when there is cause: because such

Assurances are grounded on the Civill Law. By which meanes His

Majesties other Courts of Justice are eased of the multiplicitie

of Questions that might arise by suits of Law of this kinde.

    And thus having been bold to make this short relation of my

poore observation herein, I most humbly submit this Remedy to the

High wisedome of His Majestie, to dispose thereof in such Manner

and Measure, as the Nature and Number of the suits of Law, at

this day in this Kingdome doe require. In the restraint whereof

His Majestie shall have great Honour: His Kingdome Peace: the

Judges Ease: the Subjects quietnesse, and the Common-wealth

increase of Trade.

    The Trades considered apart, I reduced to such, as tend to

the Fortification of the Kingdome, or Maintenance of Trade. The

former I noted to be Ordinance or Munition. In which case the

Philosopher giveth good Counsell, {Greek phrase omitted}. Sic

amandum tanquam sis osurus, sic oportet edisse tanquqam sis

amaturus.

    The latter I reduced to Fishing and Clothing, as the

Nurseries of Trade. For the Fishing, the infinite treasure that

Strangers search out of our Seas, the variety of Trade that

thereby they purchase, the multitude of Mariners they breed, the

Fleets of Shipping they maintaine, me thinkes should every of

them apart, or all of them together, be unto us as so many

provocations to rouze us up to the exercise thereof: Whereby His

Majestie might receive such a Tolle or Custome of them, as other

Princes doe in like case, and be once again Lord and Master of

the Seas, for all the dispute of the Author of Mare liberum: and

the Native subject encouraged by some Immunity or Priviledge, to

lay hold on that benefit, which God and Nature hath brought home

to our doores.

    For the Clothing, that also is a point of State and great

consequence. The Causes of the decay whereof, I observed to bee

either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique some past, some

present. In which former, it may perhaps seeme strange to speake

of a Remedy for a thing past. Wherein the best Remedy I can

thinke of, is, to be warned by those harmes, not to disturbe or

distract Trade upon any suggestion, though never so specious. It

is a safe rule, that in Rebus nouis constituendis euidens esse

debet utilitas. And in Projects, though they promise much, yet

the utility is commonly Contingent, which may be, or may not be.

But in the mutation of the naturall course of Trade, there ought

to be Perspicuity and apparency of evident utility: Else a Breach

may be sooner made in Trade then can be repaired: and the Current

once diverted, will hardly bee revolved, into it genuine Source

and Course againe.

    The present Domestique Causes of the Decay of Clothing, I

considered in the Trade under the Clothier, or under the

Merchant. Under the Clothier, I noted the Ill making and False

sealing of Cloth: and both through the Non-execution of the

Statute of 4 of the King. the abuse wherof is growne to be very

great, and the reformation hath beene by His Majesties

Proclamations and otherwise, so much and so oft attempted of late

years, and nothing therein effected, that it seemeth a very

difficult matter to reforme the same. Neverthlesse if it may

please His Majestie, to commit the care of the execution of the

Statute, to some of the Principall Cities and Townes in the

Clothing Counties, where Broad Clothes, Kersies, and Perpetuanoes

are made; and to make them the Overseers mentioned in the

Statute, instead of those ignorant and negligent Searchers, with

reasonable allowance for their paines; I am confident it would

prove a singular Remedy. For we have not only the example of the

Low Countries, where this course is taken, but also here with us:

as Worcester for that sort of Clothes, Colchester for Bayes, and

Canterbury for Sayes. In all which places the former abuses are

removed by this means; and the Clothes, and Bayes, and

Manufactures of those Cities, triumph in great credit and

estimation. Which execution of the saide Statute, is the rather

to be committed to the care and charge of the principall Cities

and Townes in the Clothing Counties; because by ancient Statutes

not repealed, all Clothes and Kersies ought to bee brought to the

next City, Borough, or Towne Corporate, to be sealed, before they

be put to sale. And if such Clothes so sealed, prove defective,

that Corporation or Towneship that so hath sealed them, shall

forfeit the whole value thereof.

    The reformation of which abuse will redound to the benefit of

the Clothier, as well as the Merchant. For none is more hurt with

false Cloth, then that Clothier which maketh true Cloth: because

his markets are alwayes hurt by the cheapnesse that false Cloth

may be afforded at. Therefore to facilitate this Remedy, I have

made a collection of all the principall Cities and Townes in the

Clothing Counties for this purpose, as by a list thereof, fixed

to the end of this discourse may appeare, that so a worke of this

nature be no longer deferred, wherein the Honour of the King, and

the Benefit of the Publique are so much involved.

    Under the Merchant I observed the Cloth-Trade to suffer at

Home and Abroad: At Home, either by exporting the Materials of

Clothing, or by Ore-lading the Cloth-Trade with charge. The

Remedy in the former, were to lay a restraint of exportation of

Wools and Wool-fels out of Ireland, and to quicken the execution

of the Statute for that purpose in England, by encouraging the

discoverers of such abuses.

    The latter is the Sur-charging of the Cloth Trade, either

generally or specially: this last, in the Impositions and Impress

monies imposed by the Merchant Adventurers: which as it is a

charge laid upon the Drapery of the Kingdome, I conceive, under

favour, is a matter that trencheth into the Suprmeme power and

dignity of the King, and is peculiar to Him alone. And if for

Government, or other just causes in Societies and Corporation,

there be a necessity of paying of debts, or defraying of

necessary charge; I should thinke it better policy to spare the

Cloth, and other the Native Commodities of the Kingdom, and to

implore His Majesties favour, to levy such charge upon the

Forreine Commodities: according to the Counsell of Stephanus, Si

Vectigal nouum euitari non potest, tune onerentur inerces

perigrinae, auae ad luxum magis quam ad necessitatem faciunt. And

this I conceive would be a good remedy for easing the Cloth Trade

of the present charge under the Merchants: which would also bee a

meanes for paying of their debts, with a little more length of

time, and a great deale of encouragement, both to Clothiers and

Merchants in the Cloth Trade.

    And Abroad, if it appeare upon examination, that the

Residence of the Merchant Adventurers at Delft in Holland be

inconvenient for the Trade: As His Majestie was graciously

pleased to five them that liberty for a tryall, so it may please

His Majestie to dispose thereof, in some more fit place for

their's and the Publique good.

    The Forreince Causes of the Decay of the Drapery, I noted to

bee Generall, as the Warres; or Speciall, as the great Imposition

in Holland. The one is the worke of God, the other of the King,

to remove the same. To whom I recommend them both.

    And thus farre for the Remedies in the Matter of Trade,

considered in Money and Merchandize: the Forme followeth in

Governed and Ungoverned Trade. In the Former I observed a too

strict, and in the latter a too loose forme of Trade. The Remedy

in the One, if it seeme good to the high wisedome of His

Majestie, may be Privative, in racing and rooting out the name

and use of Monopolies from amongst this Nation, as His Majestie

hath royally begun in that His Gracious Proclamation before

mentioned. And to free and open the course of Trade, where now it

is unequally stopt, to the encouragement of the subjects, and the

benefit of the Publique.

    In the other Positive, by disposing the Trades of His

Majesties subjects that are now distracted; into Order and

Government. Whereof none hath more need, as hath been shewed,

then those that Trade into the Dominions of the King of Spaine.

Whose Trade the rather calleth for redresse, because it exporteth

Cloth and other the Manufactures of the Kingdome, and importeth

Treasure, the life of Trade: In both which thre is now a

marveilous great defect, and Trade in all mens hands become so

poore and leane, that it doth scarce, haerere ossibus. For where

Trade is disordred, and the Traders ungoverned, there they are

like a house devided, which cannot long subsist: according to

that of the Orator, Nec domus ulla, nec Civitas, nec Societas,

nee Gens, nec hominum universum genus stare, nec rerum natura

omnis, nec fine imperio mundus ipse potest.

    {Greek phrase omitted}



The Principall Cities and Towns for execution of the Statute for

searching and Sealing of Cloth, are in Counties,



Three Greater:

    Wiltshire: Salisbury, Wilton, Westbury, Trubigde,

Wooton-Basset, Deuizes, Malmsbury, Chipnam, Castlecomb, Calne,

Bradford, Bromhil, Beckinton, Warminster.

    Somersetsh.: Bath, Wells, Freshfor, Tauton, Philips-Norton,

Frome, Somerton, Wellington, Bridgewater, Ilmister, Axbridge,

Glastonbury.

    Glocestersh.: Glocester, Tedbury, Sttowdwater, Dursley,

Wotten-underhedge, Ebley, Witcomb, Winchcomb, Thornbury,

Teuxbury, Cirencester.



Six less:

    Oxfordshire: Burford, Witney.

    Worcesters.: Worcester, Kidderminster.

    Herefordshire: Hereford, Lidbury.

    Warwickshire: Watwicke, Coventry.

    Devonshire: Exceter, Tanton.

    Hampsh.: Southampton, Portsmouth.

