





Lecture IV













The Tribe and the Land













    It has been very commonly believed that, before the agrarian






measures of James the First, Ireland was one of the countries in






which private property in land was invested with least






sacredness, and in which forms of ownership generally considered






as barbarous most extensively prevailed. Spenser and Davis






certainly suggest this opinion, and several modern writers have






adopted it. The Brehon law-tracts prove, however, that it can






only be received with considerable qualification and






modification, and they show that private property, and especially






private property in land, had long been known in Ireland at the






epoch to which they belong, having come into existence either






through the natural disintegration of collective ownership or






through the severance of particular estates from the general






tribal domain. Nevertheless it cannot, I think, be doubted that






at the period to which the tracts are an index much land was held






throughout Ireland under rules or customs savouring of the






ancient collective enjoyment, and this I understand Dr Sullivan






to allow. (Introduction, p. cxliv)






    Part of the evidence of the fact just stated is tolerably






familiar to students of Irish history. At the beginning of the






seventeenth century the Anglo-Irish Judges declared the English






Common Law to be in force throughout Ireland, and from the date






of this decision all land in the country descended to the eldest






son of the last owner, unless its devolution was otherwise






determined by settlement or will. In Sir John Davis's report of






the case and of the arguments before the Court, it is recited






that hitherto all land in Ireland had descended either under the






rule of Tanistry or under the rules of Gavelkind. The system of






inheritance here called Gavelkind is thus described: When a






landowning member of an Irish Sept died, its chief made a






re-distribution of all the lands of the Sept. He did not divide






the estate of the dead man among his children, but used it to






increase the allotments of the various households of which the






Sept was made up. The Judges treated both Tanistry and Gavelkind






as systems of succession after death, of a peculiarly barbarous






and mischievous kind; and, as systems of succession, I shall






consider them hereafter. But all systems of succession after






death bear a close relation to ancient modes of enjoyment during






life; for instance, in the Joint Undivided Family of the Hindoos,






the stirpes, or stocks, which are only known to European law as






branches of inheritors, are actual divisions of the family, and






live together in distinct parts of the common dwelling.






('Calcutta Review' July 1874, p. 208) The so-called Irish






Gavelkind belongs to a class of institutions very common in the






infancy of law; it is a contrivance for securing comparative






equality among the joint proprietors of a common fund. The






redistribution here takes place at the death of a head of a






household; but if equality were secured by what is practically






the same process -- viz., re-division after a fixed period of






years -- an institution would be produced which has not quite






died out of Europe at the present moment, and of which there are






traditions in all old countries. At the same time i have no doubt






that, when the Irish Gavelkind was declared illegal, it was very






far from being the only system of succession known to Ireland






except Tanistry, and i th ink it probable that many different






modes of enjoyment and inheritance were abolished by the decision






giving the land to the eldest son.






    It was the actual observation of peculiar agricultural






usages, special methods of cultivation, and abnormal rules of






tenure, which mainly enabled G. L. Von Maurer to restore the






German Mark to knowledge; and it was by using Von Maurer's






results as his key that Nasse was able to decipher the scattered






references to the 'Agricultural Community of the Middle Ages' in






a variety of English documents. I venture to think that this






class of observation has not been carried far enough in Ireland






to yield material for a confident opinion, but there certainly






seem to be vestiges of ancient collective enjoyment in the






extensive prevalence of 'rundale' holdings in parts of the






country. Under this system a definite area of land is occupied by






a group of families. In the form now most common, the arable






lands are held in severalty, while pasture and bog are in common.






But as lately as fifty years since, cases were frequent in which






the arable land was divided into farms which shifted among the






tenant-families periodically, and sometimes annually. Even when






no such division was made, a well-known relic of the Mark-system,






as it showed itself in Germany and England, was occasionally






found : the arable portion of the estates was composed of three






different qualities of soil, and each tenant had a lot or lots in






the land of each quality, without reference to position. What was






virtually the same system of tenure prevailed quite recently in






the Scottish Highlands. I have ascertained that the families






which formed the village-communities only just extinct in the






Western Highlands had the lands of the village re-distributed






among them by lot at fixed intervals of time; and I gather from






Mr Skene's valuable note on 'Tribe Communities in Scotland'






(appended to the second volume of his edition of Fordun's






Chronicle), that he believes this system of re-division to have






been once universal, or at least widely extended, among the






Scottish Celts.






    It is to be observed that (so far as I am able to learn) the






Irish holdings in 'rundale' are not forms of property, but modes






of occupation. There is always some person above who is legally






owner of all the land held by the group of families, and who,






theoretically, could change the method of holding, although,






practically, popular feeling would put the greatest difficulties






in his way. We must bear in mind, however, that archaic kinds of






tenancy are constantly evidence of ancient forms of






proprietorship. This is so in countries in which superior






ownership has arisen through the natural course of events through






purchase from small allodial proprietors, through colonisation of






village waste-lands become in time the lord's waste, or (in an






earlier state of society) through the sinking of whole






communities of peasants into villeinage, and through a consequent






transformation of the legal theory of their rights. But all this






process of change would be gravely misconstrued if it were






supposed that, because a Chief or Lord had come to be recognised






as legal owner of the whole tribal domain, or of great portions






of it, he therefore altered the accustomed methods of occupation






and cultivation, or (as some would even seem to think) he began






at once to regard the occupying peasantry as modern lessees or






modern tenants at will. No doubt the ancient type of ownership






long served as the model for tenancy; and the common holdings,






dying out as property, survived as occupation. And, if this were






the case in other countries, much more would it be so in Ireland,






where property has changed hands so often and so violently; where






during whole centuries, the owners of land neither regarded, nor






were in a position to regard, the occupiers save as payers of






rent and dues; and where the conception of a landlord acting on






his legal ownership with a view to improvement and increase of






production is altogether modern.






    The chief Brehon law-tract, which sets forth the mutual






rights of the collective tribe and of individual tribesmen or






households of tribesmen in respect of tribal property, is called






the Corus Bescna, and is printed in the Third Volume of the






official edition. It presents great difficulties. I quite agree






with the Editors that the commentary and glosses constantly






contradict and obscure the text, either because the commentators






did not understand it or because they belonged to a later period






and a different stage of legal relations. But the most serious






doubt which occurs to the student of the text arises from the






strong and palpable bias of the compiler towards the interests of






the Church; indeed, part of the tract is avowedly devoted to the






law of Church property and of the organisation of religious






houses. When this writer affirms that, under certain






circumstances, a tribesman may grant or contract away tribal






land, his ecclesiastical leaning constantly suggests a doubt as






to his legal doctrine. Does he mean to lay down that the land may






be parted with generally and in favour of anybody, or only that






it may be alienated in favour of the Church? This difficulty of






construction has an interest of its own. I am myself persuaded






that the influence of the Christian Church on law has been very






generally sought for in a wrong quarter, and that historians of






law have too much overlooked its share in diffusing the






conceptions of free contract, individual property, and






testamentary succession, through the regions beyond the Roman






Empire which were peopled by communities held together by the






primitive tie of consanguinity. It is generally agreed among






scholars that Churchmen introduced these races to wills and






bequests; the Brehon tracts suggest to me at least that, along






with the sacredness of bequests, they insisted upon the






sacredness of contracts; and it is well known that, in the






Germanic countries, their ecclesiastical societies were among the






earliest and largest grantees of public or 'folk' land (Stubbs,






'Constitutional History ', vol. i. p. 154). The Will, the






Contract, and the Separate Ownership were in fact indispensable






to the Church as the donee of pious gifts; and they were also






essential and characteristic elements in the civilisation amid






which the Church had been reared to maturity. It is possible that






the compiler of the Corus Bescna may have been an ecclesiastic,






as he certainly would have been in any society except the Irish;






but, if he were a lawyer, he writes aS a lawyer would state the






case on behalf of a favourite and important client. Let me add






that all the Brehon writers seem to me to have a bias towards






private or several, as distinguished from collective, property.






No doubt it was then, as always, the great source of legal






business, and it may have seemed to them, and it possibly was,






the index to such advance in civilisation as their country was






capable of making.






    My own strong opinion is that the 'Fine,' whose rights and






powers are the principal theme of the Corus Bescna, and whose






name the translators render 'Tribe,' is neither the Tribe in its






largest extension, nor, on the other hand, the modern Family or






group of descendants from a living ancestor, but the Sept. It is






a body of kinsmen whose progenitor is no longer living, but whose






descent from him is a reality, and neither a myth nor a fiction.






It is the Joint Family of the Hindoos, but with the






characteristics of that group considerably modified through






settlement on the land. This peculiar assemblage or corporation






of blood-relatives, which has been referred to by me several






times before, is formed by the continuance of the family union






through several, and it may be through an indefinite number of






generations. The rule throughout most of the civilised world is






that, for all purposes of law, families are broken up into






individuals or dissolved into a number of new families by the






death of their head. But this is not necessary the case. The






group made up of those whom we vaguely call our relatives -- of






our brothers, nephews, great-uncles, uncles, and cousins, no less






than those related to us in the ascending and descending lines --






might very well, after any number of deaths, remain knitted






together not only by blood and affection, but by mutual rights






and duties prescribed or sanctioned by the law. An association of






this sort is well known to the law of India as the Joint






Undivided Family, or, to give the technical description, the






Family, 'joint in food, worship, and estate.' If a Hindoo has






become the root of a family it is not necessarily separated by






his death; his children continue united for legal purposes as a






corporate brotherhood, and some definite act of one or more of






the brethren is required to effect a dissolution of the plexus of






mutual rights and a partition of the family property. The family






thus formed by the continuance of several generations in union is






identical in outline with a group very familiar to the students






of the older Roman law -- the Agnatic Kindred. The Agnates were






that assemblage of persons who would have been under the






patriarchal authority of some common ancestor, if he had lived






long enough to exercise it. The Joint Family of the Hindoos is






that assemblage of persons who would have joined in the






sacrifices at the funeral of some common ancestor, if he had died






in their lifetime. In the last case the sacerdotal point of view






merely takes the place of the legal or civil.






    So far as we are able, amid the disadvantages under which we






are placed by the obscurity of our authorities, let us examine






the legal qualities which the ancient Irish law attributes to






this brotherhood of kinsmen as it was found in Ireland. First of






all, the 'Tribe' of the Brehon tracts is a corporate, organic,






self-sustaining unit. 'The Tribe sustains itself.' ('Ancient Laws






of Ireland,' ii. 283.) Its continuity has begun to depend on the






land which it occupies -- 'land,' says one of the still






unpublished tracts, 'is perpetual man' -- but it is not a purely






land-owning body; it has 'live chattels and dead chattels,'






distinguished from those of individual tribesmen. ('Ancient Laws






of Ireland,' ii. 289.) Nor is it a purely cultivating body; it






may follow a professional calling. (Ibid., iii. 49-51.) A portion






of the tribal domain, probably the arable and choice pasture






lands, has been allotted to separate households of tribesmen, but






they hold their allotments subject to the controlling rights of






the entire brotherhood, and the primary or fundamental rule is






that they are to keep their shares of tribe-land intact. 'Every






tribesman is able to keep his tribe-land; he is not to sell it or






alienate or conceal it, or give it to pay for crimes or






contracts.' ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' ii. 283.) 'No person






should leave a rent upon his land or upon his tribe which he did






not find upon it.' (Ibid., iii. 52, 53.) 'Everyone is wealthy who






keeps his tribe-land perfect as he got it, who does not leave






greater debt upon it than he found on it.' (Ibid., iii. 55.)






    Under certain circumstances the tribesman may alienate, by






grant, contract, or bequest, a certain quantity of the tribe-land






allotted to him; but what are the circumstances, and what the






quantity, are points on which we cannot venture to make any






precise statement, so obscure and contradictory are the rules set






forth. But the grantee primarily contemplated is certainly the






Church, though it seems clear that there is a general power of






alienation, either with the consent of the entire tribal






brotherhood or under pressure of strong necessity. It further






appears to be beyond question that the tribesman has considerably






greater power of disposition over property which he has acquired






than over property which has devolved on him as a member of a






tribe, and that he has more power over acquisitions made by his






own unaided industry than over acquisitions made through profits






arising from the cultivation of tribal land. 'No person should






grant land except such as he has purchased himself, unless by the






common consent of the tribe. ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' iii. 52,






53.) 'He who has not sold or bought (i.e., he who keeps his






tribeland as he obtained it) is allowed to make grants, each






according to his dignity (i.e., as the commentator explains, to






the extent of one-third or one-half of his tribe-land).' 'He who






neither sells nor purchases may give as far as the third of his






tribe-share in case of little necessity and one-half in case of






great necessity' ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,'iii. 47.) 'If it be






land that acquires it, it is one-half;... if he be a professional






man, it is two-thirds of his contracts ' (iii. 49).






    The distinction between acquired property and property






inherited or received from kinsmen, and the enlarged power of






parting with the first, are found in many bodies of ancient law






-- in our own early law among others. The rule that alienations,






otherwise unlawful, may be made under pressure of necessity, is






found in many parts of Hindoo law. The rule requiring the consent






of the collective brotherhood to alienations, with many minor






rules of this part of Brehon law, constantly forms part of the






customs of Indian and Russian village-communities; and the duty






of following common practices of tillage, which is the bequest






from these communities which lasted longest in the Germanic






countries, is classed by the Corus Bescna, along with Marriage,






as one of the fundamental institutions of the irish people.






('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' iii. 17.) But much the most striking






and unexpected analogies in the Brehon law on the subject of






Tribesmen and the Tribe are those which it has with the Hindoo






law of Joint Undivided Families. Under the Brahminical Indian






law, whenever a member of a joint family has acquired property






through special scientific knowledge or the practice of a liberal






art, he does not bring it into the common fund, unless his






accomplishments were obtained through a training given to him by






his family or at their expense. The whole law on the subject was






much considered in a strange case which arose before the High






Court of Madras ('Madras High Court Reports,' ii. 56), where a






joint family claimed the gains of a dancing-girl. The decision of






the Court is thus summarised by the Reporter: 'The ordinary gains






of science are divisible (i.e., they are brought into hotchpot






upon partition of an undivided estate), when such science has






been imparted at the family expense and acquired while receiving






a family maintenance. It is otherwise when the science has been






imparted at the expense of persons not members of the learner's






family.' The very counterparts of the Indian rule and of the






Indian exception are found in the ancient Irish law. 'If (the






tribesman) be a professional man-that is, if the property be






acquired by judicature or poetry, or any profession whatsoever --






he is capable of giving two-thirds of it to the Church... but, if






it was the lawful profession of his tribe, he shall not give of






the emolument of his profession but just as he could give of the






land of his tribe.' (Corus Bescna, 'Ancient Laws of Ireland,'






iii. 5.) It will be seen from the instances which I have given






that the rules of the Irish Brehon law regulating the power of






individual tribesmen to alienate their separate property answer






to the rules of Indian Brahminical law which regulate the power






of individual members of a joint family to enjoy separate






property. The difference is material. The Hindoo law assumes that






collective enjoyment by the whole brotherhood is the rule, and it






treats the enjoyment of separate property by individual brethren






as an exception -- an exception, I may add, round which an






enormous mass of law has now clustered. On the other hand, the






Brehon law, so far as it can be understood, seems to me






reconcileable with no other assumption than that individual






proprietary rights have grown up and attained some stability






within the circle of the tribe. The exercise of these rights is






at the same time limited by the controlling powers of the






collective brotherhood of tribesmen; and to these last, as to the






Agnatic Kindred at Rome, some ultimate right of succession






appears to be reserved. Hence the Irish legal unit is not






precisely a Joint Family; if the Brehon law is to be trusted, it






has considerably less of the 'natural communism' which






characterises the Indian institution. The 'Fine' of the tracts is






constantly spoken of in connection with landed property, and,






whenever it is so connected, I imagine it to have undergone some






of the changes which are constantly brought about by contact with






the land, and I figure it to myself in that case as a Mark or






Village-Community, in which the ideas proper to the older group






out of which it grew, the Joint Family, have survived in






exceptional strength It in this respect approaches the Russian






rather than the Indian type of village-community.






    The 'Judgments of Co-Tenancy' is a Brehon law-tract, still






unpublished at the time at which I write, and presenting, in its






present state, considerable difficulties of interpretation. It






puts, at the outset, the question, -- 'Whence does Co-Tenancy






arise?' The answer given is, 'From several heirs and from their






increasing on the land.' The tract then goes on to explain that






the land is, in the first year, to be tilled by the kinsmen just






as each pleases; that in the second year they are to exchange






lots; that in the third year the boundaries are to be fixed; and






that the whole process of severance is to be consummated in the






tenth year. I trust it is not a presumptuous conjecture that the






order of change here indicated is more trustworthy than the time






fixed for each of its stages. The period of ten years for the






entire transition from collective to separate property seems to






me greatly too short, and hard to reconcile with other Irish






evidence; and I suggest that the Brehon lawyer, attached to the






institution of separate property, like the rest of his class, is






depicting rather an ideal than an actual set of arrangements. The






process, however, which is here described, if it be spread over a






much longer space of time, is really in harmony with all our






knowledge of the rise and progress of cultivating communities.






First a Joint Family, composed of 'several heirs increasing on






the land,' is found to have made a settlement. In the earliest






stage the various households reclaim the land without set rule.






Next comes the system of exchanging lots. Finally, the portions






of land are enjoyed in severalty.






    The references to the ancient collective ownership and






ancient collective enjoyment in the non-legal Irish literature






appear to be very rare. But my friend Mr Whitley Stokes has






supplied me with two passages in point. The 'Liber Hymnorum,'






attributed to the eleventh century, contains (folio 5A) the






following statement: 'Numerous were the human beings in Ireland






at that time (i.e. the time of the sons of Aed Slane, A.D.






658-694), and such was their number that they used to get only






thrice nine ridges for each man in Ireland, to wit, nine of bog,






and nine of smooth (arable), and nine of wood.' Another Irish






manuscript, believed to date from the twelfth century, the 'Lebor






na Huidre,' Says that 'there was not ditch, nor fence, nor






stone-wall round land, till came the period of the sons of Aed






Slane, but (only) smooth fields. Because of the abundance of the






households in their period, therefore it is that they introduced






boundaries in Ireland. These curious statements can, of course,






only be regarded as authority for the existence, at the time when






they were penned, of a belief that a change from a system of






collective to a system of restricted enjoyment had occurred at






some period or other in Ireland, and of a tradition respecting






the date of the change. But it is instructive to find both of






them attributing it to the growth of population, and an especial






interest attaches to the account given in the 'Liber Hymnorum' of






the newer distribution of land which was thought to have taken






the place of something older. The periodical allotment to each






household of a definite portion of bog land, wood land, and






arable land wears a strong resemblance to the apportionment of






pasture and wood and arable land which still goes on in our day






under the communal rules of the Swiss Allmenden (see Laveleye,






'P. et s. F. P.,' pp. 268 et seq.), and which is an undoubted






legacy from the ancient constitution of certain Swiss Cantons as






Teutonic Hundreds.






    Property in Land, wherever it has grown out of the gradual






dissolution of the ancient cultivating communities, has many






characteristics which distinguish it from the form of landed






property with which Englishmen and men of English race are best






acquainted. The area within which this last form of property is






the sole or dominant kind of ownership is now much larger than it






was, through its diffusion over all North America, except Mexico,






and over all colonies settled for the first time by Englishmen,






but our nearly exclusive familiarity with it has led, I think, to






our very commonly over-estimating the extent to which it prevails






over the world, and even over Western Europe. Its parentage may






be traced, not to the decaying authority of the Tribe over the






severalties of the tribesmen, but to the ever-increasing






authority of the Chief, first over his own domain and 'booked'






land, and secondarily over the tribe-lands. The early growth of






the power of the Chief is thus of the utmost interest in the






history of landed property, and I propose to discuss it at some






length in the sUCceeding Lectures. Meantime, let me say something






on the transmutations which Patriarchal Power is observed, as a






fact, to undergo in the assemblies of men held together by






kinship which are still found making a part of Aryan communities.






    The Joint Undivided Family, wherever its beginning is seen in






such communities, springs universally out of the Patriarchal






Family, a group of natural or adoptive descendants held together






by subjection to the eldest living ascendant, father,






grandfather, or great-grandfather. Whatever be the formal






prescriptions of the law, the head of such a group is always in






practice despotic, and he is the object of a respect, if not






always of an affection, which is probably seated deeper than any






positive institution. But in the more extensive assemblages of






kinsmen which constitute the Joint Family the eldest male of the






eldest line is never the parent of all the members, and not






necessarily the first in age among them. To many of them he is






merely a distant relative, and he may possibly be an infant. The






sense of patriarchal right does not die out in such groups. Each






father or grandfather has more power than anybody else over his






wife, children, and descendants; and there is always what may be






called a belief that the blood of the collective brotherhood runs






more truly and purely in some one line than in any other. Among






the Hindoos, the eldest male of this line, if of full mental






capacity, is gene rally placed at the head of the concerns of the






joint family; but where the institution survives in any






completeness, he is not a Paterfamilias, nor is he owner of the






family property, but merely manager of its affairs and






administrator of its possessions. If he is not deemed fit for his






duties, a 'worthier' kinsman is substituted for him by election,






and, in fact, the longer the joint family holds together, the






more election gains ground at the expense of birth. The head or






manager of the Sclavonic House-Communities (which, however, are






much more artificial than the Hindoo Joint Families) is






undisguisedly an elective representative, and in some of our






examples a council of kinsmen belonging to the eldest line of






descent takes the place of an individual administrator. The whole






process I will describe as the gradual transmutation of the






Patriarch into the Chief. The general rule is that the Chief is






elected, with a strong preference for the eldest line. Sometimes






he is assisted by a definite council of near kinsmen, and






sometimes this council takes his place. On the whole, where the






body of kinsmen formed on the type of the Joint Family is a






purely civil institution, the tendency is towards greater






disregard of the claims of blood. But in those states of society






in which the brotherhood is not merely a civil confraternity, but






a political, militant, self-sustaining group, we can perceive






from actually extant examples that a separate set of causes come






into operation, and that the Chief, as military leader, sometimes






more than regains the privileges which he lost through the decay






of the tradition which connected him with the common root of all






the kindred. True patriarchal authority, however, revives






whenever the process of expansion into a group is interrupted and






whenever one of the brotherhood plants himself at a distance from






the rest. A Hindoo who severs himself from a Joint Family, which






the law as administered by the English tribunals gives him great






facilities for doing, acquires much greater power over his






family, in our sense of the word, than he had as a member of the






larger brotherhood. Similarly, in the developed Joint Family or






Village-Community, as the little society becomes more populous,






as the village spreads, as the practice of living in separate






dwellings extends, as the land rather than the common lineage






gets to be regarded as the cement of the brotherhood, each man in






his own house practically obtains stringent patriarchal authority






over his wife, children, and servants. But then, on the other






hand, the separated member of the joint family, or the head of






the village household, will himself become the root of a new






joint brotherhood, unless his children voluntarily dissolve the






family union after his death. Thus all the branches of human






society may or may not have been developed from joint families






which arose out of an original patriarchal cell; but, wherever






the Joint Family is an institution of an Aryan race, we see it






springing from such a cell, and, when it dissolves, we see it






dissolving into a number of such cells.






























Lecture X





The Primitive Forms of Legal Remedies









            II





    I pass from the early law of procedure in the roman and


Teutonic societies to the corresponding branch of another.


ancient legal system which has been only just revealed to us, and


which, so far as its existence was suspected, was supposed until


lately to be separated by peculiarly sharp distinctions from all


Germanic bodies of usage.


    Rather more than half of the Senchus Mor is taken up with the


Law of Distress. The Senchus Mor, as I told you, pretends to be a


Code of Irish law, and indeed to be that very Code which was


prepared under the influence of St. Patrick upon the introduction


of Christianity into Ireland. I added that in the present state


of our knowledge, no theory can be very confidently advanced as


to the date of this Brehon compendium. It may be that some such


revision of the pre-Christian law did take place; it may be that


the Brehon lawyers only conjectured that it must have taken


place; it may be that a tract of unusual dimensions and


proportionately valued by the Brehon law-school which happened to


possess it, came gradually to be associated with a name held in


pre-eminent honour or pre-eminently sacred, a process of which


there are believed to be several examples in the history of


eastern jurisprudence, These doubts, however, as to the true date


of the Senchus Mor do not take away from the significance and


instructiveness of the fact that in a volume of great antiquity,


of undoubted genuineness, and evidently thought by its possessors


to contain all that was important in the law, the Law of


Distress, now an extremely subordinate branch of our legal


system, occupies a space so extraordinarily large.


    I borrow from the Editor of the First Volume of 'Ancient Laws


of Ireland,' the following epitome of the old Irish law of


distress as laid down in the Senchus Mor: --


    'The plaintiff or creditor, having first given the proper


notice, proceeded, in the case of a defendant or debtor, not of


chieftain grade, to distrain. If the defendant or debtor were a


person of chieftain grade, it was necessary not only to give


notice, but also to "fast upon him." The fasting upon him


consisted in going to his residence and waiting there for a


certain time without food. If the plaintiff did not within a


certain time receive satisfaction for his claim, or a pledge


therefor, he forthwith, accompanied by a law-agent, witnesses,


and others, seized his distress. The distress, when seized, was


in certain cases liable to a Stay, which was a period varying.


according to fixed rules, during which the debtor received back


the distress, and retained it in his own keeping, the creditor


having a lien upon it. Such a distress is a "distress with time;"


but under certain circumstances and in particular cases an


"immediate distress" was made, the peculiarity of which was that


during the fixed period of the Stay the distress was not allowed


to remain in the debtor's possession, but in that of the


creditor, or in one of the recognised greens or pounds.


    'If the debt was not paid by the end of the Stay, the


creditor took away the distress, and put it in a pound. He then


served notice of the distress on the debtor whom he had


distrained, letting him know where what was distrained was


impounded. The distress remained in the pound a certain period,


fixed according to its nature (dithim, translated "delay in


pound," is the name of this period). At the end of the delay in


pound, the Forfeiting Time began to run, during which the


distress became forfeited at the rate of three "seds" per day,


until entirely forfeited. If the entire value of the distress


thus forfeited was exactly equal to the original debt and the


subsequent expenses, the debt was liquidated; if it was less than


this, a second distress was taken for the difference; and, if


more, the overplus was returned. All this proceeding was managed


by the party himself, or his law-agent, with the several


witnesses of the various steps, and other necessary parties.


    'But if, instead of allowing his cattle to go to pound, the


debtor gave a sufficient pledge, e.g., his son, or some article


of value, to the creditor, that he would within a certain time


try the right to the distress by law, the creditor was bound to


receive such pledge. If he did not go to law, as he so undertook,


the pledge became forfeited for the original debt. At any time,


up to the end of the "dithim," the debtor could recover his


cattle by paying the debt and such expenses as had been incurred.


But, if he neglected to redeem them until the "dithim" had


expired, then he could only redeem such as were still


unforfeited.'


    The very existence in ancient Ireland of the law thus


summarised is almost enough by itself to destroy those reckless


theories of race which assert an original, inherent difference of


idea and usage between Teuton and Celt. The Irish system of


Distress is obviously, in all essential features, the Germanic


system. It wears, on its face, a very strong general resemblance


to the corresponding branch of Our Common Law; and I have seen


some very ingenious attempts to account for the differences


between the two by suggestions that the primitive contour of the


English law of Distress has been impaired. The object of such


speculations is to argue for the direct derivation of the English


set of rules from the Celtic; but it does not appear to the


necessary to resort to a supposition which has great and special


difficulties of its own. The virtual identity of the Irish law of


Distress with the Teutonic law is best brought out by comparing


it with the Teutonic systems of procedure collectively. Thus the


Distress of the Senchus Mor is not, like the Distress of the


English Common Law, a remedy confined in the main to demands of


the lord on his tenants; as in the Salic and other Continental


Germanic Codes, it extends to breaches of contract, and indeed,


so far as the Brehon law is already known, it would appear to be


the universal method of prosecuting claims of all kinds. The


Notice again to the person whose goods are to be distrained which


it strenuously insists upon, though not found in the surviving


English Common law, fills an important place, as I stated, in


other Teutonic collections of rules. So too the attendance of


witnesses is required by the Continental Codes; and, though the


presence of the Brehon law agent is peculiar to the Irish system


and very characteristic of it, certain persons having much the


same duties are required by some of the Teutonic systems to be


present during the process of distraint. Further, the Stay of


proceedings, which has been compared to an Attachment, seems to


me better explained by certain provisions of the 'Leges


Barbarorum.' Under some of them when a person's property is about


to be seized he makes a mimic resistance; under the Salic law, he


protests against the injustice of the attempt; under the


Ripuarian law, he goes through the expressive formality of


standing at his door with a drawn sword. Thereupon, the seizure


is interrupted and an opportunity is given for enquiring into the


regularity of the proceedings and, probably also, into the


justice of the claim. The Lien or charge upon the distrained


property, which the Irish law confers on the creditor during the


currency of the Stay, is not found in the Continental Teutonic


law in this exact shape; but, at a particular stage of the Salic


proceedings, the creditor has the power of interdicting the


debtor from selling or mortgaging any part of his property until


the debt has been satisfied. On the other hand, several features


of the Irish system, which are wholly absent from the Continental


Teutonic procedure, or very faintly marked in it, belong


conspicuously to the English law. Among these may be placed the


impounding, and the 'taking in withernam,' but the great.


Resemblance of all, and the common point of dissimilarity from


the most ancient of the Leges Barbarorum, lies in the fact that


the Irish procedure, like the English, requires neither


assistance nor permission from any Court of Justice. In all the


Teutonic bodies of custom except the English and the Lombardic,


even when the greatest latitude of seizure is allowed to


litigants out of Court, some. judicial person or body must be


applied to before they proceed to extremities. With us, however,


the entire seizure is completed before authority is called in;


and the Irish law has exactly the same peculiarity. Not only so,


but the Irish law corresponds to the English law of Distress in a


very advanced stage of development. It does not employ the


seizure of cattle merely as a method of extorting satisfaction.


It provides, as you have seen, for their forfeiture in discharge


of the Demand for which they were taken; and thus is


distinguished by an improvement which was only added to the


English law by statute after the lapse of several centuries.


    The true difficulty in estimating the place of this Irish


procedure in the historical development of law arises from doubts


as to the part really played by the legal proceeding in which it


terminated. The English process of distress, wherever it was felt


to be unjust, led up to, and ended in, the action of replevin,


and the court, which ultimately tried the action, practically


acquired its jurisdiction through the interposition of the


Sheriff in restoring the cattle upon security given. No such


interference with a high hand as that of the Sheriff appears to


be contemplated by the Irish law. but the Brehon lawyer who ought


properly to accompany the distrainor is expressly stated by the


Senchus Mor to aid him 'until the decision of a Court.' ('Ancient


Laws of Ireland,' i. 85.) What was the proceeding thus referred


to? What authority had the Irish Courts at any time at which the


Brehon law was held in respect? What were these Courts? To what


extent did they command the public force of the sovereign State?


was there any sovereign power at any time established in any part


of Ireland which could give operative jurisdiction to Courts of


Justice and operative force to the law? All these questions -- of


which the last are in truth the great problems of ancient Irish


history -- must in some degree be answered before we can have


anything, like a confident opinion on the actual working of the


Law of Distress set forth at such length in the Senchus Mor.


    The learned Editors of the various Introductions prefixed to


the official publications of Ancient Irish Law are plainly of


opinion that such jurisdiction as any Irish Courts possessed was,


to use the technical phrase, voluntary. The Law of Distress, in


this view, was clearly enough conceived by the Brehon lawyer, but


it depended for the practical obedience which it obtained on the


aid of public opinion and of popular respect for a professional


Caste. Its object was to force disputants to submit to what was


rather an arbitration than an action, before a Brehon selected by


themselves, or at most before some recognised tribunal advised by


a Brehon. At the same time, it would seem that there are ancient


Irish tracts or fragments of tracts in existence which describe


the ancient Irish as having had a most elaborate public


organisation, judicial as well as legislative. Dr Sullivan, in


his Introduction, admits that the information which has come down


to us on these subjects is very fragmentary, and so obscure that


it will be impossible to give a satisfactory account of them


until the whole of the law-fragments in Irish MSS. are published


or at least made accessible to scholars; but he nevertheless


believes in the historical reality of this organisation, and he


speaks (Introduction, pp. cclii. cclxii.) of the Irish Courts in


language of extremely modern tinge. Enough is known of Irish


history to make it very difficult to understand when this


elaborate judicial system can have existed; but a place is found


for it by attributing it to a period not only before the


Anglo-Norman invasions of Ireland, but before the Viking descents


on the Irish coasts. The safest course is certainly to reserve


one's opinion on the subject until the authorities for Dr


Sullivan's statements have been much more critically examined


than they have been; but I am bound to say that they are not so


inherently improbable, nor are Dr Sullivan's opinions so hard to


reconcile with the views of the Editors of the translations, as


persons unacquainted with legal history might suppose. There are


analogies to many of the tribunals described among the


rudimentary institutions of several communities. Such tribunals


might further be highly developed and yet their jurisdiction


might be only voluntary. Sohm appears to me to have proved that


the Frankish Popular Courts did not execute their own decrees; if


the defendant had promised to submit to an award, the local


deputy of the King might be required to enforce it, but, if there


had been no such promise, the plaintiff was forced to petition


the King in person. There is much reason in fact for thinking


that, in the earliest times and before the full development of


that kingly authority which has lent so much vigour to the arm of


the law in most Aryan communities, but which was virtually denied


to the Irish, Courts of Justice existed less for the purpose of


doing right universally than for the purpose of supplying an


alternative to the violent redress of wrong. Even then if we


suppose that the Ireland which is said to have enjoyed an


elaborate judicial organization was greatly ruder and wilder than


Irish patriots would probably allow it to have been, there is no


such inconsistency between the prevalence of disorder and the


frequency of litigation as would make them exclude one another.


The Norse literature, which Mr Dasent has popularised among us,


shows that perpetual fighting and perpetual litigation may go on


side by side, and that a highly technical procedure may be


scrupulously followed at a time when homicide is an everyday


occurrence. The fact seems to be that contention in Court takes


the place of contention in arms, but only gradually takes its


place; and it is a tenable theory that many of the strange


peculiarities of ancient law, the technical snares, traps, and


pitfalls with which it abounds, really represent and carry on the


feints, stratagems, and ambuscades of actual armed strife between


man and man, between tribe and tribe. Even in our own day, when a


wild province is annexed to the British Indian Empire, there is a


most curious and instructive rush of suitors to the Courts which


are immediately established. The arm of the law summarily


suppresses violence, and the men who can no longer fight go to


law instead, in numbers which sometimes make Indian officials


believe that there must be something maleficent in the law and


procedure which tempt men into Court who never saw a Court


before. The simple explanation is that the same natural impulse


is gratified in a new way; hasty appeals to a judge succeed


hurried quarrels, and hereditary law-suits take the place of


ancestral blood-feuds. If the transition from one state of


society to another in modern India were not sudden but gradual


and slow, as it universally was in the old Aryan world, we should


see the battle with technicalities going on in Court at the same


time that the battle was waged out of Court with sword and


matchlock.


    When, however, we are considering the place in legal history


of the old Irish Law of Distress, the point to which we have to


attend is not so much the mere existence of Courts of Justice as


the effectiveness of their process, or in other words the degree


in which they command the public force of the Commonwealth. I


think I have shown it to be probable that, in proportion as


Courts grow stronger, they first take under their control the


barbarous practice of making reprisals on a wrongdoer by seizing


his property, and ultimately they absorb it into their own


procedure. Now, the Irish Law of Distress belongs in one respect


to a very early stage in this course of development, since it is


even more completely extrajudicial than is that fragment of the


primitive barbarous remedy which has survived among ourselves. On


the other hand, there are several particulars in which it is not


more but distinctly less archaic than the English Common law. The


'Notice' to the defendant, for which it provides -- the 'Stay,'


or temporary retention of the goods by the owner, subject to a


lien -- the witnesses who have to be present, and the skilled


legal adviser who has to attend throughout the proceedings --


belong to a range of ideas greatly more advanced than that under


which all these precautions are dispensed with. Even stronger


evidence of maturity is furnished by the almost inconceivable


multitude of rules and distinctions which the Senchus Mor applies


to every part of the proceedings; and our own experience shows


that the most remarkable feature of the old Irish law, the


forfeiture of the property taken in distress when the original


debt and the expenses of custody come up to its full value, has


its place among the latest improvements in jurisprudence.


    Whatever, then, be the truth as to the Ireland of the golden


age, these characteristics of the Irish Law of Distress leave on


my mind a very distinct impression that it was brought to the


shape in which we find it amid a society in which the action of


Courts of Justice was feeble and intermittent. It says much for


the spirit of equity and reasonableness which animated the Brehon


lawyers who gave it its form, and much also for their ingenuity,


but suggests that they relied little on the assistance of Courts


and directed their efforts to making the most of a remedy which


was almost wholly extrajudicial. The comparison of the Teutonic


laws shows that they had a basis of Aryan custom to work upon;


but, while in other communities the superstructure on this


foundation was the work of Courts ever feeling themselves


stronger, in Ireland it seems to have been the work of lawyers


dependent in the main for the usefulness of their labours on


popular respect for their order. I do not affect to say how the


ancient law of Ireland is to be fitted to the ancient history. It


may be that the picture of judicial organisation found in some


law-tracts is, like the description of private law found in


others, rather a representation of what ought to be than of what


is or has been. It may be also that the law laid down in the


Senchus Mor is of much later date than the compilers of that


tract pretend, and that therefore it received its shape in times


of disturbance and confusion. But I cannot believe that it ever


synchronised with a period of judicial activity and efficiency.


    From what I have said I think you will have collected the


chief points of difference between the Irish Law of Distress, as


laid down in the Senchus Mor, and the english Common Law of


Distress, as declared by the earliest authorities which our


Courts recognise. Both had the same origin, but the Irish


distraint was an universal, highly developed proceed ing employed


in enforcing all kinds of demands, while the corresponding


English remedy, though much less carefully guarded by express


rules, was confined to a very limited and special class of cases.


I have a melancholy reason for calling your attention to the


contrast. Edmund Spenser has spoken of it, in his 'View of the


State of Ireland,' and here is the passage: --


    'There are one or two statutes which make the wrongful


distraining of any man's goods against the forme of Common Law to


be fellony. The which statutes seeme surely to have been at first


meant for the good of the realme, and for restrayning of a foul


abuse, which then reigned commonly among that people, and yet is


not altogether laide; that, when anyone was indebted to another,


he would first demand his debt, and, if he were not paid, he


would straight go and take a distress of his goods and cattell,


where he could find them to the value; which he would keep till


he were satisfied; and this the simple churl (as they call him)


doth commonly use to doe yet through ignorance of his misdoing,


or evil use that hath long settled among them. But this, though


it be sure most unlawful, yet surely me seems it is too hard to


make it death, since there is no purpose in the party to steal


the other's goods, or to conceal the distress, but he doeth it


openly for the most part before witnesses. And again the same


statutes are so slackly penned (besides there is one so


unsensibly contryved that it scarcely carryeth any reason in it)


that they are often and very easily wrested to the fraude of the


subject, as if one going to distrayne upon his own land or


tenement, where lawfully he may, yet if in doing thereof he


transgresse the least point of the Common Law, he straight


committeth fellony. Or if one by any other occasion take any


thing from another, as boyes sometimes cap one another, the same


is straight fellony. This is a very hard law.


    Spenser goes on, in a passage which I need not quote in full,


to account for these statutes by a special provision in the


charters of most of the Anglo-Irish corporate towns. The English


law had not currency, he tells us, beyond the walls, and the


burgesses had the power conferred on them of distraining the


goods of any Irishman staying in the town or passing through it,


for any debt whatsoever. He suggests that the Irish population


outside was led in this way to suppose it lawful to distrain the


property of the townspeople. The explanation, if true, would be


sad enough, but we know that it cannot convey the whole truth,


and the real story is still sadder. The Irish used the remedy of


distress because they knew no other remedy, and the English made


it a capital felony in an Irishman to follow the only law with


which he was acquainted. Nay, those very subtleties of old


English law which, as Blackstone says, made the taking of


distress 'a hazardous sort of proceeding' to the civil


distrainor, might bring an Irishman to the gallows, if in


conscientiously attempting to carry out the foreign law he fell


into the smallest mistake. It is some small consolation to be


able, as one result of the inquiries we have been prosecuting, to


put aside as worthless the easy justification of those who pass


over these cruelties as part of the inevitable struggle between


men of different races. Both the Irish law, which it was a


capital crime to obey, and the English law, which it was a


capital crime to blunder in obeying, were undoubtedly descended


from the same body of usage once universally practised by the


forefathers of both Saxon and Celt.


    Among the writers who have recognised the strong affinities


connecting the English and Irish Law of Distress, I find it


difficult to distinguish between those who believe in the direct


derivation of the English law from pre-existing Celtic customs


common to Britain and Ireland, and those who see a sufficient


explanation of the resemblances between the two sets of rules in


their common parentage. I am not at all prepared to deny that


recent researches, and particularly those into old French


customary law, render it easier to believe than it once was that


portions of primitive or aboriginal custom survive the most


desolating conquests. But I need scarcely say that the hypothesis


of the direct descent of any considerable branch of English law


from British usage is beset by extraordinary difficulties, of


which not the least is the curiously strong case which may also


be made out for the purely Roman origin of a good many


institutions and rules which we are used to consider purely


English and Germanic. On this last point a very interesting


little volume, which has attracted too little notice, Mr Coote's


'Neglected Fact in English History,' may be read with advantage,


and should be compared with the reply to its arguments, on the


whole a successful one, which Mr. Freeman published in


'Macmillan's Magazine, for July, 1870. The true rival of all


these theories of the derivation of one body of custom from


another is, of course, the theory of the common descent of all


from an original basis of usage which we must, provisionally at


all events, call Aryan. Confining ourselves to the practice which


we have been investigating, the remedy for supposed wrong by


distress, if there could be a doubt of its being a legacy from


the primitive Aryan usages, it would be removed by the remarkable


detail which connects the Irish with the Hindoo law. The Irish


rules of distraint very strongly resemble the English rules, less


strongly resemble the Continental Teutonic rules, but they


include one rule not found in any Teutonic Code, almost


unintelligible in the Irish system, but known to govern conduct


even at this hour all over the East, where its meaning is


perfectly clear. This is the rule that a creditor who requires


payment from a debtor of higher rank than himself shall 'fast


upon him.' What possible explanation will cover all the fact


except that the primitive Aryans bequeathed the remedy of


distress to the communities which sprang from them, and that


varieties of detail have been produced by what Dr. Sullivan, in


his Introduction, has happily called dynamical influences?


    Here is the leading provision of the Senchus Mor on the


subject (i. 113): --


    'Notice precedes every distress in the case of the inferior


grades except it be by persons of distinction or upon persons of


distinction. Fasting precedes distress in their case. He who does


not give a pledge to fasting is an evader of all; he who


disregards all things shall not be paid by God or man.'


    Mr. Whitley Stokes was the first, I believe, to point out


that the institution here referred to was identical with a


practice diffused over the whole East, and called by the Hindoos


'sitting dharna.' I will presently read you a passage in which


the proceeding is described as it was found in India before the


British government, which has always regarded it as an abuse, had


gone far in its efforts to suppress it. But perhaps the most


striking examples of the ancient custom are to be found at this


day in Persia, where (I am told) a man intending to enforce


payment of a demand by fasting begins by sowing some barley at


his debtor's door and sitting down in the middle. The symbolism


is plain enough. The creditor means that he will stay where he is


without food, either until he is paid or until the barley-seed


grows up and gives him bread to eat.


    The corresponding Indian practice is known, I before stated,


as 'sitting dharna' -- dharna, according to the better opinion,


being exactly equivalent to the Roman 'capio,' and meaning


'detention' or 'arrest.' Among the methods of enforcing payment


of a debt described in the collection of rules attributed to the


semi-divine legislator, Manu (viii. 49), is one which Sir William


Jones renders 'the mediation of friends;' but more recent


Sanscrit scholars assert that the expression of the original text


signifies 'dharna.' And in the Vyavahara Mayukha, a Brahminical


law-book of much authority, Brihaspiti, a juridical writer


sometimes classed with Manu, is cited as enumerating, among the


lawful modes of compulsion by which the debtor can be made to


pay, 'confining his wife, his son, or his cattle, or watching


constantly at his door.' This remarkable passage not only


connects Hindoo law with Irish law through the reference to


'watching constantly at the door,' but it connects it also with


the Teutonic, and among them with the English bodies of custom,


by speaking of the distraint of cattle as a method of enforcing a


demand. We have not in the Western world, so far as I am aware,


any example of so strong a form of distress as seizing a man's


wife or children, but it is somewhat curious that we have


evidence of its having been common in ancient Ireland to give a


son as a pledge to the creditor for the purpose of releasing the


distrained property.


    Lord Teignmouth has left us a description (in Forbes'


'Oriental Memoirs,' ii. 25) of the form which the 'watching


constantly at the door' of Brihaspiti had assumed in British


India before the end of the last century. 'The inviolability of


the Brahmin is a fixed principle with the Hindoos, and to deprive


him of life, either by direct violence or by causing his death in


any mode, is a crime which admits of no expiation. To this


principle may be traced the practice called dharna, which may be


translated caption or arrest. It is used by the Brahmins to gain


a point which cannot be accomplished by any other means, and the


process is as follows: The Brahmin who adopts this expedient for


the purpose mentioned proceeds to the door or house of the person


against whom it is directed, or wherever he may most conveniently


arrest him; he then sits down in dharna with poison or a poignard


or some other instrument of suicide in his hand, and threatening


to use it if his adversary should attempt to molest or pass him,


he thus completely arrests him. In this situation the Brahmin


fasts, and by the rigour of the etiquette the unfortunate object


of his arrest ought to fast also, and thus they both remain till


the institutor of the dharna obtains satisfaction. In this, as he


seldom makes the attempt without the resolution to persevere, he


rarely fails; for if the party thus arrested were to suffer the


Brahmin sitting in dharna to perish by hunger, the sin would for


ever lie upon his head. This practice has been less frequent of


late years, since the institution of the Court of Justice at


Benares in 1793; but the interference of the Court and even of


the Resident has occasionally proved insufficient to check it.'


    You will observe that the old Brahminical writer merely


speaks of confining a man to his house by 'watching constantly at


the door' as one among several modes of extorting satisfaction.


He classes it with forms of distraint more intelligible to us --


the seizure of the debtor's cattle, of his wife, or of his child.


Though the ancient rule has not descended to us along with its


original context, we need not doubt that even in the earliest


times it was enforced by a supernatural sanction, since every


violation of the Brahminical Code was regarded by its authors not


only as a civil offence but as a sin. Thus a Brahmin might quite


well be conceived as saying with the writer in the Senchus Mor,


'He who does not give a pledge to fasting is an evader of all; he


who disregards all things shall not be paid by God or man.' Many


centuries then elapse, which it would be vain to calculate, and


almost in our own day we find the ancient usage practised in


India, but with modifications corresponding to a great deal of


change which is suspected to have occurred in Hindoo theology.


The indefinite supernatural penalty has become the definite


supernatural penalty incurred by destroying life, and


particularly human life. The creditor not only 'watches at the


door,' but kills himself by poison or dagger if the arrest is


broken, or by starvation if payment is too long delayed. Finally,


we have the practice described by Lord Teignmouth as one


peculiarly or exclusively resorted to by Brahmins. The sanctity


of Brahminical life has now in fact pretty much taken, in Hindoo


idea, the place once occupied by the sanctity of human life, and


'sitting dharna,' when the English law first endeavoured to


suppress it, was understood to be a special mode of oppression


practised by Brahmins for a consideration in money This is the


view taken of it by the Indian Penal Code, which condemns it in


the following terms (s. 508): --


    'Whoever voluntarily causes... any person to do anything


which that person is not legally bound to do... by inducing...


that person to believe that he... will become by some act of the


offender an object of Divine displeasure, if he does not do the


thing which it is the object of the offender to cause him to


do... shall be punished with imprisonment, &c.'


    It seems to me that a reasonable explanation may be given of


the origin of these practices which now seem so strange. Let us


not forget that all forms of Distress, the seizure of wife,


child, or cattle, even when wholly unregulated by law, were


improvements on older custom. The primitive proceeding was


undoubtedly the unceremonious, unannounced, attack of the tribe


or the man stung by injury on the tribe or the man who had


inflicted it. Any expedient by which sudden plunder or slaughter


was adjourned or prevented was an advantage even to barbarous


society. Thus, it was a gain to mankind as a whole when its


priests and leaders began to encourage the seizure of property or


family, not for the purpose of permanent appropriation, but with


a view to what we should now not hesitate to call extortion.


Similarly, it was a step forwards when men learned to pause


before attacking instead of attacking at once. We are told, in


the Compendium of Kafir Laws and Customs published by Mr Dugmore


and other missionaries (p. 38), that the regular procedure of a


Kafir law-suit simulates an expedition in force of the plaintiff


and his friends against the village to which the defendant


belongs. 'On their arrival they sit down together in some


conspicuous position and await quietly the result of their


presence. This... is the signal for mustering all the adult male


residents that are forthcoming. These accordingly assemble and


also sit down within conversing distance.' After long silence a


conversation ensues, and the proceeding, which is a perfectly


peaceable one, is continued by a long series of technical


formalities and intricate pleadings. This silent pause of the


attacking party is an early form of Notice, in itself one of the


most valuable of institutions; and with it is connected another


primitive contrivance, shutting a man up in his house till he


gives satisfaction, instead of setting on him at once. A very


striking illustration of it is found in a law of Alfred, familiar


to historical scholars (Kemble, 'Saxons,' i. 272; Thorpe,


'Ancient Laws,' i. 91): --


    'Let the man who knows his foe to be homesitting fight not


before he have demanded justice of him. If he have power to beset


his foe and besiege him in his house, let him keep him there for


seven days but not attack him if he will remain indoors. If then,


after seven days, he be willing to surrender and give up his


weapons, let him be kept safe for thirty days, and let notice be


given to his kinsmen and friends. But if the plaintiff have not


power of his own, let him ride to the Ealdorman, and, if the


Ealdorman will not aid him, let him ride to the King before he


fights.' The passage ends with a provision of which the spirit,


strange to say, survives in the modern Code making the loudest


claim to civilised principle, the Code Napolon (Code Pnal, s.


324), to the effect that if the man who is homesitting be really


shut up in his house with the complainant's wife, daughter, or


sister, he may be attacked and killed without ceremony. 


    The object of the Law of Alfred is plainly the same with that


aimed at by the ancient rule of Brihaspiti. The man who, if


nature had her way, would be slain at once, is shut up in his


house but left otherwise unharmed till he or his kinsmen pay the


debt or compound for the money. The English rule is to be


enforced by the civil power, the Ealdorman or the King; the


Hindoo Brahminical rule by the fear of punishment in another


world. The Irish law-tract retains the Brahminical rule as an


alternative in certain cases to Notice. But an institution which


was perfectly intelligible in a society which included an order


of lawyers who were also priests has lost all meaning when this


society has been introduced by Christianity to a wholly new set


of religious ideas. 


    The course of our enquiry has led us backwards and forwards


between the extreme Easterly and the extreme Westerly branches of


the Aryan race. Let me now add one word to connect the Eastern


usage with the most ancient law of the community which once


occupied with its government nearly the whole space between the


two. 'Sitting dharna,' placed under the ban of British law,


chiefly survives in British india in an exaggerated air of


suffering worn by the creditor who comes to ask a debtor of


higher rank for payment, and who is told to wait. But it is still


common in the Native Indian States, and there it is pre-eminently


an expedient resorted to by soldiers to obtain arrears of pay.


You will remember that the 'pignoris capio' of the Romans is


stated by Gaius to have survived as a remedy in two classes of


cases, one of them being the default of a military paymaster.



















Lecture XI





The Early History of the Settled Property of Married Women





    The subject on which I am about to speak may perhaps convey


one lesson. It may serve as a caution against the lax employment


of the words 'ancient' and 'modern,' There are few persons, I


suppose, who, approaching the Settled Property of Married Women


without previous knowledge of its history, would not pronounce it


one of the most modern of subjects. It has given rise to vehement


controversy in our own day; some of the questions which it


suggests are not yet solved; and there are many here, I dare say,


who believe that they remember the first dawn of sound ideas on


these questions. Yet, as a matter of fact, the discussion of the


settled property of married women is a very old discussion. I do


not indeed say, considering the vast antiquity now claimed for


the human race, that our very first forefathers troubled


themselves about the matter; but nothing can be more certain than


that very soon after those divisions of mankind which were


destined to ultimate greatness are seen in possession of the


institution which was the one condition of their progress to


civilisation -- the Family -- they are discerned grappling with


the very same problem, no doubt in an early form, which we


ourselves have hardly yet succeeded in solving. This assertion, I


may observe, is less incredible to a Frenchman, or indeed to a


citizen of any Continental State, than it is possibly to an


Englishman. The law of the Continent on the proprietary relations


of husband and wife is in the main Roman law, very slightly


transmuted; and through the institutions of the Romans the


history of this branch of law may be traced to the earliest


institutions of so much of the human race as has proved capable


of civilisation.


    The Roman and Hindoo systems of law from which I propose to


illustrate my subject are very far indeed from being the only


sources from which information can be gathered concerning the


infancy of mankind, or even concerning the Aryan race of men. But


the evidence supplied by each of them is highly authentic, and,


while both of them run back to what may fairly be called a vast


antiquity, they both assume at their starting-point the existence


of the institution, by no means apparently universal among savage


men, out of which, as I said, all civilisation has grown -- the


Family. I need scarcely add that, even for historical purposes,


their value is very unequal.


    There is no history so long, so continuous, and so authentic


as that of the Roman Law; and yet it is not a little remarkable


that till about half a century ago it was systematically treated,


except by a small minority of jurists, as if it had no history at


all. This was a consequence of its great juridical perfection.


Let me pause to observe that, considering the time and pains


spent in acquiring the Latin language, it is much to be regretted


that so little is known of the chief branch of Latin literature.


For it is really so expressed, and so put together, as to deserve


the name of literature. Moreover, it was the only literature of


the Romans which has any claim to originality; it was the only


part of their literature in which the Romans themselves took any


strong interest; and it is the one part which has profoundly


influenced modern thought. One result, however, of its symmetry


and lucidity was that it was long regarded as a birth of pure


intellect, produced, so to speak, at a single effort. Those who


attempted to construct a history for it were few, and not of the


highest credit. But it happened that in 1816, the great German


historian, Niebuhr, travelling in Italy, had his attention


attracted at Verona to a manuscript of one of the Fathers, under


the letters of which ancient writing appeared. This manuscript,


when deciphered, proved to be a nearly perfect copy of an


educational work, written in the second century of our era, for


young Roman students of law, by one of the most famous of Roman


lawyers, Gaius or Caius. At that period Roman jurisprudence


retained enough of the traces of its most ancient state for it to


be necessary that they should be explained to young readers by


the author of such a treatise; and it thus became possible to


reconstruct, from the book of Gaius, the whole past history of


Roman law with some completeness Certainly, without Niebuhr's


discovery the subject of this lecture could never have been


understood, or its original outline restored.


    Hindoo law, which I have placed by the side of Roman law,


calls assuredly for no eulogy. It is full of monstrous


iniquities, and has been perverted in all directions by priestly


influence. But then a great deal of it is undoubtedly of


prodigious antiquity, and, what is more important, we can see


this ancient law in operation before our eyes. British


legislation has corrected some of its excesses, but its


principles are untouched, and are still left to produce some of


their results. French law, as I said, is Roman law a little


altered, but then it is the Roman law in its matured, developed,


and refined condition, and the ancient institutions of the Romans


are only seen through it dimly. But some of the institutions


which the Romans and Hindoos once had in common may be seen


actually flourishing in India, under the protection of English


Courts of Justice.


    The two societies, Roman and Hindoo, which I take up for


examination, with the view of determining some of their earliest


ideas concerning the property of women, are seen to be formed at


what for practical purposes is the earliest stage of their


history, by the multiplication of a particular unit or group, the


Patriarchal Family. There has been much speculation of late among


writers belonging to the school of so-called pre-historic inquiry


as to the place in the history of human society to which this


peculiar group, the Patriarchal Family, is entitled. Whether,


however, it has existed universally from all time -- whether it


has existed from all time only in certain races -- or whether in


the races among whose institutions it appears, it has been formed


by slow and gradual development -- it has, everywhere, where we


find it, the same character and composition. The group consists


of animate and inanimate property, of wife, children, slaves,


land, and goods, all held together by subjection to the despotic


authority of the eldest male of the eldest ascending line, the


father, grandfather, or even more remote ancestor. The force


which binds the group together is Power. A child adopted into the


Patriarchal family belongs to it as perfectly as the child


naturally born into it, and a child who severs his connection


with it is lost to it altogether. All the larger groups which


make up the primitive societies in which the Patriarchal family


occurs, are seen to be multiplications of it, and to be, in fact,


themselves more or less formed on its model.


    But, when first we view the Patriarchal Family through


perfectly trust worthy evidence, it is already in a state of


decay. The emancipation or enfranchisement of male children from


parental power by the parents' voluntary act has become a


recognised usage, and is one among several practices which


testify a relaxation of the stricter ideas of a more remote


antiquity. Confining our attention to women, we find that they


have begun to inherit a share of the property of the family


concurrently with their male relatives; but their share appears,


from several indications, to have been smaller, and they are


still controlled both in the enjoyment of it and in the disposal.


Here, however, we come upon the first trace of a distinction


which runs through all legal history. Unmarried women, originally


in no different position from married women, acquire at first a


much higher degree of proprietary independence. The unmarried


woman is for life under the guardianship of her male relatives,


whose primitive duty was manifestly to prevent her alienating or


wasting her possessions, and to secure the ultimate reversion of


these possessions to the family to whose domain those possessions


had belonged. But the powers of the guardians are undergoing slow


dissolution through the two great sapping agencies of


jurisprudence, Legal Fictions and Equity. To those who are alive


to the permanence of certain legal phenomena there is no more


interesting passage in ancient law than that in which the old


lawyer Gaius describes the curious forms with which the


guardian's powers were transferred to a trustee, whose trust was


to exercise them at the pleasure of the ward. Meantime, there can


be no reasonable doubt that among the Romans, who alone supply us


with a continuous history of this branch of jurisprudence, the


great majority of women became by marriage, as all women had


originally become, the daughters of their husbands. The Family


was based, less upon actual relationship than upon power, and the


husband acquired over his wife the same despotic power which the


father had over his children. There can be no question that, in


strict pursuance of this conception of marriage, all the wife's


property passed at first absolutely to the husband, and became


fused with the domain of the new family; and at this point


begins, in any reasonable sense of the words, the early history


of the property of married women.


    The first sign of change is furnished by the employment of a


peculiar term to indicate the relation of husband to wife, as


different from the relation of father to child, or master to


slave. The term, a famous one in legal history, is manus, the


Latin word for 'hand,' and the wife was said convenire in manum,


to come under the hand of her husband. I have elsewhere expressed


a conjectural opinion that this word manus or hand, was at first


the sole general term for patriarchal power among the Romans, and


that it became confined to one form of that power by a process of


specialisation easily observable in the history of language. The


allotment of particular names to special ideas which gradually


disengage themselves from a general idea is apparently determined


by accident. We cannot give a reason, other than mere chance, why


power over a wife should have retained the name of manus, why


power over a child should have obtained another name, potestas,


why power over slaves and inanimate property should in later


times be called dominium. But, although the transformation of


meanings be capricious, the process of specialisation is a


permanent phenomenon, in the highest degree important and worthy


of observation. When once this specialisation has in any case


been effected I venture to say that there can be no accurate


historical vision for him who will not, in mental contemplation,


re-combine the separated elements. Taking the conceptions which


have their root in the family relation -- what we call property,


what we call marital right, what we call parental authority, were


all originally blended in the general conception of patriarchal


power. If, leaving the Family, we pass on to the group which


stands next above it in the primitive organisation of society --


that combination of families, in a larger aggregate, for which at


present I have no better name than Village Community -- we find


it impossible to understand the extant examples of it, unless we


recognise that, in the infancy of ideas, legislative, judicial,


executive, and administrative power are not distinguished, but


considered as one and the same. There is no distinction drawn in


the mind between passing a law, affirming a rule, trying an


offender, carrying out the sentence, or prescribing a set of


directions to a communal functionary. All these are regarded as


exercises of an identical power lodged with some depositary or


body of depositaries. When these communities become blended in


the larger groups which are conveniently called political: the


re-combination of ideas originally blended becomes infinitely


more difficult, and, when successfully effected, is among the


greatest achievements of historical insight. But I venture to say


that, whether we look to that immortal system of village


communities which became the Greek or Hellenic world -- or that


famous group of village-communities on the Tiber, which, grown


into a legislating empire, has influenced the destinies of


mankind far more by altering their primitive customs than by


conquering them -- or to the marvellously complex societies to


which we belong, and in which the influence of the primitive


family and village notions still makes itself felt amid the mass


of modern thought -- still I venture to say, that one great


secret for understanding these collections of men, is the


reconstruction in the mind of ancient, general, and blended ideas


by the re-combination of the modern special ideas which are their


offshoots.


    The next stage in the legal history of Roman civil marriage


is marked by the contrivance, very familiar to students of Roman


law, by which the process of 'coming under the hand' was


dispensed with, and the wife no longer became in law her


husband's daughter. From very early times it would appear to have


been possible to contract a legal marriage by merely establishing


the existence of conjugal society. But the effect on the wife of


continuous conjugal society was, in old Roman law, precisely the


same as the effect on a man of continuous servile occupation in a


Roman household. The institution called Usucapion, or (in modern


times) Prescription, the acquisition of ownership by continuous


possession, lay at the root of the ancient Roman law, whether of


persons or of things; and, in the first case, the woman became


the daughter of the chief of the house; in the last case the man


became his slave. The legal result was only not the same in the


two cases because the shades of power had now been discriminated,


and paternal authority had become different from the lordship of


the master over the slave. In order, however, that acquisition by


Usucapion might be consummated, the possession must be


continuous; there was no Usucapion where the possession had been


interrupted -- where, to use the technical phrase (which has had


rather a distinguished history), there had been usurpation, the


breaking of usus or enjoyment. It was possible, therefore, for


the wife, by absenting herself for a definite period from her


husband's domicile, to protect herself from his acquisition of


paternal power over her person and property. The exact duration


of the absence necessary to defeat the Usucapion -- three days


and three nights -- is provided for in the ancient Roman Code,


the Twelve Tables, and doubtless the appearance of such a rule in


so early a monument of legislation is not a little remarkable: It


is extremely likely, as several writers on the ancient law


conjectured, that the object of the provision was to clear up a


doubt, and to declare with certainty what period of absence was


necessary to legalise an existing practice. But it would never do


to suppose that the practice was common, or rapidly became


common. In this, as in several other cases, it is probable that


the want of qualification in the clause of the Twelve Tables is


to be explained by the reliance of the legislator on custom,


opinion, or religious feeling to prevent the abuse of his


legislation. The wife who saved herself from coming under marital


authority no doubt had the legal status of wife, but the Latin


antiquaries evidently believed that her position was not at first


held to be respectable. By the time of Gaius, however, any


association of imperfect respectability with the newer form of


marriage was decaying or had perished; and, in fact, we know that


marriage, 'without coming under the hand,' became the ordinary


Roman marriage, and that the relation of husband and wife became


a voluntary conjugal society, terminable at the pleasure of


either party by divorce. It was with the state of conjugal


relations thus produced that the growing Christianity of the


Roman world waged a war ever increasing in fierceness; yet it


remained to the last the basis of the Roman legal conception of


marriage, and to a certain extent it even colours the Canon law


founded though it be, on the whole, on the sacramental view of


marriage.


    For our present purpose it is necessary to regard this newer


marriage just when it had superseded the ancient and stricter


usages of wedlock, and just before it began to be modified by the


modern and much severer principles of the Christian community.


For at this point in the history of marriage we come upon the


beginnings of that system of settling the property of married


women which has supplied the greatest part of Continental Europe


with its law of marriage settlement. It appears an immediate


consequence from thoroughly ascertained legal principles that, as


soon as the wife ceased to pass by marriage into her husband's


family, and to become in law his daughter, her property would no


longer be transferred to him. In the earlier period of Roman law,


this property, present and prospective, would have remained with


her own family, and, if she was no longer under direct parental


authority, would have been administered by her guardians for the


behoof of her male relatives. As we know, however, and as I


before stated, the power of guardians was gradually reduced to a


shadow. The legal result would seem to have been that the woman


would be placed in the same position as a French wife at this day


under what the French Code calls the rgime of biens spars, or


as an English wife whose property has been secured to her


separate use by an appropriate marriage settlement or by the


operation of the new Married Women's Property Act. But, though


this was the legal consequence, it would be a social anachronism


to assume that in practice it followed rapidly or generally. The


original object of the marriage 'without coming under the hand'


was doubtless to prevent the acquisition of excessive proprietary


power by the husband, not to deprive him of all such power, and


indeed the legal result of this marriage, unless practically


qualified in some way, would unquestionably have been far in


advance of social feeling. Here, then, we come upon an


institution which, of all purely artificial institutions, has had


perhaps the longest and the most important history. This is the


dos, or dotal estate, something very different from our 'dower.'


It has become the dot of French law, and is the favourite form of


settling the property of married women all over the Continent of


Europe. It is a contribution by the wife's family, or by the wife


herself, intended to assist the husband in bearing the expenses


of the conjugal household. Only the revenue belonged to the


husband, and many minute rules, which need not be specified here,


prevented him from spending it on objects foreign to the purpose


of the settlement. The corpus or capital of the settled property


was, among the Romans (as now in France), incapable of


alienation, unless with the permission of a court of justice. If


any part of the wife's property was not settled on her as dos, it


became her parapherna. Parapherna means something very different


from our 'paraphernalia,' and is the biens separs of French law.


It was that portion of a wife's property which was held by her


under the strict law applicable to a woman marrying without


'coming under the hand.' The authority of her guardians having


died out, and this part of her property not having, by the


assumption, been conveyed to the husband as dos, it remained


under her exclusive control, and at her exclusive disposal. It is


only quite recently, under the Married Women's Property Act, that


we have arrived at a similar institution, since money settled to


a wife's separate use, though practically the same thing,


required a settlement to create it.


    I have now abridged a very long, and, in some portions, a


very intricate history. The Roman law began by giving all the


wife's property to the husband, because she was assumed to be, in


law, his daughter. It ended in having for its general rule that


all the wife's property was under her own control, save when a


part of it had been converted by settlement into a fund for


contributing to the expenses of the conjugal household. But, no


doubt, the exception to the general rule was the ordinary


practice. In all respectable households, as now on the Continent,


there was a settlement by way of dos. Not that we are to suppose


there was among the Romans any such form of contract as we are


accustomed to under the name of Marriage Settlement. The


mechanism was infinitely simpler. A few words on paper would


suffice to bring any part of the wife's property under the


well-ascertained rules supplied by the written law for dotal


settlements, and nothing more than these words would be needed,


unless the persons marrying wished to vary the provisions of the


law by express agreement. This simple, but most admirable,


contrivance of having, so to speak, model settlements set forth


ready made in the law, which may be adopted or not at pleasure,


characterises the French Code Napolon, and it was inherited by


the French from the Romans.


    Warning you that the account which I have given you of the


transitions through which the Roman law of settled property


passed, is, from the necessity of the case, fragmentary, I pass


to the evidence of early ideas on our subject which is contained


in the Hindoo law. The settled property of a married woman,


incapable of alienation by her husband, is well-known to the


Hindoos under the name of Stridhan. It is certainly a remarkable


fact that the institution seems to have been developed among the


Hindoos at a period relatively much earlier than among the


Romans. But instead of being matured and improved, as it was in


the Western society, there is reason to think that in the East,


under various influences which may partly be traced, it has


gradually been reduced to dimensions and importance far inferior


to those which at one time belonged to it.


    The definition of Stridhan, or 'woman's property,' given in


one of the oldest and most authoritative of the Hindoo juridical


treatises, the Mitakshara, is as follows: 'That which is given


(to the wife) by the father, the mother, the husband, or a


brother, at the time of the wedding, before the nuptial fire.' Up


to this point, the doctrine has the concurrence of all the


schools of Hindoo law, but the compiler of the Mitakshara adds a


proposition not found elsewhere: 'also property which she may


have acquired by inheritance, purchase, partition, seizure, or


finding, is denominated by Manu and the others "woman's


property."' (Mitakshara, xi. 2.). These words, attributed, you


see, to the mythical legislator, Manu, have excited the most


vehement controversies among later Brahminical commentators, and


have caused considerable perplexity to Anglo-Indian Judges, bound


as they are to elicit consistent doctrine from the Hindoo legal


texts. 'All the property which a woman may have acquired by


inheritance, purchase, partition, seizure, or finding,' is a


comprehensive description of all the forms of property as defined


by the modes of acquisition, and, if all this be Stridhan, it


follows that the ancient Hindoo law secured to married women, in


theory at all events, an even greater degree of proprietary


independence than that given to them by the modern English


Married Women's Property Act. No doubt there is much difficulty


in understanding this. The existing Hindoo written law, which is


a mixed body of religious, moral, and legal ordinances, is


pre-eminently distinguished by the strictness with which it


maintains a number of obligations plainly traceable to the


ancient despotism of the Family, and by its excessive harshness


to the personal and proprietary liberty of women. Among the Aryan


sub-races, the Hindoos may be as confidently asserted as the


Romans to have had their society organised as a collection of


patriarchally governed families. If, then, at any early period,


the married woman had among the Hindoos her property altogether


enfranchised from her husband's control, it is not easy to give a


reason why the obligations of the family despotism were relaxed


in this one particular. In point of fact, there is no clue to the


mystery so long as we confine our attention to the Hindoo law,


and no course is open to a Judge except to take his stand on the


one ancient authority I have quoted or to follow the great bulk


of modern authorities who repudiate the doctrine of the


Mitakshara on this point. The Anglo-Indian Courts have now


substantially decided that Hindoo law (with the possible


exception of that current in Western India) limits the Stridhan


to property given to the woman at her marriage either by her


family or by her husband ('Madras High Court Reports,' iii. 312).


I think, however, that if we extend our examination to other


bodies of Aryan custom, we may partly understand the amplitude


which the Mitakshara, one of the most archaic of Hindoo


compendia, assigns to the Stridhan. A full enquiry would take me


much beyond the limits which I have proposed to myself in this


Lecture, but its results would shortly be these. Among the Aryan


communities as a whole, we find the earliest traces of the


separate property of women in the widely disused ancient


institution known as the Bride-Price. Part of this price, which


was paid by the bridegroom either at the wedding or the day after


it, went to the bride's father as compensation for the


Patriarchal or Family authority which was transferred to the


husband, but another part went to the bride herself and was very


generally enjoyed by her separately and kept apart from her


husband's property. It further appears that under a certain


number of Aryan customs the proprietary rights of other kinds


which women slowly acquired were assimilated to their rights in


their portion of the Bride-Price, probably as being the only


existing type of woman's property. The exact extent of the


separate ownership which the ancient Irish law allowed to married


women is still uncertain, but undoubtedly they had some power of


dealing with their own property without the consent of their


husbands, and this was one of the institutions expressly declared


by the Judges to be illegal at the beginning of the seventeenth


century.


    If then the Stridhan had a pre-historic origin in the


Bride-Price, its growth and decay become more intelligible. First


of all it was property conferred on the wife by the husband 'at


the nuptial fire,' as the sacerdotal Hindoo lawyers express it.


Next it came to include what the Romans called the dos, property


assigned to the wife at her marriage by her own family. The next


stage may very well have been reached only in certain parts of


India, and the rules relating to it may only have found their way


into the doctrine of certain schools; but still there is nothing


contrary to the analogies of legal history in the extension of


the Stridhan until it included all the property of a married


woman. The really interesting question is how came the law to


retreat after apparently advancing farther than the Middle Roman


Law in the proprietary enfranchisement of women, and what are the


causes of the strong hostility of the great majority of Hindoo


lawyers to the text of the Mitakshara, of which the authority


could not be wholly denied? There are in fact clear indications


of a sustained general effort on the part of the Brahminical


writers on mixed law and religion, to limit the privileges of


women which they seem to have found recognised by older


authorities. The attention of English and European students of


the Hindoo law books was first attracted to this subject by a


natural desire to scrutinise the sacred texts upon which the


Brahmin learned were in the habit of insisting in defence of the


abominable practice of Suttee or widow-burning. The discovery was


soon made that the oldest monuments of law and religion gave no


countenance to the rite, and the conclusion was at once drawn


that, even on Hindoo principles, it was an unlawful innovation.


This mode of reasoning undoubtedly gave comfort to many devout


Hindoos, whom no secular argument could have reconciled to the


abandonment of a custom of proved antiquity; but still, in itself


it was unsound. The disuse of all practices which a scholar could


show to be relatively modern would dissolve the whole Hindoo


system. These inquiries, pushed much farther, have shown that the


Hindoo laws, religious and civil, have for centuries been


undergoing transmutation, development, and, in some points,


depravation at the hands of successive Brahminical expositors,


and that no rules have been so uniformly changed -- as we should


say, for the worse -- as those which affect the legal position of


women.


    It will probably be conceded by all who have paid any


attention to our subject, that the civilised societies of the


West, in steadily enlarging the personal and proprietary


independence of women, and even in granting to them political


privilege, are only follow ing out still farther a law of


development which they have been obeying for many centuries. The


society, which once consisted of compact families, has got


extremely near to the condition in which it will consist


exclusively of individuals, when it has finally and completely


assimilated the legal position of women to the legal position of


men. In addition to many other objections which may be urged


against the common allegation that the legal disabilities of


women are merely part of the tyranny of sex over sex, it is


historically and philosophically valueless, as indeed are most


propositions concerning classes so large as sexes. What really


did exist is the despotism of groups over the members composing


them. What really is being relaxed is the stringency of this


despotism. Whether this relaxation is destined to end in utter


dissolution -- whether, on the other hand, under the influence


either of voluntary agreement or of imperative law, society is


destined to crystallise in new forms -- are questions upon which


it is not now material to enter, even if there were any hope of


solving them. All we need at present note is that the so-called


enfranchisement of women is merely a phase of a process which has


affected very many other classes, the substitution of individual


human beings for compact groups of human beings as the units of


society. Now, it is true that in the legal institutions of the


Hindoos (political institutions, I need scarcely say, for many


centuries they have had none) the despotism of the family group


over the men and women composing it is maintained in greater


completeness than among any society of similar civilisation and


culture. Yet there is abundant evidence that the emancipation of


the individual from the family had proceeded some way, even


before the country had come under the Western influences through


the British dominion. If I were to give you the full proof of


this, I should have to take you through much of the detail of


Hindoo law. I will mention one indication of it, because few are


aware that the peculiarity in question serves as a sort of test


by which we can distinguish very ancient or undeveloped from


comparatively matured and developed law.


    All beginners in law have heard of the difference between


distributing an inheritance per stirpes and distributing it per


capita. A man has two sons, one of whom has eight children, and


the other two. The grandfather dies, his two sons having died


before him, and the grandfather's property has to be divided


between the grandchildren. If the division is per stirpes the


stocks of the two sons will be kept separate, and one half of the


inheritance will be distributed between the eight grandchildren,


and the other half between the two. If the division is per capita


the property will be equally divided between the whole ten


grandchildren, share and share alike. Now the tendency of matured


and developed law is to give a decided preference to distribution


per stirpes; it is only with remote classes of relatives that it


abandons the distinctions between the stocks and distributes the


property per capita. But in this, as in several other


particulars, very ancient and undeveloped law reverses the ideas


of the modern jurist, and uniformly prefers distribution per


capita, exactly equal division between all the surviving members


of the family; and this is apparently on the principle that, all


having been impartially subject to a despotism which knew no


degrees, all ought to share equally on the dissolution of the


community by the death of its chief. A preference for division


per stirpes, a minute care for the preservation of the stocks, is


in fact very strong evidence of the growth of a respect for


individual interests inside the family, distinct from the


interests of the family group as a whole. This is why the place


given to distribution per stirpes shows that a given system of


law has undergone development, and it so happens that this place


is very large in Hindoo law, which is extremely careful of the


distinction between stocks, and maintains them through long lines


of succession.


    Let us now turn to the causes which in the Hindoo law, and in


the great alternative Aryan system, the Roman law, have


respectively led to the disengagement of the individual from the


group. So far as regards the Roman institutions, we know that


among the most powerful solvent influences were certain


philosophical theories, of Greek origin, which had deep effect on


the minds of the jurists who guided the development of the law.


The law, thus transformed by a doctrine which had its most


distinct expression in the famous proposition, 'all men are


equal,' was spread over much of the world by Roman legislation.


The empire of the Romans, for one reason alone, must be placed in


a totally different class from the Oriental despotisms, ancient


and modern, and even from the famous Athenian Empire. All these


last were tax-taking empires, which exercised little or no


interference in the customs of village-communities or tribes. But


the Roman Empire, while it was a tax-taking, was also a


legislating empire. It crushed out local customs, and substituted


for them institutions of its own. Through its legislation alone


it effected so great an interruption in the history of a large


part of mankind, nor has it had any parallel except -- and the


comparison is very imperfect -- the modern British Empire in


India. There is no reason to suppose that philosophical theory


had any serious influence on the jurisprudence of the Hindoos. I


speak with reserve on the subject, but I believe that none of the


remarkable philosophical theories which the genius of the race


produced are founded on a conception of the individual as


distinct from that of the group in which he is born. From those


of them with which I happen to be acquainted, I should say that


their characteristics are of exactly the reverse order, and that


they have their nearest counterpart in certain philosophical


systems of our own day, under which the individual seems lost in


some such conception as that of Humanity. What, then, was the


influence (for some influence there certainly was) which,


operating on the minds of the Brahminical jurists, led them to


assign to the individual rights distinct from those which would


have belonged to him through mere membership in the family group?


I conceive that it was the influence of Religion. Wherever among


any part of Hindoo society there prevailed the conviction of


responsibility after death -- whether that responsibility was to


be enforced by direct rewards and punishments, or through the


stages of the metempsychosis -- the conception of the individual,


who was to suffer separately and enjoy separately, was


necessarily realised with extreme distinctness.


    The portions of the race strongly affected by religious


belief of this kind were exactly those for which the Brahminical


jurists legislated, and at first they probably legislated for


these alone. But with the notion of responsibility after death


the notion of expiation was always associated. Building upon this


last notion, the Brahminical commentators gradually transformed


the whole law until it became an exemplification of what Indian


lawyers call the doctrine of Spiritual Benefit. Inasmuch as the


condition of the dead could be ameliorated by proper expiatory


rites, the property descending or devolving on a man came to be


regarded by these writers partly as a fund for paying the


expenses of the ceremonial by which the soul of the person from


whom the inheritance came could be redeemed from suffering or


degradation, and partly as a reward for the proper performance of


the sacrifices. There ought to be nothing to surprise us in the


growth of such a doctrine, since it is only distinguished, by its


logical completeness, from one which had great influence on


Western jurisprudence. The interest which from very early times


the Church claimed in the moveable or personal property of


deceased persons is best explained by its teaching that the first


and best destination of a dead man's goods was to purchase masses


for his soul, and out of this view of the proper objects of


wealth the whole testamentary and intestate jurisdiction of the


Ecclesiastical Courts appears to have grown. But in India the law


constructed on these principles became extremely unfavourable to


the ownership of property by women, apparently because its


priestly authors thought that women, through their physical


weakness and their seclusion (which was doubtless regarded as


unavoidable), would have much greater difficulty than men, amid a


society always more or less disturbed, in applying a proper share


of the property to the funeral ceremonies of the person who had


transmitted it. The reasoning on the subject current even in


comparatively ancient times is thus given in the Mitakshara; 'The


wealth of a regenerate man is designed for religious uses, and a


woman's succession to such property is unfit because she is not


competent to the performance of religious rites.' The compiler of


the Mitakshara who has preserved the liberal rule as to Stridhan


which I before referred to, combats this doctrine, not, however,


by affirming the capacity of women for sacrifice, but by denying


that all property is intended for religious uses, and by pointing


out that certain acts which a female owner can do are of a


quasi-religious character, e.g., she may dig tanks. (Mitakshara,


ii. 1, 22, 23, 24.) And, putting him aside, the Brahminical


commentators who succeed one another in the Hindoo juridical


schools show a visibly increasing desire to connect all property


with the discharge of sacrificial duties, and with this desire


the reluctance to place property in the hands of women is somehow


connected.


    On the whole the successive generations of Hindoo lawyers


show an increasing hostility to the institution of the Stridhan,


not by abolishing it, but by limiting to the utmost of their


power the circumstances under which it can arise. Minute


distinctions are drawn between the various modes in which


property may devolve upon a woman, and the conditions under which


such property may become Stridhan made rare and exceptional. The


aim of the lawyers was to add to the family stock, and to place


under the control of the husband as much as they could of


whatever came to the wife by inheritance or gift; but whenever


the property does satisfy the multifarious conditions laid down


for the creation of the Stridhan, the view of it as emphatically


'woman's property' is carried out with a logical consistency very


suggestive of the character of the ancient institution on which


the Brahminical jurists made war. Not only has the woman


singularly full power of dealing with the Stridhan -- not only is


the husband debarred from intermeddling with it, save in extreme


distress -- but, when the proprietress dies, there is a special


order of succession to her property, which is manifestly intended


to give a preference, wherever it is possible, to female


relatives over males.


    Let me add that the account which I have given you of the


probable liberality of the Hindoo institutions to females at some


long past period of their development, and of the dislike towards


this liberality manifested by the Brahminical lawyers, is not to


be regarded as fanciful or purely conjectural, although,


doubtless, we can only guess at the explanation of it. It is


borne out by a very considerable number of indications, one of


which I mention as of great but very painful interest. The most


liberal of the Hindoo schools of jurisprudence, that prevailing


in Bengal Proper, gives a childless widow the enjoyment of her


husband's property, under certain restrictive conditions, for her


life; and in this it agrees with many bodies of unwritten local


custom. If there are male children, they succeed at once; but if


there are none the widow comes in for her life before the


collateral relatives. At the present moment, marriages among the


upper classes of Hindoos being very commonly infertile, a


considerable portion of the soil of the wealthiest Indian


province is in the hands of childless widows as tenants for life.


But it was exactly in Bengal Proper that the English, on entering


India, found the Suttee, or widow-burning, not merely an


occasional, but a constant and almost universal practice with the


wealthier classes, and, as a rule, it was only the childless


widow, and never the widow with minor children, who burnt herself


on her husband's funeral pyre. There is no question that there


was the closest connection between the law and the religious


custom, and the widow was made to sacrifice herself in order that


her tenancy for life might be got out of the way. The anxiety of


her family that the rite should be performed, which seemed so


striking to the first English observers of the practice, was, in


fact, explained by the coarsest motives; but the Brahmins who


exhorted her to the sacrifice were undoubtedly influenced by a


purely professional dislike to her enjoyment of property. The


ancient rule of the civil law, which made her tenant for life,


could not be got rid of, but it was combated by the modern


institution which made it her duty to devote herself to a


frightful death.


    If the Stridhan of the Hindoos is a form of married women's


separate property, which has been disliked and perverted by the


professional classes who had the power to modify it, the


institution which was first the dos of the Romans, and is now the


dot of Continental Europe, has received a singular amount of


artificial encouragement. I have endeavoured to describe to you


how it originated, but I have yet to state that it entered into


one of the most famous social experiments of the Roman Empire. A


well-known statute of the emperor Augustus, celebrated by Horace


in an official ode as the prince's greatest legislative


achievement, had for its object the encouragement and regulation


of marriage and the imposition of penalties on celibacy. Among


the chief provisions of this 'Lex Julia et Papia Poppoea' -- to


give its full title -- was a clause compelling opulent parents to


create portions, or dotes, for their marriageable daughters. This


provision of a statute, which very deeply affected the Roman law


in many ways, must have met with general approval, for at a later


date we find the same principle applied to the donatio propter


nuptias, or settlement on the married couple from the husband's


side. In the matured Roman law, therefore, singular as it may


seem to us, parents were under a statutory obligation to make


settlements on their children.


    It has been rather the fashion to speak of these experiments


of the Roman Emperors on public morality as if they totally


miscarried -- I suppose, from some idea that the failure added to


the credit of the moral regeneration effected by Christianity.


But, as a matter of fact, the Christian Church conferred few


civil benefits of greater moment to several generations of


mankind than in keeping alive the traditions of the Roman


legislation respecting settled property, and in strenuously


exerting itself to extend and apply the principles of these


disciplinary laws. There can be no serious question that, in its


ultimate result, the disruption of the Roman Empire was very


unfavourable to the personal and proprietary liberty of women. I


purposely say, 'in its ultimate result,' in order to avoid a


learned controversy as to their position under purely Teutonic


customs. It is very possible that the last stages of the process,


which it is difficult to call anything but feudalisation, were


more unfavourable to women than the earlier changes, which were


exclusively due to the infusion of Germanic usage; but, at any


rate, the place of women under the new system when fully


organised was worse than it was under Roman law, and would have


been very greatly worse but for the efforts of the Church. One


standing monument of these efforts we have constantly before us


in the promise of the husband in the Marriage service, 'With all


my worldly goods, I thee endow;' a formula which sometimes


puzzles the English lawyer, from its want of correspondence with


anything which he finds among the oldest rules of English law.


The words have, indeed, been occasionally used in English legal


treatises, as the text of a disquisition on the distinction


between Roman dos, to which they are supposed to refer, and the


doarium, which is the 'dower' of lands known to English law. The


fact is, however, that the tradition which the Church was


carrying on was the general tradition of the Roman dos, the


practical object being to secure for the wife a provision of


which the husband could not wantonly deprive her, and which would


remain to her after his death. The bodies of customary law which


were built up over Europe were, in all matters of first


principle, under ecclesiastical influences; but the particular


applications of a principle once accepted were extremely various.


The dower of lands in English law, of which hardly a shadow


remains, but under which a wife surviving her husband took a


third of the rents and profits of his estates for life, belonged


to a class of institutions widely spread over Western Europe,


very similar in general character, often designated as doarium,


but differing considerably in detail. They unquestionably had


their origin in the endeavours of the Church to revive the Roman


institution of the compulsory dos, which, in this sense, produced


the doarium, even though the latter may have had a partially


Germanic origin, and even though it occasionally assume (as it


unquestionably does) a shape very different from the original


institution. I myself believe that another effect of this


persistent preaching and encouragement is to be found in the


strong feeling which is diffused through much of Europe, and


specially through the Latinised societies, in favour of dotation,


or portioning of daughters, a feeling which seldom fails to


astonish a person acquainted with such a country as France by its


remarkable intensity. It is an economical power of considerable


importance, for it is the principal source of those habits of


saving and hoarding which characterise the French people, and I


regard it as descended, by a long chain of succession, from the


obligatory provisions of the marriage law of the Emperor


Augustus.


    The importance and interest of our subject, when treated in


all its bearings and throughout its whole history, are quite


enough to excuse me, I trust, for having detained you with an


account of its obscure beginnings. It has been said that the


degree in which the personal immunity and proprietary capacity of


women are recognised in a particular state or community is a test


of its degree of advance in civilisation; and, though the


assertion is sometimes made without the qualifications which are


necessary to give it value, it is very far indeed from being a


mere gallant commonplace. For, inasmuch as no class of similar


importance and extent was, in the infancy of society, placed in a


position of such absolute dependence as the other sex, the degree


in which this dependence has step by step been voluntarily


modified and relaxed, serves undoubtedly as a rough measure of


tribal, social, national capacity for self-control -- of that


same control which produces wealth by subduing the natural


appetite of living for the present, and which fructifies in art


and learning through subordinating a material and immediate to a


remote, intangible, and spiritual enjoyment. The assertion, then,


that there is a relation between civilisation and the proprietary


capacities of women is only a form of the truth that every one of


those conquests, the sum of which we call civilisation, is the


result of curbing some one of the strongest, because the primary,


impulses of human nature. If we were asked why the two societies


with which we have been concerned -- the Hindoos on the one hand,


and the Romans and all the races to which they have bequeathed


their institutions on the other -- have had so widely different a


history, no reply can be very confidently given, so difficult is


it, among the vast variety of influences acting on great


assemblages of men, to single out any one or any definite number


of them, and to be sure that these have operated more powerfully


than the rest. Yet, if it were absolutely necessary to give an


answer, it would consist in pointing to the difference in their


social history which has been the subject of this lecture, and in


observing that one steadily carried forward, while the other


recoiled from, the series of changes which put an end to the


seclusion and degradation of an entire sex.














Lecture V













The Chief and His Order













    Nothing seems to me to have been more clearly shown by recent






researches than the necessity of keeping apart the Tribe and the






Tribal Chief as distinct sources of positive institutions. The






lines of descent are constantly entwined, but each of them is






found to run up in the end to an independent origin. If I were to






apply this assertion to political history, I should be only






repeating much of what has been said by Mr Freeman in his






excellent work on 'Comparative Politics.' Confining myself to the






history of private institutions, let me observe that the






distinction which I have drawn should be carefully borne in mind






by those who desire to penetrate to the beginnings of Property in






Land. The subject has been greatly obscured by the practice, now






brought home to the early writers on feudal law, of






systematically passing over or misconstruing all forms of






proprietary enjoyment which they could not explain on their own






principles; and hitherto the truth has only been directly seen






through some of the rules of tenure. It may now, however, be laid






down without rashness that Property in Land, as known to






communities of the Aryan race, has had a twofold origin. It has






arisen partly from the disentanglement of the individual rights






of the kindred or tribesmen from the collective rights of the






Family or Tribe, and partly from the growth and transmutation of






the sovereignty of the Tribal Chief. The phenomena attributable






to the double process seem to me easily distinguishable from one






another. Both the sovereignty of the Chief and the ownership of






land by the Family or Tribe were in most of Western Europe passed






through the crucible of feudalism; but the first reappeared in






some well-marked characteristics of military or knightly tenures,






and the last in the principal rules of non-noble holdings, and






among them of Socage, the distinctive tenure of the free farmer.






The status of the Chief has thus left us one bequest in the rule






of Primogeniture, which, however, has long lost its most ancient






form; another in the right to receive certain dues and to enforce






certain monopolies; and a third in a specially absolute form of






property which was once exclusively enjoyed by the Chief, and






after him by the Lord, in the portion of the tribal territory






which formed his own domain. On the other hand, several systems






of succession after death, and among them the equal division of






the land between the children, have sprung out of tribal






ownership in various stages of decay; and it has left another set






of traces (not quite so widely extended), in a number of minute






customary rules which govern tillage and occasionally regulate






the distribution of the produce.






    The fate of this double set of institutions in England and in






France appears to me most instructive. I have frequently dwelt in






this place on the erroneousness of the vulgar opinion which dates






the extreme subdivision of the soil of France from the first






French Revolution, and from the sale of the Church lands and of






the estates of the emigrant nobility. A writer -- I was going to






say as commonly read as Arthur Young, but certainly as often






mentioned as if he were commonly read -- notices this






morcellement, on the very eve of the French Revolution, and






immediately after it, as the great feature which distinguished






France from England. 'From what we see in England,' he says,






('Travels in 1787, '88, and, '89' p. 407) ' we cannot form an






idea of the abundance in France of small properties, that is,






little farms belonging to those who cultivate them.' He estimates






that more than a third of the kingdom was occupied by them -- a






very large proportion, when the extent of Church land in France






is taken into account; but recent French investigations have






shown reasons for thinking that the true proportion was still






larger, and that it was rather growing than diminishing, through






that extravagance of the nobles which Court life fostered, and






which compelled them to sell their domains to peasants in small






parcels. Young clearly saw that this subdivision of the soil was






the result of some legal rule; and strongly dissenting from the






Revolutionary leaders who wished to carry it farther, he declared






that 'a law ought to be passed to render all division below a






certain number of arpents illegal.'






    It seems to have very generally escaped notice that the law






of equal or nearly equal division after death was the general law






of France. The rule of primogeniture was of exceptional






application, and was for the most part confined to lands held by






knightly tenure; indeed, in the South of France, where the custom






of equal division was strengthened by the identical rule of the






Roman jurisprudence, the privileges of the eldest son were only






secured by calling in the exceptional rules of which the Roman






Law gives the benefit to milites (or soldiers on service) when






making their wills or regulating their successions, and by laying






down that every chevalier, and every noble of higher degree, was






a miles within the meaning of the Roman juridical writers. The






two systems of succession and the two forms of property lay side






by side, and there were men alive quite recently who could






remember the bitter animosities caused by their co-existence and






antagonism. A very great part of the land held by laymen belonged






to the peasantry, and descended according to the rule of equal






division, but eldest son after eldest son succeeded to the






signory. Yet it was not the rule of primogeniture followed in






noble descents which was the true grievance; at most it became a






grievance under the influence of the peculiar vein of sentiment






introduced by Rousseau. The legacy from tribal sovereignty to






signorial privilege, which was really resented, was that which I






placed second in order. The right to receive feudal dues and to






enforce petty monopolies, now almost extinguished in England by






the measures to which the Copyhold Commission has given effect,






had ceased long before the end of the last century to be of any






considerable importance to the class which was invested with it;






but M. de Tocqueville has explained, in his 'Ancien Rgime' (i.






18), that it made up almost the entire means of living which the






majority of the French nobility possessed. A certain number of






noblemen, besides their feudal rights, had their terres, or






domain, belonging to them in absolute property, and sometimes of






enormous extent; and the wealthiest members of this limited






class, the grands, who so frequently appear in French Court






history, but who, away from the Court, were much the most






respected and beloved of their order, formed the counterpart,






from the legal point of view, of the English landed proprietary.






The rest of the nobles lived mainly, not on rent, but on their






feudal dues, and eked out a meagre subsistence by serving the






King in arms. The sense of property in the soil was thus not in






the lord but in the peasantry; and the peasantry viewed the






exercise of signorial rights with a feeling closely akin to that






which is inspired by a highly oppressive tax. The condition of






sentiment produced by it is even now a political force of some






moment in France; and a similar, though a far weaker, repulsion






is known to have been caused in this country by the taking of






tithes in kind. It is a significant fact that, where the






ownership is acknowledged to reside in the superior holder, the






exaction of even an extreme rent from the tenants below has very






rarely been regarded with the same bitterness of resentment.






    The change, therefore, which took place in France at the






first Revolution was this: the land-law of the people superseded






the land-law of the nobles, In England the converse process has






been gone through, and what has occurred is obviously in harmony






with much else in English history. The system of the nobles has






become in all essential particulars the system of the people. The






rule of primogeniture, which once applied only to knightly






holdings, came to apply to the great bulk of English tenures,






except the Gavelkind of Kent and some others of merely local






importance. This part of the change took place at a remote epoch,






and its circumstances are involved in much obscurity; and we know






little more of it with certainty than that it was rapidly






proceeding between the time at which Glanville and the time at






which Bracton wrote. Glanville, probably not earlier than the






thirty-third year of Henry the Second's reign, expresses himself






as if the general rule of law caused lands held by free






cultivators in socage to be divided equally between all the male






children at the death of the last owner; Bracton, probably not






later than the fifty-second year of Henry the Third, writes as if






the rule of primogeniture applied universally to military tenures






and generally to socage tenures. But another branch of the






process was postponed almost to our own day. Possibly not many






Englishmen have recognised with as much clearness as a recent






French writer (Doniol, 'La Revolution Franaise et la Fodalit*')






that the transmutation of customary and copyhold into freehold






property, which has been proceeding for about forty years under






the conduct of the Copyhold and Enclosure Commissioners, is the






peaceful and insensible removal of a grievance which did more






than any other to bring about the first French Revolution and to






prevent the re-establishment of the ancient political order. But






long before there was a Copyhold Commission, the great mass of






English landed property had assumed certain characteristics which






strongly distinguished it from the peasant property of the






Continent as it existed before it was affected by the French






Codes, and as it is still found in some countries. This last form






of proprietorship was very generally fettered by the duty of






cultivation in some particular way, and, as a rule, could not be






dealt with so as to bar the rights reserved to the children and






widow of the owner by the law of succession. The traces of a






similar species of ownership, probably once widely diffused, may






still be here and there discerned through the customs of






particular English manors. I repeat the opinion which I expressed






three years ago, that our modern English conception of absolute






property in land is really descended from the special






proprietorship enjoyed by the Lord, and more anciently by the






tribal Chief, in his own Domain. It would be out of place to






enter here on a discussion of the changes which seem to me






desirable in order to make the soil of England as freely






exchangeable as the theory now generally accepted demands; but to






the principle of several and absolute property in land I hold






this country to be committed. I believe I state the inference






suggested by all known legal history when I say that there can be






no material advance in civilisation unless landed property is






held by groups at least as small as Families; and I again remind






you that we are indebted to the peculiarly absolute English form






of ownership for such an achievement as the cultivation of the






soil of North America.






    Before describing to you the new light which the Ancient Laws






of Ireland throw on the primitive condition of the institutions






of which I have been speaking, let me give you one word of






caution as to the statements of modern Irish writers respecting






the original relations of the Irish Tribe and of the Irish Tribal






Chief. Unhappily the subject has been discussed in the spirit of






the later agrarian history of Ireland. On the one hand, some






disputants have thought to serve a patriotic purpose by






contending that the land of each Tribe belonged absolutely to






itself and was its common property, and that the Chief was a mere






administrative officer, rewarded for his services in making a






fair distribution of the territory among the tribesmen by a






rather larger share of its area than the rest, which was allotted






to him as his domain. Contrariwise, some writers, not perhaps






actuated by much kindliness to the Irish people, have at least






suggested that they were always cruelly oppressed by their






superiors, and probably by their natural chiefs more than any






others. These authors point to the strong evidence of oppression






by the Chiefs which the books of the English observers of Ireland






contain. Edmund Spenser and Sir John Davis cannot have merely






intended to calumniate the Irish native aristocracy when they






emphatica1ly declared that the 'chiefs do most shamefully






rackrent their tenants,' and spoke with vehement indignation of






the exactions from which the tribesmen suffered, the 'coshering,'






and the 'coin and livery,' which occur over and over again in






their pages. A third school, of a very different order from






these, has representatives among the most learned Irishmen of our






day. They resent the assertion that the land belonged to the






tribe in common as practically imputing to the ancient Irish that






utter barbarism to which private property is unknown. They say






that traces of ownership jealously guarded are found in all parts






of the Brehon laws, and they are on the whole apt to speak of the






vassalage to the Chief which these laws attribute to the






tribesmen as if it implied something like modern tenancy in the






latter and modern ownership in the former. But they say that the






relation of landlord and tenant was regulated by careful and






kindly provisions, and they ascribe the degradation of the






system, like the other evils of Ireland, to English cupidity and






ignorance. The Norman nobles who first settled in Ireland are






well known to have become in time Chieftains of Irish Tribes; and






it is suggested that they were the first to forget their duties






to their tenants and to think of nothing but their privileges.






Nor is there anything incredible in this last assumption. An






English settler in India who buys land there is often reputed a






harder landlord than the native zemindars, his neighbours, not






because he intends to be harsher (indeed in some things he is






usually far more considerate and bountiful), but because he is






accustomed to a stricter system and cannot accommodate himself to






the loose and irregular play of relations between native






landowner and native tenant.






    I cannot wholly concur in any one of these theories






concerning Chief and Tribe. Each seems to me to contain a portion






of truth, but not the whole. Let me first say that the whole






land-system shadowed forth in the Brehon laws does seem to me to






have for its basis the primary ownership of the tribe-land by the






Tribe. It is also true that the Chief appears to exercise certain






administrative duties in respect of this land, and that he has a






specific portion of the tribe-land allotted to him, in the






vicinity of his residence or stronghold, for the maintenance of






his household and relatives. But this is not all. As we see the






system through the law, it is not stationary, but shifting,






developing, disintegrating, re-combining. Even according to the






texts apparently oldest, much of the tribal territory appears to






have been permanently alienated to sub-tribes, families, or






dependent chiefs; and the glosses and commentaries show that,






before they were written, this process had gone very far indeed.






Whatever, again, may have been the original dignity and authority






of the Chief, they are plainly growing, not merely through the






introduction of alien principles and ideas, but from natural






causes, more or less operative all over Europe. The general






character of these causes is very much the same as in the






Germanic countries. The power of the Chief grows first through






the process which is called elsewhere 'commendation,' the process






by which the free tribesman becomes 'his man,' and remains in a






state of dependence having various degrees. It farther grows from






his increasing authority over the waste-lands of the tribal






territory and from the servile or semi-servile colonies he plants






there; and lastly, it augments from the material strength which






he acquires through the numbers of his immediate retainers and






associates, most of whom stand to him in more or less servile






relations. But the Brehon law tells us much that is novel and






surprising concerning the particular course of these changes and






their nature in detail. It furnishes us with some wholly new






ideas concerning the pas sage of society from inchoate to






complete feudalism, and helps us to complete the account of it






derived from Germanic sources. In this, as it seems to me, the






greatest part of its interest consists.






    With the Chieftaincy of the Tribe the early history of modern






Aristocracy and modern Kingship begins. These two great






institutions had, in fact, at first the same history, and the






Western world long continued to bear the marks of their original






identity. The Manor with its Tenemental lands held by the free






tenants of the Lord, and with its Domain which was in immediate






dependence on him, was the type of all the feudal sovereignties






in their complete form, whether the ruler acknowledged a superior






above him or whether he at most admitted one in the Pope, or the






Emperor, or God himself. In every County, or Dukedom, or Kingdom






there were great tenants holding directly of its head and on some






sort of parity with him; and there was a Domain under his more






immediate government and at his immediate disposal. There is no






obscurer and more difficult subject than the origin of the class






whose power was the keystone of all these political and






proprietary constructions, and none on which the scantiest






contributions to our knowledge are more welcome.






    There is one view of the original condition of privileged






classes which, though held by learned men, has been a good deal






weakened of late by German research, and seems to me still






farther shaken by portions of the Brehon law. This is the






impression that they always constituted, as they practically do






now, a distinct class or section of the community, each member of






the class standing in a closer relation to the other members than






to the rest of the national or tribal society to which all






belong. It cannot be doubted that the earliest modern






aristocracies have as a fact, when they are first discerned, this






particular aspect. Mr Freeman ('Norman Conquest,' i. 88) says






that the 'difference between eorl and ceorl is a primary fact






from which we start.' Tacitus plainly distinguished the noble






from the non-noble freeman in the Germanic societies which he






observed; and Caesar, as I stated in another Lecture, divides all






the Continental Celtic tribes into the Equites and the Plebs. We






can understand that a spectator looking at a set of tribal






communities from the outside would naturally class together all






men visibly exalted above the rest; but nevertheless this is not






quite the appearance which early Germanic society wears in the






eyes of enquirers who follow the method of Von Maurer and Landau.






Each Chief or Lord appears to them to have been noble less with






reference to other noblemen than with reference to the other free






tribesmen comprised in the same group with himself. Nobility has






many diverse origins; but its chief source seems to have been the






respect of co-villagers or assemblages of kinsmen for the line of






descent in which the purest blood of each little society was






believed to be preserved. Similarly, the Brehon law suggests that






the Irish Chiefs were not the class by themselves which the






corresponding order among the Continental Celts appeared to






Caesar to be, but were necessarily the heads of separate groups






composed of their kindred or of their vassals. 'Every chief,'






says the text which I quoted before, 'rules over his land,






whether it be great or whether it be small.' And while the Irish






law describes the way (as I shall point out) in which a common






freeman can become a chief, it also shows that the position to






which he attains is the presidency of a group of dependants.






Nevertheless the persons thus elevated undoubtedly tend to






become, from various causes, a class by themselves and a special






section of the general community; and it is very probable that






the tendency was at work from the earliest times. It is farther






to be remarked that some aristocracies were really a section of






the community from the very first. This structure of society is






produced where one entire tribal group conquers or imposes its






supremacy upon other tribal groups also remaining entire, or






where an original body of tribesmen, villagers, or citizens,






gradually gathers round itself a miscellaneous assemblage of






protected dependants. There are many known instances of both






processes, and the particular relation of tribal groups which the






former implies was certainly not unknown to the Celtic societies.






Among the Scottish Highlanders some entire septs or clans are






stated to have been enslaved to others; and on the very threshold






of Irish history we meet with a distinction between free and






rent-paying tribes which may possibly imply the same kind of






superiority and subordination.






    The circumstance of greatest novelty in the position of the






Chief which the Brehon law appears to me to bring out is this:






Whatever else a Chief is, he is before all things a rich man;






not, however, rich, as popular assoCiations would lead us to






anticipate, in land, but in live stock -- in flocks and herds, in






sheep, and before all things in oxen. Here let me interpose the






remark, that the opposition commonly set up between birth and






wealth, and particularly wealth other than landed property, is






entirely modern. In French literature, so far as my knowledge






extends, it first appears when the riches of the financial






officers of the French monarchy -- the Superintendents and






Farmers General -- begin to attract attention. With us it seems






to be exclusively the result of the great extension and






productiveness of industrial undertakings on the largest scale.






But the heroes of the Homeric poems are not only valiant but






wealthy (Odyss. xiv. 96-106); the warriors of the Nibelungen-Lied






are not only noble but rich. In the later Greek literature we






find pride of birth identified with pride in seven wealthy






ancestors in succession, epta pappoi plonsioi; and you are well






aware how rapidly and completely the aristocracy of wealth






assimilated itself in the Roman State to the aristocracy of






blood. Passing to the Irish Chief, we find the tract called the






'Cain-Aigillne' laying down (p. 279) that 'the head of every






tribe should be the man of the tribe who is the most experienced,






the most noble, the most wealthy, the most learned, the most






truly popular, the most powerful to oppose, the most steadfast to






sue for profits and to be sued for losses.' There are many other






passages to the same effect; and on closely examining the system






(as I propose to do presently) we can perceive that personal






wealth was the principal condition of the Chief's maintaining his






position and authority.






    But while the Brehon laws suggest that the possession of






personal wealth is a condition of the maintenance of






chieftainship, they show with much distinctness that through the






acquisition of such wealth the road was always open to






chieftainship. We are not altogether without knowledge that in






some European societies the humble freeman might be raised by






wealth to the position which afterwards became modern nobility.






One fact, among the very few which are tolerably well ascertained






respecting the specific origin of particular modern aristocracies






is, that a portion of the Danish nobility were originally






peasants; and there are in the early English laws some traces of






a process by which a Ceorl might become a Thane. These might be






facts standing by themselves, and undoubtedly there is strong






reason to suspect that the commencements of aristocracy were






multifold: but the Brehon tracts point out in several places,






with legal minuteness, the mode in which a peasant freeman in






ancient Ireland could become a chief. There are few personages of






greater interest spoken of in these laws than the Bo-Aire,






literally the 'cow-nobleman.' He is, to begin with, simply a






peasant who has grown rich in cattle, probably through obtaining






the use of large portions of tribe-land. The true nobles, or






Aires -- a word striking from its consonance with words of






similar meaning in the Teutonic languages -- are divided, though






we can scarcely believe the classification to correspond with an






universal fact, into seven grades. Each grade is distinguished






from the others by the amount of wealth possessed by the Chief






belonging to it, by the weight attached to his evidence, by his






power of binding his tribe by contracts (literally of






'knotting'), by the dues which he receives in kind from his






vassals according to a system to be presently described, and by






his Honor-Price, or special damages incurred by injuring him. At






the bottom of the scale is the chief or noble called the






Aire-desa; and the Brehon law provides that when the Bo-Aire has






acquired twice the wealth of an Aire-desa, and has held it for a






certain number of generations, he becomes an Aire-desa himself.






The advantage secured to wealth does not, you see, exclude






respect for birth, but works into it. 'He is an inferior chief,'






says the 'Senchus Mor,' 'whose father was not a chief;' and there






are many other strong assertions of the reverence due to






inherited rank. The primary view of chieftainship is evidently






that it springs from purity or dignity of blood, but noble birth






is regarded as naturally associated with wealth, and he who






becomes rich gradually climbs to a position indistinguishable






from that which he would have occupied if he had been nobly born.






What is thus new in the system is the clear account of nobility






as a status, having its origin in the organic structure of






ancient society, but nevertheless in practice having perpetually






fresh beginnings.






    The enormous importance which belongs to wealth and specially






to wealth in cattle, in the early Aryan society reflected by the






Brehon tracts, helps, I think, to clear up one great difficulty






which meets us on the threshold of an enquiry into the origin of






aristocracies. I suppose that the popular theory on the subject






of the privileged class in modern communities is that it was






originally indebted for its status, if not for its power or






influence, to kingly favour. An Englishman once questioned the






Emperor Paul of Russia on the position of the Russian nobility.






'The only man who is noble in my dominions,' said the Czar, 'is






the man to whom I speak, for the time that I am speaking to him.'






I merely take these words as the strongest possible statement of






the view to which I am referring; but they were used by a monarch






with a disturbed brain, whose authority had contracted something






of an Oriental character from its long subordination to Tartar






power, and they were never absolutely true even of Russia. Among






ourselves, however, the favourite assumption seems certainly to






be, however slight may be the practical consequences we draw from






it, that all aristocratic privilege had its origin in kingly






grace; and this appears, on the whole, to be the theory of






English law. But the institutions of many parts of the Continent






long retained the traces of a different set of ideas, and these






were found where kingly power was actually much greater than in






England. The French Noblesse, before the Revolution, would as a






body have resented the assertion that they were a creation of the






King, and the Kings of France more than once admitted that they






were only the most exalted members of a class to which their own






nobility belonged.






    Kings have everywhere nowadays, and in many countries have






had for centuries, a monopoly of the power of ennobling. This






road to nobility has been so long trodden, that men in general






have almost forgotten there ever was another route. Yet






historical scholars have long known that nobility conferred by






royal grant was, in one sense, a modern institution, though they






have not succeeded in completely explaining how it came to






supplant or dwarf the institution upon which it was engrafted.






There seems to be no doubt that the first aristocracy springing






from kingly favour consisted of the Comitatus, or Companions of






the King. Although there is a good deal of evidence that the






class was at first considered in some way servile, it gradually






became in some countries the type of all nobility. A few






tolerably familiar facts may serve to remind us how remarkable






has been the fortune of the royal households all over Western






Europe. The Mayor of the Frankish Palace became King of the






Franks. The Chamberlain of the Romano-German Emperors is now the






German Emperor. The blood of the Steward of Scotland runs in the






veins of the Kings of England. The Constables of France






repeatedly shook or saved the French throne. Among ourselves the






great officers of the Royal Council and Household still take






precedence either of all Peers or of all Peers of their own






degree. Whence, then, came this great exaltation of the Mayor or






Count of the Palace, of the great Seneschal or Steward, of the






high Chancellor, the Great Chamberlain, and High Constable --






titles which, when they do not mark an office originally






clerical, point to an occupation which must at first have been






menial?






    It seems certain that the household sprang from very humble






beginnings. Tacitus describes the companions of the Germanic






chief as living with him in his house and supported by his






bounty. Mr Stubbs when stating ('Constitutional History,' p. 150)






that 'the gesiths of an (English) king were his guard and private






council,' observes that the 'free household servants of a ceorl






are also in a certain sense his gesiths.' The Companions of the






King appear also in the Irish legal literature, but they are not






noble, and they are associated with the king's body-guard, which






is essentially servile. The King of Erin, though he never existed






(strictly speaking), save for short intervals, yet always, so to






speak tended to exist, and the Crith Gablach, a Brehon tract of






which a translation is given at the end of Sullivan's edition of






O'Curry's Lectures, contains a picture of his palace and state.






The edifice intended to be described is apparently very much the






same as the great Icelandic house of which Mr Dasent, in the






'Story of Burnt Njal,' has attempted to give a drawing from the






descriptions found in Norse literature. In it the King feasts his






guests, from kings and king's sons to a ghastly company of






prisoners in fetters, the forfeited hostages of subject-chiefs or






sub-septs who have broken their engagements. The Companions are






there also, and they are stated to consist of his privileged






tenantry and of his body guard, which is composed of men whom he






has delivered from death, jail, or servitude, never (a






significant exception) of men whom he has saved on the






battle-field. I am afraid that the picture of Irish society






supplied by the Crith Gablach must throughout be regarded as to a






great extent ideal or theoretical; at any rate, there is much






testimony from English visitors to Ireland that many considerable






Irish Chiefs were much more humbly furnished out than the King of






Erin at Tara. Yet it is very likely that they all had Companions






attending them, and I suspect that the obligation of. maintaining






a little court had much to do with that strange privilege which






in later times had a deplorable history; the right of the Chief






to go with a following to the dwellings of his tenants and there






be feasted at the tenant's expense. That even petty Chiefs of the






Scottish Highlands had a retinue of the same character is known






to all who can recall that immortal picture of Celtic society






which for the first time brought it home to men who were nearly






our contemporaries that ancient Celtic life and manners had






existed almost down to their days -- the novel of 'Waverley.'






    It seems extremely probable that, in a particular stage of






society, this personal service to the Chief or King was






everywhere rendered in expectation of reward in the shape of a






gift of land. The Companions of the Teutonic kings, in






Continental Europe, shared largely in the Benefices-grants of






Roman provincial land fully peopled and stocked. In ancient






England the same class are believed to have been the largest






grantees of public land next to the Church; and doubtless we have






here part of the secret of the mysterious change by which a new






nobility of Thanes, deriving dignity and authority from the King,






absorbed the older nobility of Eorls. But we are a little apt to






forget the plentifulness of land in countries lying beyond the






northern and western limits of the Roman Empire, or just within






them. Mr Thorold Rogers, writing of a period relatively much






later, and founding his opinion on the extant evidence of returns






from manor-lands, speaks of land as the 'cheapest commodity of






the Middle Ages.' The practical difficulty was not to obtain






land, but the instruments for making it productive; and hence, in






a society older relatively than any Teutonic society of which we






have any distinct knowledge, that very society which the Brehon






tracts enable us to understand, it may very well have been that






the object of suit at court was much less to obtain land than to






obtain cattle. The Chief, as I have already said, was before all






things rich in flocks and herds. He was military leader, and a






great part of his wealth must have been spoil of war, but in his






civil capacity he multiplied his kine through his growing power






of appropriating the waste for pasture, and through a system of






dispersing his herds among the tribesmen, which will be described






in the next Lecture. The Companion who followed him to the foray,






or was ready to do so, cannot but have been enriched by his






bounty; and thus, if already noble, he became greater; if he was






not noble, the way to nobility lay through wealth. The passage






which I am about to read to you may serve to illustrate what






probably took place, though there is nothing except common






humanity to connect the tribes of whose customs it speaks with






the primitive Teutons and Celts. The Rev H. Dugmore, in a most






interesting volume, called a 'Compendium of Kafir Laws and






Customs,' and published at the Wesleyan Missionary Press, Mount






Coke, British Kaffraria, writes thus of much the most advanced of






the South African native races, the Kafirs or Zulus (p. 27): 'As






cattle constitute the sole wealth of the people, so they are






their only medium of such transactions as involve exchange,






payment, or reward. The retainers of a chief serve him for






cattle; nor is it expected that he could maintain his influence,






or indeed secure any number of followers, if unable to provide






them with what at once constitutes their money, food, and






clothing. He requires, then, a constant fund from which to






satisfy his dependants; and the amount of the fund required may






be judged of from the character of the demand made upon him. His






retinue, court, or whatever it is to be called, consists of men






from all parts of the tribe, the young, the clever, and the






brave, who come to do court service for a time, that they may






obtain cattle to furnish them with the means of procuring wives,






arms, or other objects of desire. On obtaining these they return






to their homes and give place to others. Thus the immediate






retinue of a chief is continually changing, and constitutes a






permanent drain on his resources.' Mr Dugmore goes on to state






that the sources of the chief's wealth are the inherited cattle






of his father, offerings made to him on the ceremony of his






circumcision, benevolences levied from his tribe, fines and






confiscations, and the results of predatory excursions.






    The remarkable part played by kine in ancient Irish society






will, I hope, be made more intelligible in the next Lecture.






Meantime, let me observe that the two Celtic societies included






in these islands which longest retained their ancient usages were






both notoriously given to the plunder of cattle. Lord Macaulay,






in speaking of Irish cattle-stealing, sometimes, I must own,






seems to me to express himself as if he thought the practice






attributable to some native vice of Irish character; but no doubt






it was what Mr Tylor has taught us to call a survival, an ancient






and inveterate habit, which in this case continued through the






misfortune which denied to Ireland the great condition of modern






legal ideas, a strong central government. The very same practice,






among the Celts of the Scottish Highlands and the rude Germanic






population of the Lowland Border, has almost been invested by one






man's genius with the dignity of a virtue. Again, turning to






'Waverley,' I suppose there is no truer representative of the






primitive Celtic chief than Donald Bean Lean, who drives the






cattle of Tully Veolan, and employs a soothsayer to predict the






number of beeves which are likely to come in his Way. He is a far






more genuine 'survival' than Fergus McIvor, who all but deserts






his cause for a disappointment about an earldom.






    It has been pointed out that the status of the King's






Companions was at first in some way servile. Whenever legal






expression has to be given to the relations of the Comitatus to






the Teutonic kings, the portions of the Roman law selected are






uniformly those which declare the semi-servile relation of the






Client or Freedman to his Patron. The Brehon law permits us to






take the same view of the corresponding class in Celtic






societies. Several texts indicate that a Chief of high degree is






always expected to surround himself with unfree dependants; and






you will recollect that the retinue of the King of Erin was to






consist not only of free tribesmen but of a bodyguard of men






bound to him by servile obligations. So far as it goes, I quite






agree with the explanation which Mr Freeman has given of the






original connection between servile status and that nobility with






which the primitive nobility of birth has become mixed up and






confounded. 'The lowly clientage,' he says, 'of the Roman






Patrician and the noble following of the Hellenic and Teutonic






leader may really come from the same source, and may both alike






be parts of the same primeval heritage.' (' Comparative






Politics,' p. 261.) But perhaps we may permit ourselves to go a






step beyond this account. The Comitatus or Companions of the






Chief, even when they were freemen, were not necessarily Or






ordinarily his near kindred. Their dependence on him, carrying






with it friendship and affection, would in modern societies place






them in a position well understood, and on something like an






equality with him; but in the beginning of things one man was






always the kinsman, the slave, or the enemy of another, and mere






friendship and affection would, by themselves, create no tie






between man and man. In order that they might have any reality,






they would have to be considered as establishing one of the






relations known to that stage of thought. Between equals this






would be assumed or fictitious kinship. But between the Chief who






embodied purity of tribal descent and his associates, it would






have more or less to follow the pattern of the slave's dependence






on his master, and, where the Companion was not actually the






Chief's slave, the bond which connected them would very probably






be adapted to the more honourable model furnished by the relation






between ex-slave and ex-master.























Lecture XIII





Sovereignty and Empire





    The word 'law' has come down to us in close association with


two notions, the notion of order and the notion of force. The


association is of considerable antiquity and is disclosed by a


considerable variety of languages, and the problem has repeatedly


suggested itself, which of the two notions thus linked together


is entitled to precedence over the other, which of them is first


in point of mental conception? The answer, before the Analytical


Jurists wrote, would on the whole have been that 'law' before all


things implied order. 'Law, in its most general and comprehensive


sense, signifies a rule of action, and is applied


indiscriminately to all kinds of action, whether animate or


inanimate, rational or irrational. Thus we say, the laws of


motion, of gravitation, of optics or mechanics, as well as the


laws of nature and of nations.' With these words Blackstone


begins that Chapter on 'the Nature of Laws in General,' which may


almost be said to have made Bentham and Austin into Jurists by


virtue of sheer repulsion. The Analytical Jurists, on the other


hand, lay down unhesitatingly that the notion of force has


priority over the notion of order. They say that a true law, the


command of an irresistible Sovereign, enjoins a class of acts or


a class of omissions either on a subject or on a number. of


subjects, placed by the command alike and indifferently under a


legal obligation. The characteristic which thus as a matter of


fact attaches to most true laws of binding a number of persons,


taken indifferently, to a number of acts or omissions, determined


generally, has caused the term 'law' to be extended by metaphor


to all uniformities or invariable successions in the physical


world, in the operations of the mind, or in the actions of


mankind. Law when used in such expressions as the Law of Gravity


the Law of Mental Association, or the Law of Rent is treated by


the Analytical Jurists as a word wrested from its true meaning by


an inaccurate figurative extension, and the sort of disrespect


with which they speak of it is extremely remarkable. But I


suppose that, if dignity and importance can properly be


attributed to a word, there are in our day few words more


dignified and more important than Law, in the sense of the


invariable succession of phenomena, physical, mental, or even


politico-economical. With this meaning, 'law' enters into a great


deal of modern thought, and has almost become the condition of


its being carried on. It is difficult at first to believe that


such an expression as 'the Reign of Law,' in the sense in which


the words have been popularised by the Duke of Argyll's book,


would have been strongly disliked by Austin; but his language


leaves little doubt on the point, and more than once reminds us


that, though his principal writings are not much more than forty


years old, he wrote before men's ideas were leavened to the


present depth by the sciences of experiment and observation. The


statement that, in all languages, Law primarily means the command


of a Sovereign, and has been applied derivatively to the orderly


sequences of Nature is extremely difficult of verification. and


it may be doubted whether its value, if it be true, wOuld repay


the labour of establishing its truth. The difficulty would be the


greater because the known history of philosophical and juridical


speculation shows us the two notions, which as a matter of fact


are associated with Law, acting and reacting on one another. The


order of Nature has unquestionably been regarded as determined by


a Sovereign command. Many persons to whom the pedigree of much of


modern thought is traceable, conceived the particles of matter


which make up the universe as obeying the commands of a personal


God just as literally as subjects obey the commands of a


sovereign through fear of a penal sanction. On the other hand,


the contemplation of order in the external world has strongly


influenced the view taken of laws proper by much of the civilised


part of mankind. The Roman theory of a Law Natural has affected


the whole history of law, and this famous theory is in fact


compounded of two elements, one furnished by an early perception,


Greek in origin, of a certain order and regularity in physical


nature, and the other attributable to an early perception, Roman


in origin, of a certain order and uniformity among the


observances of the human race. I need not here repeat the proof


of this which I attempted to give in a volume published some


years ago. Nobody is at liberty to censure men or communities of


men for using words in any sense they please, or with as many


meanings as they please, but the duty of the scientific enquirer


is to distinguish the meanings of an important word from one


another, to select the meaning appropriate to his own purposes,


and consistently to employ the word during his investigations in


this sense and no other. The laws with which the student of


Jurisprudence is concerned in our own day are undoubtedly either


the actual commands of Sovereigns, understood as the portion of


the community endowed with irresistible coercive force, or else


they are practices of mankind brought under the formula 'a law is


a command,' by help of the formula, 'whatever the Sovereign


permits, is his command.' From the point of view of the Jurist,


law is only associated with order through the necessary condition


of every true law that it must prescribe a class of acts or


omissions, or a number of acts and omissions determined


generally; the law which prescribes a single act not being a true


law, but being distinguished as an 'occasional' or 'particular'


command. Law, thus defined and limited, is the subject-matter of


Jurisprudence as conceived by the Analytical Jurists. At present


we are only concerned with the foundations of their system; and


the questions which I wish to raise in the present Lecture are


these: has the force which compels obedience to a law always been


of such a nature that it can reasonably be identified with the


coercive force of the Sovereign, and have laws always been


characterised by that generality which, it is said, alone


connects them with physical laws or general formulas describing


the facts of nature? These enquiries may seem to you to lead us


far afield, but I trust you will perceive in the end that they


have interest and importance, and that they throw light on the


limits which must be assigned in certain cases, not to the


theoretical soundness, but to the practical value, of the


speculations we have been discussing.


    Let me recur to Sovereignty, as conceived by the Analytical


Jurists. The readers of Austin's treatise will remember his


examination of a number of existing governments or (as he would


say), forms of political superiority and inferiority, for the


purpose of determining the exact seat of sovereignty in each of


them. This is among the most interesting parts of his writings,


and his sagacity and originality are nowhere more signally


demonstrated. The problem had become much more complex than it


was when Hobbes wrote, and even than it was at the date of


Bentham's earlier publications. Hobbes, a partisan in England,


was a keen scientific observer of the political phenomena of the


Continent, and there the political conditions open to his


observation were (putting England aside) practically limited to


despotism and anarchy. But, by the time Austin wrote, England,


probably considered by Hobbes as the ground on which the battle


of his principles was to he fought out, had long since become a


'limited monarchy,' an expression disliked by Hobbes' successors


almost as much as the thing was by Hobbes himself, and moreover


the influences of the first French Revolution were beginning to


have their play. France had lately become a limited monarchy, and


almost all the other Continental States had given signs of


becoming so. The complex political mechanism of the United States


had arisen on the other side of the Atlantic, and the even more


complicated systems of the German and Swiss Confederations in


Continental Europe. The analysis of political societies, for the


purpose of determining the seat of sovereignty, had obviously


become much more difficult, and nothing can exceed the


penetration evinced by Austin in applying this analysis to extant


examples.


    Nevertheless Austin fully recognises the existence of


communities, or aggregates of men, in which no dissection could


disclose a person or group answering to his definition of a


Sovereign. In the first place, like Hobbes, he fully allows that


there is a state of anarchy. Wherever such a state is found, the


question of Sovereignty is being actively fought out, and the


instance given by Austin is that which was never absent from


Hobbes's mind, the struggle between Charles the First and his


Parliament. An acute critic of Hobbes and Austin, whom I am


permitted to identify with Mr Fitzjames Stephen, insists that


there is a condition of dormant anarchy, and the reservation is


doubtless made to meet such cases as that of the United States


before the War of Secession. Here the seat of sovereignty was for


years the subject of violent dispute in words or on paper, and


many eminent Americans acquired fame by measures which


compromised for a time a notorious difference of principle, and


adjourned a struggle which was nevertheless inevitable. It is in


fact quite possible that there may be deliberate abstinence from


fighting out a question known to be undecided, and I see no


objection to calling the temporary equilibrium thus produced a


state of dormant anarchy. Austin further admits the theoretical


possibility of a state of nature. He does not attach to it the


importance which belongs to it in the speculations of Hobbes and


others, but he allows its existence wherever a number of men, or


of groups not numerous enough to be political, have not as yet


been brought under any common or habitually acting authority.


And, in speaking in this last sentence of groups not numerous


enough to be political, I have introduced the most remarkable


exception allowed by Austin to the rule that Sovereignty is


universal among mankind. The passage occurs at p. 237 of the


first volume of the third edition: --


    'Let us suppose that a single family of savages lives in


absolute estrangement from every other community. And let us


suppose that the father, the chief of this insulated family,


receives habitual obedience from the mother and children. Now,


since it is not a limb of another and larger community, the


society formed by the parents and children, is clearly an


independent society, and, since the rest of its members


habitually obey its chief, this independent society would form a


society political, in case the number of its members were not


extremely minute. But, since the number of its members is


extremely minute, it would, I believe, be esteemed a society in a


state of nature; that is, a society consisting of persons not in


a state of subjection. Without an application of the terms, which


would somewhat smack of the ridiculous, we could hardly style the


society a society political and independent, the imperative


father and chief a monarch or sovereign, or the obedient mother


and children subjects.'


    And then Austin quotes from Montesquieu the doctrine that


'Political power necessarily implies the union of several


families.'


    The effect of this passage then is that a society may be too


small to admit of the application of the theory. The employment,


Austin says, of his terminology would be ridiculous in such a


case. I believe I shall be able to point out to you the


significance of this appeal to our sense of absurdity, generally


a a most dangerous criterion; but at present I merely ask you to


note the seriousness of the admission, since the form of


authority about which it is made, the authority of the Patriarch


or Paterfamilias over his family, is, at least according to one


modern theory, the element or germ out of which all permanent


power of man over man has been gradually developed.


    There are, however, another set of cases, known to us from


sources of knowledge of which it is perhaps fair to say that


(though Austin is in one sense a modern writer) they were hardly


open when he wrote -- cases in which the application of his


principles is at least difficult and doubtful. It is from no


special love of Indian examples that I take one from India, but


because it happens to be the most modern precedent in point. My


instance is the Indian Province called the Punjaub, the Country


of the Five Rivers, in the state in which it was for about a


quarter of a century before its annexation to the British Indian


Empire. After passing through every conceivable phase of anarchy


and dormant anarchy, it fell under the tolerably consolidated


dominion of a half-military, half-religious oligarchy, known as


the Sikhs. The Sikhs themselves were afterwards reduced to


subjection by a single chieftain belonging to their order,


Runjeet Singh. At first sight, there could be no more perfect


embodiment than Runjeet Singh of Sovereignty, as conceived by


Austin. He was absolutely despotic. Except occasionally on his


wild frontier, he kept the most perfect order. He could have


commanded anything; the smallest disobedience to his commands


would have been followed by death or mutilation, and this was


perfectly well known to the enormous majority of his subjects.


Yet I doubt whether once in all his life he issued a command


which Austin would call a law. He took, as his revenue, a


prodigious share of the produce of the soil. He harried villages


which recalcitrated at his exactions, and he executed great


numbers of men. He levied great armies; he had all material of


power, and exercised it in various ways. But he never made a law.


The rules which regulated the life of his subjects were derived


from their immemorial usages, and these rules were administered


by domestic tribunals, in families or village-communities -- that


is, in groups no larger or little larger than those to which the


application of Austin's principles cannot be effected, on his own


admission, without absurdity.


    I do not for a moment assert that the existence of such a


state of political society falsifies Austin's theory, as a


theory. The great maxim by which objections to it are disposed of


is, as I have so often said before, 'What the Sovereign permits,


he commands.' The Sikh despot permitted heads of house holds and


village-elders to prescribe rules, therefore these rules were his


commands and true laws. Now we can see that an answer of this


kind might have some force if it were made to an English lawyer


who denied that the Sovereign in England had ever commanded the


Common law. The Crown and Parliament command it, because the


Crown and Parliament permit it; and the proof that they permit it


is that they could change it. As a matter of fact, since the


objection was first advanced, the Common law has been largely


encroached upon by Act of Parliament, and, in our own day, it is


possible that it may come to owe the whole of its binding force


to statute. But my Oriental example shows that the difficulty


felt by the old lawyers about the Common law may have once


deserved more respect than it obtained from Hobbes and his


successors. Runjeet Singh never did or could have dreamed of


changing the civil rules under which his subjects lived. Probably


he was as strong a believer in the independent obligatory force


of such rules as the elders themselves who applied them. An


Eastern or Indian theorist in law, to whom the assertion was made


that Runjeet Singh commanded these rules, would feel it stinging


him exactly in that sense of absurdity to which Austin admits the


appeal to be legitimate. The theory remains true in such a case,


but the truth is only verbal.


    You must not suppose that I have been indulging in a merely


curious speculation about a few extreme cases to which the theory


of Sovereignty, and of Law founded on it, will not apply without


straining of language. In the first place, the Punjaub under


Runjeet Singh may be taken as a type of all Oriental communities


in their native state, during their rare intervals of peace and


order. They have ever been despotisms, and the commands of the


despots at their head, harsh and cruel as they might be, have


always been implicitly obeyed. But then these commands, save in


so far as they served to organise administrative machinery for


the collection of revenue, have not been true laws; they have


been of the class called by Austin occasional or particular


commands. The truth is that the one solvent of local and domestic


usage in those parts of the world of which We have any real


knowledge has been not the command of the Sovereign but the


supposed command of the Deity. In India, the influence of the


Brahminical treatises on mixed law and religion in sapping the


old customary law of the country has always been great, and in


some particulars, as I tried to explain on a former occasion, it


has become greater under English rule.


    It is important to observe that, for the purposes of the


present enquiry, the state of political society which I have


described as Indian or Oriental is a far more trustworthy clue to


the former condition of the greatest part of the world than is


the modern social organisation of Western Europe, as we see it


before our eyes. It is a perhaps not unreasonable impression that


Sovereignty was simpler and more easily discovered in the ancient


than in the modern world. The critic of Hobbes and Austin, whom I


before quoted, writes, 'in every state of which we read, whether


Greek, Phoenician, Italian, or Asiatic, there was a Sovereign of


some sort whose authority was absolute while it lasted;' and he


adds that, 'if Hobbes had tried to write an imaginary history of


mankind he could not have constructed one better fitted for his


purpose than the history of the foundation and establishment of


the Roman Empire.' I put aside for awhile the consideration of


the Roman Empire, and my reasons for doing so will become


apparent afterwards; but, if we give our attention to empires at


all resembling that of the Romans in territorial extent, we shall


find that, properly understood, they are very far from


corresponding to the Great Leviathan imagined by Hobbes. We know


something of the Assyrian and Babylonian Empires from Jewish


records, and something of the Median and Persian Empires from


Greek records. We learn from these that they were in the main


tax-taking empires. We know that they raised enormous revenues


from their subjects. We know that, for occasional wars of


conquest, they levied vast armies from populations spread over


immense areas. We know that they exacted the most implicit


obedience to their occasional commands, or punished disobedience


with the utmost cruelty. We know that the monarchs at their head


were constantly dethroning petty kings and even transplanting


whole communities. But amid all this, it is clear that in the


main they interfered but little with the every day religious or


civil life of the groups to which their subjects belonged. They


did not legislate. The 'royal statute' and 'firm decree' which


has been preserved to us as a sample of 'law of the Medes and


Persians which altereth not' is not a law at all in the modern


juridical acceptation of the term. It is what Austin would call a


'particular command,' a sudden, spasmodic, and temporary


interference with ancient multifarious usage left in general


undisturbed. What is even more instructive is that the famous


Athenian Empire belonged to the same class of sovereignties as


the Empire of the Great King. The Athenian Assembly made true


laws for residents on Attic territory, but the dominion of Athens


over her subject cities and islands was clearly a tax-taking as


distinguished from a legislating Empire.


    The difficulty of employing Austin's terminology of these


great governments is obvious enough. How can it conduce to clear


thinking to speak of the Jewish law as commanded at one period by


the Great King at Susa? The cardinal rule of the Analytical


Jurists, 'what the Sovereign permits, he commands,' remains


verbally true, but against its application in such a case there


lies an appeal to a higher tribunal of which Austin allows the


jurisdiction, our sense of the ridiculous.


    I have now reached the point at which I can conveniently


state my own opinion of the practical limitations which must be


given to the system of the Analytical Jurists, in order that it


may possess, I will not say theoretical truth, but practical


value. The Western world, to which they confined their attention,


must be conceived as having undergone two sets of changes. The


States of modern Europe must be conceived as having been formed


in a manner different from the great empires of antiquity (save


one), and from the modern empires and kingdoms of the East, and a


new order of ideas on the subject of legislation must be


conceived as having been introduced into the world through the


empire of the Romans. Unless these changes had taken place, I do


not believe that the system would ever have been engendered in


the brain of its authors. Wherever these changes have not taken


place, I do not believe the application of the system to be of


value.


    The most nearly universal fact which can be asserted


respecting the origin of the political communities called States


is that they were formed by the coalescence of groups, the


original group having been in no case smaller than the


patriarchal family. But in the communities which came into


existence before the Roman Empire, and in those which have been


slightly affected by it or not at all, this coalescence was soon


arrested. There are some traces of the process everywhere. The


hamlets of Attica coalesce to form the Athenian State; and the


primitive Roman State is formed by the coalescence of the minute


communities on the original hills. In very many Indian


village-communities there are signs of smaller elements combining


to make them up. But this earlier coalescence soon stops. In a


later stage, political communities, wearing a superficial


resemblance to the Roman Empire, and often of very great


territorial extent, are constructed by one community conquering


another or one chieftain, at the head of a single community or


tribe, subjugating great masses of population. But, independently


of the Roman Empire and its influence, the separate local life of


the small societies included in these great States was not


extinguished or even much enfeebled. They continued as the Indian


village-community has continued, and indeed, even in their most


glorious forms, they belonged essentially to that type of


society. But the process of change by which the States of the


modern world were formed has been Materially different from this.


The smaller groups have been much more completely broken up and


absorbed in the larger, the larger have again been swallowed up


in still wider, and these in yet wider areas. Local life and


village custom have not, it is true, decayed everywhere in the


same degree. There is much more of them in Russia than in


Germany; more of them in Germany than in England; more of them in


England than in France. But on the whole, whenever the modern


State is formed, it is an assemblage of fragments considerably


smaller than those which made up empires of the earlier type, and


considerably liker to one another.


    It would be rash to lay down confidently which is cause and


which is consequence, but unquestionably this completer


trituration in modern societies of the groups which once lived


with an independent life has proceeded concurrently with much


greater activity in legislation. Wherever the primitive condition


of an Aryan race reveals itself either through historical records


or through the survival of its ancient institutions, the organ


which in the elementary group corresponds to what we call the


legislature, is everywhere discernible. It is the Village


Council, sometimes owning a responsibility to the entire body of


villagers, sometimes disclaiming it, sometimes overshadowed by


the authority of an hereditary chief, but never altogether


obscured. From this embryo have sprung all the most famous


legislatures of the world, the Athenian Ekklesia, the Roman


Comitia, Senate and Prince, and our own Parliament, the type and


parent of all the 'collegiate sovereignties' (as Austin would


call them) of the modern world, or in other words of all


governments in which sovereign power is exercised by the people


or shared between the people and the King. Yet, if we examine the


undeveloped form of this organ of State, its legislative faculty


is its least distinct and least energetic faculty. In point of


fact, as I have observed elsewhere, the various shades of the


power lodged with the Village Council, under the empire of the


ideas proper to it, are not distinguished from one another, nor


does the mind see a clear difference between making a law,


declaring a law, and punishing an offender against a law. If the


powers of this body must be described by modern names, that which


lies most in the background is legislative power, that which is


most distinctly conceived is judicial power. The laws obeyed are


regarded as having always existed, and usages really new are


confounded with the really old.


    The village-communities of the Aryan race do not therefore


exercise true legislative power so long as they remain under


primitive influences. Nor again is legislative power exercised in


any intelligible sense of the words by the Sovereigns of those


great States, now confined to the East, which preserve the


primitive local groups most nearly intact. Legislation, as we


conceive it, and the break up of local life appear to have


universally gone on together. Compare the Hindoo


village-community in India with the Teutonic village-community in


England. The first of them, among all the institutions of the


country which are not modern and of British construction, is far


the most definite, far the most strongly marked, far the most


highly organised. Of the latter, the ancient English community,


the vestiges may certainly be tracked, but the comparative method


has to be called in, and the written law and written history of


many centuries searched, before their significance can be


understood and the broken outline restored to completeness. It is


impossible not to connect the differing vitality of the same


institution with certain other phenomena of the two countries. In


India, Mogul and Mahratta, following a long series of earlier


conquerors, have swept over the village-communities, but after


including them in a nominal empire they have imposed no permanent


obligation beyond the payment of tax or tribute. If on some rare


occasions they have attempted the enforced religious conversion


of subjugated populations, the temples and the rites have been at


most changed. in the villages, while the civil institutions have


been left untouched. Here in England the struggle between the


central and the local power has followed a very different course.


We can see plainly that the King's law and the King's courts have


been perpetually contending against the local law and the local


courts, and the victory of the King's law has drawn after it the


long series of Acts of Parliament founded on its principles. The


whole process can only be called legislation ever increasing in


energy, until the ancient multifarious law of the country has


been all but completely abolished, and the old usages of the


independent communities have degenerated into the customs of


manors or into mere habits having no sanction from law.


    There is much reason to believe that the Roman Empire was the


source of the influences which have led, immediately or


ultimately, to the formation of highly-centralised,


actively-legislating, States. It was the first great dominion


which did not merely tax, but legislated also. The process was


spread over many centuries. If I had to fix the epochs of its


commencement and completion, I should place them roughly at the


issue of the first Edictum Provinciale, and at the extension of


the Roman citizenship to all subjects of the empire, but no doubt


the foundations of the change were laid considerably before the


first period, and it was continued in some ways long after the


last. But, in the result, a vast and miscellaneous mass of


customary law was broken up and replaced by new institutions.


Seen in this light, the Roman Empire is accurately described in


the Prophecy of Daniel. It devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped


the residue with its feet.


    The irruption of the barbarian races into the Empire diffused


through the communities included in it a multitude of the


primitive tribal and village ideas which they had lost.


Nevertheless no society directly or indirectly influenced by the


Empire has been altogether like the societies formed on that more


ancient system which the immobility of the East has continued


till we can actually observe it. In all commonwealths of the


first kind, Sovereignty is more or less distinctly associated


with legislative power, and the direction in which this power was


to be exercised was in a considerable number of countries clearly


chalked out by the jurisprudence which the Empire left behind it.


The Roman law, from which the most ancient legal notions had been


almost wholly expelled, was palpably the great solvent of local


usage everywhere. There are thus two types of organised political


society. In the more ancient of these, the great bulk of men


derive their rules of life from the customs of their village or


city, but they occasionally, though most implicitly, obey the


commands of an absolute ruler who takes taxes from them but never


legislates, In the other, and the one with which we are most


familiar, the Sovereign is ever more actively legislating on


principles of his own, while local custom and idea are ever


hastening to decay. It seems to me that in the passage from one


of these political systems to another, laws have distinctly


altered their character. The Force, for example, which is at the


back of law, can only be called the same by a mere straining of


language. Customary law -- a subject on which all of Austin's


remarks seem to me comparatively unfruitful -- is not obeyed, as


enacted law is obeyed. When it obtains over small areas and in


small natural groups, the penal sanctions on which it depends are


partly opinion, partly superstition, but to a far greater extent


an instinct almost as blind and unconscious as that which


produces some of the movements of our bodies. The actual


constraint which is required to secure conformity with usage is


inconceivably small. When, however, the rules which have to be


obeyed once emanate from an authority external to the small


natural group and forming no part of it, they wear a character


wholly unlike that of a customary rule. They lose the assistance


of superstition, probably that of opinion, certainly that of


spontaneous impulse. The force at the back of law comes therefore


to be purely coercive force to a degree quite unknown in


societies of the more primitive type. Moreover, in many


communities, this force has to act at a very great distance from


the bulk of the persons exposed to it, and thus the Sovereign who


wields it has to deal with great classes of acts and with great


classes of persons, rather than with isolated acts and with


individuals. Among the consequences of this necessity are many of


the characteristics sometimes supposed to be inseparable from


laws, their indifferency, their inexorableness, and their


generality.


    And as the conception of Force associated with laws has


altered, so also, I think, has the conception of Order. In the


elementary social groups formed by men of the Aryan race, nothing


can be more monotonous than the routine of village custom.


Nevertheless, in the interior of the households which together


make up the village-community, the despotism of usage is replaced


by the despotism of paternal authority. Outside each threshold is


immemorial custom blindly obeyed; inside is the Patria Potestas


exercised by a half-civilised man over wife, child, and slave. So


far then as laws are commands, they would be associated in this


stage of society less with invariable order than with inscrutable


caprice; and it is easier to suppose the men of those times


looking to the succession of natural phenomena, day and night,


summer and winter, for types of regularity, than to the words and


actions of those above them who possessed coercive power over


them.


    The Force then which is at the back of laws was not always


the same. The Order which goes with them was not always the same.


They have only gradually attracted to themselves the attributes


which seem essential to them not only in the popular view but to


the penetrating eye of the Analytical Jurist, Their generality


and their dependence on the coercive force of a Sovereign are the


result of the great territorial area of modern States, of the


comminution of the sub-groups which compose them, and above all


of the example and influence of the Roman Commonwealth under


Assembly, Senate, and Prince, which from very early times was


distinguished from all other dominations and powers in that it


brake up more thoroughly that which it devoured.


    It has sometimes been said of great systems of thought that


nothing but an accident prevented their coming into existence


centuries before their actual birth. No such assertion can be


made of the system of the Analytical Jurists, which could not


have been conceived in the brain of its authors till the time was


fully ripe for it. Hobbes's great doctrine is plainly the result


of a generalisation which he had opportunities unrivalled in that


day for effecting, since during the virility of his intellect he


was as much on the Continent as in England, first as a travelling


tutor and afterwards as an exile flying from civil disturbances.


Independently of English affairs, which he certainly viewed as a


strong partisan, the phenomena which he had to observe were


governments rapidly centralising themselves, local privileges and


jurisdictions in extreme decay, the old historical bodies, such


as the French Parliaments, tending for the time to become


furnaces of anarchy, the only hope of order discoverable in


kingly power. These were among the palpable fruits of the wars


which end ed in the Peace of Westphalia. The old multiform local


activity of feudal or quasi-feudal society was everywhere


enfeebled or destroyed; if it had continued, the system of this


great thinker would almost certainly have never seen the light;


we have heard of a village Hampden, but a village Hobbes is


inconceivable. By the time Bentham wrote, and while he was


writing, the conditions which suggest the Analytical System of


Jurisprudence presented themselves still more distinctly. A


Sovereign who was a democracy commenced, and a Sovereign who was


a despot completed, the Codification of the laws of France. There


had never before in the modern world been so striking an


exemplification of the proposition that, what the Sovereign


permits, he commands, because he could at any time substitute an


express command for his tacit permission, nor so impressive a


lesson in the far-reaching and on the whole most beneficial


results which might be expected from the increased activity of


Sovereigns in legislation proper.


    No geniuses of an equally high order so completely divorced


themselves from history as Hobbes and Bentham, or appear, to me


at all events, so completely under the impression that the world


had always been more or less as they saw it. Bentham could never


get rid of the idea that imperfect or perverse applications of


his principles had produced many things with which they had


nothing whatever to do, and I know no more striking instance of


an historical misconception (though at the time a very natural


one) than Hobbes's comparison of privileged corporations and


organised local groups to the parasites which the physiology then


becoming fashionable had shown to live in the internal membranes


of the human body. We now know that, if we are forced to use a


physiological illustration, these groups must rather be compared


to the primary cells out of which the whole human body has been


built up.


    But, if the Analytical Jurists failed to see a great deal


which can only be explained by the help of history, they saw a


great deal which even in our day is imperfectly seen by those


who, so to speak, let themselves drift with history. Sovereignty


and Law, regarded as facts, had only gradually assumed a shape in


which they answered to the conception of them formed by Hobbes,


Bentham, and Austin, but the correspondence really did exist by


their time, and was tending constantly to become more perfect.


They were thus able to frame a juridical terminology which had


for one virtue that it was rigidly consistent with itself, and


for another that, if it did not completely express facts, the


qualifications of its accuracy were never serious enough to


deprive it of value and tended moreover to become less and less


important as time went on. No conception of law and society has


ever removed such a mass of undoubted delusion. The force at the


disposal of Sovereigns did in fact act largely through laws as


understood by these Jurists, but it acted confusedly,


hesitatingly, with many mistakes and vast omissions. They for the


first time saw all that it was capable of effecting, if it was


applied boldly and consistently. All that has followed is a


testimony to their sagacity, I do not know a single law-reform


effected since Bentham's day which cannot be traced to his


influence; but a still more startling proof of the clearing of


the brain produced by this system, even in an earlier stage, may


be found in Hobbes. In his 'Dialogue of the Common Laws,' he


argues for a fusion of law and equity, a registration of titles


to land, and a systematic penal code -- three measures which we


are on the eve of seeing carried out at this very moment.


    The capital fact in the mechanism of modern States is the


energy of legislatures. Until the fact existed, I do not, as I


have said, believe that the system of Hobbes, Bentham and Austin


could have been conceived; wherever it exhibits itself


imperfectly, I think that the system is never properly


appreciated. The comparative neglect with which German writers


have treated it seems to me to be explained by the comparative


recency of legislative activity in Germany. It is however


impossible to observe on the connection between legislation and


the analytical theory of law without having the mind carried to


the famous addition which Bentham and Austin engrafted on the


speculations of Hobbes. This addition consisted in coupling them


with the doctrine or theory of utility -- of the greatest


happiness of the greatest number -- considered as the basis of


law and morals. What, then, is the connection, essential or


historical, between the utilitarian theory and the analytical


theory of law? I certainly do not affect to be able, especially


at the close of a lecture, to exhaust a subject of such extent


and difficulty, but I have a few words to say of it. To myself


the most interesting thing about the theory of Utility is that it


presupposes the theory of Equality. The greatest number is the


greatest number of men taken as units; 'one shall only count for


one,' said Bentham emphatically and over and over again. In fact,


the most conclusive objection to the doctrine would consist in


denying this equality; and I have myself heard an Indian Brahmin


dispute it on the ground that, according to the clear teaching of


his religion, a Brahmin was entitled to twenty times as much


happiness as anybody else. Now how did this fundamental


assumption of equality, which (I may observe) broadly


distinguishes Bentham's theories from some systems with which it


is supposed to share the reproach of having pure selfishness for


its base -- how did it suggest itself to Bentham's mind? He saw


plainly -- nobody more clearly -- that men are not as a fact


equal; the proposition that men are by nature equal he expressly


denounced as an anarchical sophism. Whence then came the equality


which is a postulate of his famous doctrine about the greatest


happiness of the greatest number? I venture to think that this


doctrine is nothing more than a working rule of legislation, and


that in this form it was originally conceived by Bentham. Assume


a numerous and tolerably homogeneous community -- assume a


Sovereign whose commands take a legislative shape assume great


energy, actual or potential, in this legislature -- the only


possible, the only conceivable, principle which can guide


legislation on a great scale is the greatest happiness of the


greatest number. It is in fact a condition of legislation which,


like certain characteristics of laws, has grown out of the


distance from which sovereign power acts upon subjects in modern


political societies, and of the necessity under which it is


thereby placed of neglecting differences, even real differences,


between the units of which they are composed. Bentham was in


truth neither a jurist nor a moralist in the proper sense of the


word. He theorises not on law but on legislation; when carefully


examined, he may be seen to be a legislator even in morals. No


doubt his language seems sometimes to imply that he is explaining


moral phenomena; in reality he wishes to alter or re-arrange them


according to a working rule gathered from his reflections on


legislation. This transfer of his working rule from legislation


to morality seems to me the true ground of the criticisms to


which Bentham is justly open as an analyst of moral facts.
















Lecture VII





Ancient Divisions of the Family








    'Before the establishment of the (English) common law, all


the possessions within the Irish territories ran either in course


of Tanistry or in course of Gavelkind. Every Signory or Chiefry


with the portion of land which passed with it went without


partition to the Tanist, who always came in by election or with


the strong hand, and not by descent; but all inferior tenanties


were partible between males in Gavelkind.' (Sir J. Davis'


Reports, 'Le Cas de Gavelkind,' Hil. 3, Jac. 1, before all the


Judges.)


    This passage occurs in one of the famous cases in which the


Anglo-Irish Judges affirmed the illegality of the native Irish


tenures of land. They declared the English common law to be in


force in Ireland, and thenceforward the eldest son succeeded, as


heir-at-law, both to lands which were attached to a Signory and


to estates which had been divided according to the peculiar Irish


custom here called Gavelkind. The Judges thoroughly knew that


they were making a revolution, and they probably thought that


they were substituting a civilised institution for a set of


mischievous usages proper only for barbarians. Yet there is


strong reason for thinking that Tanistry is the form of


succession from which Primogeniture descended, and that the Irish


Gavelkind, which they sharply distinguished from the Gavelkind of


Kent, was nothing more than an archaic form of this same


institution, of which Courts in England have always taken


judicial notice, and which prevailed far more widely on the


European Continent than succession by Primogeniture.


    It will be convenient that we should first consider the


so-called Gavelkind of Ireland, which is thus described by Sir


John Davis: 'By the Irish custom of Gavelkind, the inferior


tenanties were partible among all the males of the Sept, both


Bastards and Legitimate; and, after partition made, if any one of


the Sept had died, his portion was not divided among his sonnes,


but the Chief of the Sept made a new partition of all the lands


belonging to that Sept, and gave every one his part according to


his antiquity.'


    This statement occasions some perplexity, which does not,


however, arise from its being antecedently incredible. It is


made, you will observe, not of the Clan or Tribe in its largest


extension, but of the Sept. The first was a large and


miscellaneous body, composed in great part of men whose


relationship of blood with the Chief and the mass of free


tribesmen, was a mere fiction. The last was a much smaller body,


whose proximity to a common ancestor was close enough to admit of


their kinship either being a fact or being believed to be a fact.


It apparently corresponded to the small Highland communities


observed in Scotland, by an English officer of Engineers about


1730. 'They (the Highlanders) are divided into tribes or clans


under chiefs or chieftains, and each clan is again divided into


branches from the main stock, who have chieftains over them.


These are Subdivided into smaller branches, of fifty or sixty


men, who deduce their original from their particular chieftains.


(Quoted by Skene, 'Highlanders,' i. p. 156.) Such a body, as I


have already stated, seems to be the Joint Family well known to


the Hindoos, but continued as a corporate unit (which is very


rarely the case in India), through several successive


generations. There is no difference in principle, and little in


practical effect, between the mode of succession described by


Davis and the way in which a Hindoo Joint Family is affected by


the death of one of its members. All the property being held in


common, and all earnings being brought into the 'common chest or


purse,' the lapse of any one life would have the effect,


potentially if not actually, of distributing the dead man's share


among all the kindred united in the family group. And if, on a


dissolution of the Joint Family, the distribution of its effects


were not per capita but per stirpes, this would correspond to


what Davis probably means when he describes the Chief as giving


to each man 'according to his antiquity.'


    The special novelty of the information supplied to us by the


ancient Irish law consists in its revealing to us a society of


Aryan race, settled, indeed, on the land, and much influenced by


its settlement, but preserving an exceptional number of the ideas


and rules belonging to the time when kinship and not the land is


the basis of social union. There is, therefore, nothing


extraordinary in our finding, among the ancient usages of the


Irish, an institution savouring so much of the 'natural


communism' of the primitive forms of property as this Irish


Gavelkind. This 'natural communism,' I have repeatedly urged,


does not arise from any theory or * priori assumption as to the


best or justest mode of dividing the land of a community, but


from the simple impossibility, according to primitive notions, of


making a distinction between a number of kinsmen solely connected


by their real or assumed descent from a common ancestor. The


natural solvent of this communism is the land itself upon which


the kindred are settled. As the common ancestry fades away into


indistinctness, and the community gets to consider itself less an


assemblage of blood-relations than a body of co-villagers, each


household clings with increasing tenacity to the allotment which


it has once obtained, and re-divisions of the land among the


whole community, whether at fixed periods or at a death, become


rarer and rarer, and at last cease altogether, or survive only as


a tradition. In this way the widely diffused but modified form of


tribal succession, which in England is called Gavelkind, is at


last established; the descendants of the latest holder take his


property, to the exclusion of everybody else, and the rights of


the portion of the community outside the family dwindle to a veto


on sales, or to a right of controlling the modes of cultivation.


Nevertheless, surveying the Aryan world as a whole, and looking


to societies in which some fragments of the ancient social


organisation still survive, we can discover forms of succession


or property which come surprisingly near to the Irish Gavelkind


described by Davis. The best example of this occurs in a practice


which existed down to our own day over a large part of Russia.


The principle was that each household of the village was entitled


to a share of the village-lands proportioned to the number of


adult males it contained. Every death, therefore, of a grown-up


man diminished pro tanto the share of the household, and every


member of it grown to manhood increased its lot in the cultivated


area. There was a fixed unit of acreage corresponding to the


extent of soil cultivable by one man's labour, and at the


periodical division each household obtained just as much land as


answered to its number of adult labouring men. The principal


distinction between this system and that which seemed so


monstrous and unnatural to Sir John Davis is, that under the


first the re-division took place, not as each death occurred, but


at stated intervals. I must not, indeed, be understood to say


that I think the distinction unimportant. It is very possible


that re-distributions at deaths of a common fund may mark a more


advanced stage in the history of Property than periodical


redistribution, and that the recognition of interests for an


entire life may have preceded and paved the way for the final


allotment of permanent shares to separate households. Until,


however, this last point has been reached, all the modes of


re-division known to us are plainly referable to the same


principle.


    The difficulty suggested by the recital in the 'Case of


Gavelkind' is thus not a difficulty in believing it if it stood


by itself, or if it were made with less generality. But it is


distinctly stated that all the lands in Ireland which did not


descend by the rule of Tanistry descended by the rule of


Gavelkind. The indications of the state of law or custom


furnished by the Brehon tracts certainly seem to me inconsistent


with this assertion. They show us proprietary rights defined with


a sharpness and guarded with a jealousy which is hard to


reconcile with the degree of 'natural communism' implied in the


language of Davis's Report. The Corus Bescna, of which I said


something before, and which deals with rights over tribal lands,


implies that under certain circumstances they might be


permanently alienated, at all events to the Church; and we shall


presently have to discuss, some very singular rules of


succession, which, however they may affect the Family, certainly


seem to exclude the Sept. Dr Sullivan, who appears to have


consulted many more original authorities than have been


translated or given to the world, expresses himself as if he


thought that the general law of succession in Ireland was newly


analogous to the Gavelkind of Kent. 'According to the Irish


custom, property descended at first only to the male heirs of the


body, each son receiving an equal share..... Ultimately, however,


daughters appear to have become entitled to inherit all, if there


were no sons' (Introd., p. clxx).


    I do not expect that the apparent contradiction between the


Brehon tracts and the language of Davis and his contemporaries


respecting the Irish law of succession to land will be fully


accounted for till the whole of the ancient legal literature is


before the world; but meanwhile it is a plausible explanation of


the discrepancy that the Irish and the English writers attended


to different sets of phenomena. I cannot doubt that the so-called


Irish Gavelkind was found over a great part of the country. The


statements of English authorities on the point are extremely


precise. They affirm that 'no civil habitations were erected, and


no enclosure or improvement was made of land where Gavelkind was


in use,' and they say that this was especially the case in


Ulster, 'which was all one wilderness.' Nevertheless it is


extremely probable that another set of facts justified the


indications given by the Brehon tracts, and that there were other


modes of succession known besides succession by Tanistry on the


one hand, and besides on the other hand the peculiarly archaic


system under which each lapsed share was at once divided between


all the members of the Sept. Such an institution as the last,


though exceptional circumstances may keep it alive, contains


within itself a principle of decay. Each household included in


the Joint Family gains a firmer hold on its share of the lands as


the distance increases from the common ancestor; and finally


appropriates it, transmitting it exclusively to offshoots from


its own branch. Nothing is more likely than that there were


frequent examples of Irish septs with their land-customs in this


condition; and it is still more probable that usages of a


similarly modern stamp prevailed in estates permanently severed


or 'booked off' from tribal possession or established at a


distance from the main seat of the tribe. It is true that, in


society based on kinship, each family separated from the rest


tends itself to expand into a joint family or sept; but in these


severed estates custom would be apt to be enfeebled and to abate


something of its tyranny. Thus, putting the rule of Tanistry


aside, I can quite conceive that the Irish Gavelkind, the modern


Gavelkind known to Kent, and many forms of succession


intermediate between the two, co-existed in Ireland. Both the


English and the Irish authorities on law had prejudices of their


own which might lead them to confine their attention to


particular usages. The Brehon writers seem to me distinctly


biassed in favour of the descent of property in individual


families, which commended itself to them as lawyers, as friends


of the Church, and (it may be) as well-wishers to their country.


On the other, the strange ancient form of ownership which he


called Gavelkind would fascinate the observation of an Englishman


resident in Ireland. He would assuredly have none of the


curiosity about it which we feel nowadays, but surprise and


dislike would fix his attention upon it, and perhaps prevent his


recognising the comparatively wide diffusion of institutions of


the opposite type.


    This interpretation of the seeming contradiction between our


authorities is consistent with the very little we know respecting


actual divisions of land in ancient Ireland. It constantly


happened both in Ireland and the Scottish Highlands that a Chief,


besides the domain which appertained to his office, had a great


estate held under what the English lawyers deemed the inferior


tenure. There are two cases on record in which Irish Chiefs of


considerable dignity distributed such estates among their


kindred. In the fourteenth century Connor More O'Brien, a chief


who had children of his own, is stated to have divided his land


on principles which must have more or less corresponded to those


condemned by the Anglo-Irish Judges. The bulk of the estate he


assigned to the various families of the Sept formed by his own


relatives. To himself he reserved only one-sixth of one-half of


one-third, and even this sixth he divided between his three sons,


reserving only a rent to himself. But at the end of the fifteenth


century Donogh O'Brien, son of Brien Duff, son of Connor, King of


Thomond, divided all his lands between his eleven sons, reserving


to himself only the mansion and the demesne in its vicinity. The


difference between the two cases, which (it is instructive to


observe) are separated by at least a century, appears to me


sufficiently plain. In the first the land had remained in a state


of indivision during several generations; in the second it had


been periodically divided. Connor More O'Brien was distributing


the inheritance of a joint family; Donogh O'Brien that of a


family (Vallancey, 'Collectanea de Rebus Hibernicis,' i 264,


265.)


    It is worthy of observation that in the more ancient example


Connor More O'Brien appears to have paid regard to the various


stirpes or stocks into which the descendants of the orIginal


founder of his family had branched out. The principle he followed


I suppose to be the same as that pointed out by Davis when he


speaks of the chief dividing a lapsed share between the members


of a sept 'according to their antiquity.' The proceeding deserves


to be noted, as showing an advance on the oldest known tribal


customs. In the most archaic forms of the Joint Family, and of


the institution which grew out of it, the Village-Community,


these distributions are per capita; no one person who is entitled


takes more than another, whether the whole estate or a portion is


divided, and no respect is paid to the particular way in which a


given individual has descended from the common ancestor. Under a


more advanced system the distribution is per stirpes; careful


attention is paid to the lines into which the descendants of the


ancestor of the joint-family have separated, and separate rights


are reserved to them. Finally, the stocks themselves escape from


the sort of shell constituted by the Joint Family; each man's


share of the property, now periodically divided, is distributed


among his direct descendants at his death. At this point,


property in its modern form has been established; but the Joint


Family has not wholly ceased to influence successions. When


direct descendants fail it is even now the rules of the Joint


Family which determine the taking of the inheritance. Collateral


successions, when they are distant, follow the more primitive


form of the old institution, and are per capita; when they are


those of the nearer kindred they are adjusted to its more modern


shape, and are per stirpes.


    The remark has further to be made that both Connor O'Brien


and Donogh O'Brien divided their own land among their sons or


kindred during their own lifetime. Like Laertes in the Odyssee


and like Lear in the tragedy of Shakespeare, the old Chief, in


the decay of his vigour, parts with his power and retains but a


fraction of the property he had administered; and the poorer


freeman becomes one of those 'senior' pensioners of the tribe so


often referred to in the tracts. Precisely the same practice is


recognised, and even (as some think) enjoined, by the more


archaic bodies of Hindoo jurisprudence. The principle is that the


right of each member of a family accrues at his birth; and, as


the family has in theory a perpetual existence, there is no


particular reason why, if the property is divided at all, it


should be exclusively divided at a death. The power of


distributing inheritances vested in the Celtic chiefs has been


made the basis of some very doubtful theories, but I have no


doubt it is essentially the same institution as the humble


privilege which is reserved to the Hindoo father by the


Mitakshara. It is part of the prerogative belonging to the


representative of the purest blood in the joint family; but in


proportion at the Joint Family, Sept, or Clan becomes more


artificial, the power of distribution tends more and more to look


like mere administrative authority.


    Under some systems of Hindoo law, the father, when making a


distribution of property during his lifetime, is entitled to


retain a double share, and by some Indian customs the eldest son,


when dividing the patrimony with his brothers, takes twice at


much as the others. There are a good many traces of the usage in


this last form in a variety of communities. It is, for instance,


the 'birthright' of the Hebrew patriarchal history. I mention it


particularly because it seems to me to be sometimes improperly


confounded with the right conferred by what we call the rule of


Primogeniture. But the double share is rather given as the reward


or (perhaps we should say) the security for impartial


distribution, and we find it often coupled with the right to take


exclusively such things as are deemed incapable of partition, the


family house, for instance, and certain utensils. The proof that


it is not essentially a privilege of the eldest son, we find in


the circumstances that it is sometimes enjoyed by the father and


sometimes by the youngest of the sons, and in this way it is


connected with our own custom of Borough English, of which I


shall have more to say presently. There is a difference of


historical origin between this kind of privileged succession and


that which we call Primogeniture. The first is descended from a


custom of the Tribe; the last, to which I now pass, seems to me


traceable to the special position of the Chief.


    The Brehon tracts at present translated do not add much to


the knowledge which we possessed of the Irish customs


corresponding to the usage of exclusive succession by the eldest


son; and Primogeniture remains what I called it thirteen years


ago ('Ancient Law,' p. 227), 'one of the most difficult problems


of historical jurisprudence.' The first of the difficulties which


surround it is the total absence, before a particular epoch in


history, of recorded precedents for any such mode of succession


to property. It was unknown to the Hellenic world. It was unknown


to the Roman world. It was unknown to the Jews, and apparently to


the whole Semitic world. In the records of all these societies


there are vestiges of great differences between the succession of


males and the succession of females; but there was nothing like


the exclusive succession of a single son to property, although


the descent of sovereignties to the eldest son of the last


reigning king was a familiar fact, and though the Greek


philosophers had conjectured that, in an earlier state of society


than theirs, the smaller groups of men -- families and villages


-- had been governed by eldest son after eldest son.


    Even when the Teutonic races spread over Western Europe they


did not bring with them Primogeniture as their ordinary rule of


succession. The allodial property of the Teutonic freeman, that


share which he had theoretically received at the original


settlement of the brotherhood to which he belonged on their


domain, was divided at his death, when it was divided at all,


equally between his sons or equally between his sons and


daughters. It is quite certain, however, that the appearance of


Primogeniture in the West and its rapid diffusion must be


connected with the irruption of the barbarians, and with the


tribal ideas re-introduced by them into the Roman world. At this


point, however, we encounter another difficulty. The


Primogeniture which first meets us is not uniformly the


Primogeniture with which we are now familiar. The right of the


eldest son sometimes gives way to the right of the eldest male


relative of the deceased, and occasionally it seems as if neither


the succession of the eldest son nor that of the eldest relative


could take effect without election or confirmation by the members


of the aggregate group to which both belong.


    As usual, we have to look for living illustrations of the


ancient system to the usages of the Hindoos. The Family,


according to the Hindoo theory, is despotically governed by its


head; but if he dies and the Family separates at his death, the


property is equally divided between the sons. If, however, the


Family does not separate, but allows itself to expand into a


Joint Family, we have the exact mixture of election and doubtful


succession which we find in the early examples of European


primogeniture. The eldest son, and after him his eldest son, is


ordinarily the manager of the affairs of the Joint Family, but


his privileges theoretically depend on election by the


brotherhood, and may be set aside by it, and, when they are set


aside, it is generally in favour of a brother of the deceased


manager, who, on the score of greater age, is assumed to be


better qualified than his nephew for administration and business.


In ancient Irish society the Joint Family, continued through many


generations, has grown first into the Sept and then into the


Clan, contracting a greater degree of artificiality in proportion


to its enlargement. The importance, meanwhile, of the Chief to


the Tribe has rather increased than diminished, since he is no


longer merely administrator of its civil affairs but its leader


in war. The system produced from these elements appears to me


sufficiently intelligible. The veneration of the Tribe is not


attracted by individuals of the Chieftain's family, but by the


family itself, as representing the purest blood of the entire


brotherhood. It chooses its head and leader (save on the very


rarest occasions) from this family, and there are instances of


the choice being systematically made from two families in


alternation. But the necessity of having a military leader in the


vigour of his physical and mental powers is much too imperious to


admit of his choice being invariably deferred to the death of the


ruling Chief, or to allow of the election falling universally or


even generally on his son. 'It is a custom among all the Irish,'


says Spenser, 'that presently after the death of any of their


chief lords or captains, they do presently assemble themselves to


a place generally appointed and known unto them to choose another


in his stead, where they do nominate and elect for the most part,


not the eldest son, nor any of the children of the lord deceased,


but the next to him of blood that is eldest and worthiest, as


commonly the next brother if he have any, or the next cousin, and


so forth, as any is elder in that kindred or sept; and then, next


to him, they choose the next of the blood to be Tanaist, who


shall succeed him in the said Captaincy if he live thereunto....


For when their Captain dieth, if the Signory should descend to


his child, and he perhaps an infant, another might peradventure


step in between or thrust him out by strong hand being then


unable to defend his right and to withstand the force of a


forreiner; and therefore they do appoint the eldest of the kin to


have the Signory, for that commonly he is a man of stronger years


and better experience to maintain the inheritance and to defend


the country.... And to this end the Tanaist is always ready


known, if it should happen to the Captain suddenly to die, or to


be slain in battle, or to be out of the country, to defend and


keep it from all such dangers.' (Spenser's 'View of the State of


Ireland.')


    Primogeniture, therefore, considered as a rule of succession


to property, appears to me to be a product of tribal leadership


in its decay. Some such system as that represented by the Irish


Tanistry belonged probably at one time to all the tribal


communities which overran the Roman Empire, but no precise


assertion can be made as to the stage in their history at which


it began to be modified, especially since Sohm's investigations


(in his 'Frnkische Reichs-und Gerichtsverfassung') have shown us


how considerably the social organisation of some of these


communities had been affected by central or royal authority in


the interval between the observations of Tacitus and the writing


of the Salic Law. But I think we may safely conjecture that the


transition from the older to the newer Primogeniture took place


everywhere under circumstances nearly the reverse of those which


kept Tanistry so long alive in Ireland. Wherever some degree of


internal peace was maintained during tolerably long periods of


time, wherever an approach was made to the formation of societies


of the distinctive modern type, wherever military and civil


institutions began to group themselves round the central


authority of a king, the value of strategical capacity in the


humbler chiefs would diminish, and in the smaller brotherhoods


the respect for purity of blood would have unchecked play. The


most natural object of this respect is he who most directly


derives his blood from the last ruler, and thus the eldest son,


even though a minor, comes to be preferred in the succession to


his uncle; and, in default of sons, the succession may even


devolve on a woman. There are not a few indications that the


transformation of ideas was gradual. The disputes among great


Highland families about the title to the chieftaincy of


particular clans appear to date from a period when there was


still a conflict between the old principle of succession and the


new; and at a relatively later period, when throughout most of


Western Europe tribal customs have been replaced by feudal rules,


there is a visible uncertainty about such of these rules as


affect succession. Glanville, writing of English military tenures


in the later part of the reign of Henry the Second, observes:


'When anyone dies, leaving a younger son and a grandson, the


child of his eldest son, great doubt exists as to which of the


two the law prefers in the succession to the other, whether the


son or the grandson. Some think the younger son has more right to


the inheritance than the grandson... but others incline to think


that the grandson ought to be preferred to his uncle.'


(Glanville, vii. 7.) This ancient doubt has left traces of itself


on literature no less than on history, since it manifestly


affects the plot of Shakespeare's Hamlet; but the very question


of principle arose between the descendants of daughters in the


controversy between Bruce and Baliol. The succession to the Crown


of Scotland was ultimately settled, as it would have been in


earlier times, by what amounted to national election, but the


decision of Edward the First in favour of Baliol was undoubtedly


in accordance with principles which were gaining ground


everywhere, and I quite agree with Mr Burton (ii. 249) that the


celebrity of the dispute and the full consideration given to it


did much to settle the rule which prevailed in the end, that the


whole of the descendants of an elder child must be exhausted


before those of the younger had a title. When, however, the


eldest son had once taken the place of his uncle as the heir to


the humbler chieftaincies, he doubtless also obtained that


'portion of land attached to the Signory or Chiefry which went


without partition to the Tanaist;' and, as each community


gradually settled down into comparative peace under royal or


central authority, this demesne, as it was afterwards called,


must have assumed more and more the character of mere property


descending according to the rule of primogeniture. It may be


believed that in this way a principle of inheritance was formed


which first of all extended from the demesne to all the estates


of the holder of the Signory, however acquired, and ultimately


determined the law of succession for the privileged classes


throughout feudalised Europe. One vestige of this later course of


change may perhaps be traced in the noble tenure once widely


extended on the Continent, and called in French 'Parage,' under


which the near kinsmen of the eldest son still took an interest


in the family property, but held it of. him as his Peers. There


were, however, other causes than those just stated which led to


the great development of Primogeniture in the early part of the


Middle Ages, but for an examination of them I may be allowed to


refer to the work of mine which I mentioned above. ('Ancient


Law,' pp. 232 et seq.)


    I do not think that the disaffirmation of the legality of


Tanistry, and the substitution for it of the rule of


Primogeniture, can justly be reckoned among the mistakes or


crimes of the English in Ireland. The practice had been


perpetuated in the country by its disorders, which preserved


little groups of kinsmen and their petty chiefs in an unnatural


vitality; and probably Sir John Davis does not speak too harshly


of it when he charges it with 'making all possessions uncertain,


and bringing confusion, barbarism, and incivility.' The decision


against the Irish Gavelkind was far less justifiable. Even if the


institution were exactly what Davis supposed it to be, there was


in.justice in suddenly disappointing the expectations of the


distant kindred who formed the sept of the last holder: but it is


probable that several different modes of succession were


confounded under the name of Gavelkind, and that in many cases a


number of children were unjustifiably deprived of their


inheritance for the advantage of one. All that can be said for


the authors of the revolution is that they seem to have sincerely


believed the mischievousness of the institutions they were


destroying; and it is some evidence of this that, when their


descendants a century later really wished to inflict an injury on


the majority of Irishmen, they re-introduced Gavelkind, though


not in its most ancient shape. They 'gavelled' the lands of


Papists and made them descendible to all the children alike.


There seems to me a melancholy resemblance between some of the


mistakes which, at two widely distant epochs, were committed by


Englishmen, apparently with the very best intentions, when they


were brought into contact with stages in the development of


institutions earlier than that which their own civilisation had


reached. Sir John Davis's language on the subject of the Irish


custom of Gavelkind might be that of an Anglo-Indian lawyer who


should violently censure the Brahminical jurists for not


confounding families with joint undivided families. I do not know


that any such mistake has been made in India, though undoubtedly


the dissolution of the Joint Family was in the early days of our


government unduly encouraged by our Courts. But there is a closer


and more unfortunate similarity between some of the English


experiments in Ireland and those tried in India. Under an Act of


the twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth the Lord Deputy was empowered


to take surrenders and regrant estates to the Irishry. The Irish


lords, says Davis, 'made surrenders of entire countries, and


obtained grants of the whole again to themselves only, and none


other, and all in demesne. In passing of which grants, there was


no care taken of the inferior septs of people.... So that upon


every such surrender or grant, there was but one freeholder made


in a whole country, which was the lord himself; all the rest were


but tenants at will, or rather tenants in villenage.' There are


believed to be many indian joint-families or septs which, in


their later form of village-communities, had the whole of their


lands similarly conferred on a single family out of their number,


or on a royal tax-gatherer outside them, under the earliest


Indian settlements. The error was not in introducing absolute


ownership into Ireland or India, but in the apportionment of the


rights of which property is made up. How, indeed, this


apportionment shall be wisely and justly made, when the time has


fully come for putting individual property in the place of


collective property by a conscious act of the State, is a problem


which taxes to the utmost the statesmanship of the most advanced


era, when animated by the highest benevolence and informed with


the widest knowledge. It has been reserved for our own generation


to witness the least unsatisfactory approach which has hitherto


been made towards the settlement of this grave question in the


great measures collectively known as the enfranchisement of the


Russian serfs.


    The Irish practice of Tanistry connects itself with the rule


of Primogeniture, and the Irish Gavelkind with the rules of


succession most widely followed among both the Eastern and


Western branches of the Aryan race; but there are some passages


in the Brehon tracts which describe an internal division of the


Irish Family, a classification of its members and a corresponding


system of succession to property, extremely unlike any


arrangement which we, with our ideas, can conceive as growing out


of blood-relationship. Possibly, only a few years ago, these


passages would have been regarded as possessing too little


interest in proportion to their difficulty for it to be worth


anybody's while to bestow much thought upon their interpretation.


But some reasons may be given why we cannot wholly neglect them.


The distribution of the Irish Family into the Geilfine, the


Deirbhfine, the Iarfine, and the Indfine -- of which expressions


the three last are translated the True, the After, and the End


Families -- is obscurely pointed at in several texts of the


earlier volumes of the translations; but the Book of Aicill, in


the Third Volume, supplies us for the first time with statements


concerning it having some approach to precision. The learned


Editor of this volume, who has carefully examined them, describes


their effect in the following language: 'Within the Family,


seventeen members were organised in four divisions, of which the


junior class, known as the Geilfine division, consisted of five


persons; the Deirbhfine, the second in order; the Iarfine, the


third in order; and the Indfine, the senior of all, consisted


respectively of four persons. The whole organisation consisted,


and could only consist, of seventeen members. If any person was


born into the Geilfine division, its eldest member was promoted


into the Deirbhfine, the eldest member of the Deirbhfine passed


into the Iarfine; the eldest member of the Iarfine moved into the


Indfine; and the eldest member of the Indfine passed out of the


organisation altogether. It would appear that this transition


from a lower to a higher grade took place upon the introduction


of a new member into the Geilfine division, and therefore


depended upon the introduction of new members, not upon the death


of the seniors.' It seems an inference from all the passages


bearing on the subject that any member of the Joint-family or


Sept might be selected as the starting-point, and might become a


root from which sprung as many of these groups of seventeen men


as he had sons. As soon as any one of the sons had four children,


a full Geilfine sub-group of five persons was formed; but any


fresh birth of a male child to this son or to any of his male


descendants had the effect of sending up the eldest member of the


Geilfine sub-group, provided always he were not the person from


whom it had sprung, into the Deirbhfine. A succession of such


births completed in time the Deirbhfine division, and went on to


form the Iarfine and the Indfine, the After and the End Families.


The essential principle of the system seems to me a distribution


into fours. The fifth person in the Geilfine division I take to


be the parent from whom the sixteen descendants spring, and it


will be seen, from the proviso which I inserted above, that I do


not consider his place in the organisation to have been ever


changed. He appears to be referred to in the tracts as the


Geilfine Chief.


    The interest of this distribution of the kinsmen consists in


this: whatever else it is, it is not a classification of the


members of the family founded on degrees of consanguinity, as we


understand them. And, even if we went no farther than this, the


fact would suggest the general reflection which often occurs to


the student of the history of law, that many matters which seem


to us altogether simple, natural, and therefore probably


universal, are in reality artificial and confined to limited


spheres of application. When one of us opens his Prayer-book and


glances at the Table of Prohibited Degrees, or when the law


student turns to his Blackstone and examines the Table of


Descents, he possibly knows that disputes have arisen about the


rights and duties proper to be adjusted to these scales of


relationship, but it perhaps has never occurred to him that any


other view of the nature of relationship than that upon which


they are based could possibly be entertained. Yet here in the


Book of Aicill is a conception of kinship and of the rights


flowing from it altogether different from that which appears in


the Tables of Degrees and of Descents. The groups are not formed


upon the same principles, nor distinguished from one another on


the same principles. The English Tables are based upon a


classification by degrees, upon identity in the number of


descents by which a given class of persons are removed from a


given person. But the ancient Irish classification obviously


turns upon nothing of the sort. A Geilfine class may consist of a


father and four sons who are not in the same degree, and the


Brehon writers even speak of its consisting of a father, son,


grandson, great-grandson, and great-great-grandson, which is a


conceivable case of Geilfine relationship, though it can scarcely


have been a common one. Now, each of these relatives is in a


different degree from the others. Yet this distribution of the


family undoubtedly affected the law of inheritance, and the


Geilfine class, to our eyes so anomalous, might succeed in


certain eventualities to the property of the other classes, of


which the composition is in our eyes equally arbitrary.


    This singular family organisation suggests, however, a


question which, in the present state of enquiry on the subject


which occupies us, cannot fairly be avoided. I have spoken before


of a volume on 'Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity in the


Human Family,' published by the Smithsonian institute at


Washington. The author, Mr Lewis Morgan, is one of the


comparatively few Americans who have perceived that, if only on


the score of the plain extant evidences of the civilisation which


was once enjoyed and lost by some branches of their stock, the


customs and ideas of the Red Indians deserve intelligent study.


In prosecuting his researches Mr Morgan was struck with the fact


that the conception of Kinship entertained by the Indians, though


extremely clear and precise, and regarded by them as of much


importance, was extremely unlike that which prevails among the


now civilised races. He then commenced a laborious investigation


of the whole subject, chiefly through communications with


correspondents in all parts of the world. The result at which he


arrived was that the ideas on the subject of relationship


entertained by the human family as a whole were extraordinarily


various, but that a generalisation was possible, and that these


ideas could be referred to one or other of two distinct systems,


which Mr Morgan calls respectively the Descriptive and the


Classificatory system. The time at our command will only allow me


to explain his meaning very briefly. The Descriptive system is


that to which we are accustomed. It has come to us from the Canon


law, or else from the Roman law, more particularly as declared in


the 118th Novel of Justinian, but it is not at all confined to


societies deeply affected by Civil and Canon law. Its essence


consists in the giving of separate names to the classes of


relatives which are formed by the members of the family who are


removed by the same number of descents from yourself, the ego or


propositus, or from some common ancestor. Thus, your uncle stands


to you in the third degree, there being one degree or step from


yourself to your father or mother, a second from your father or


mother to their parents, a third from those parents to their


other children, among whom are your uncles. And 'uncle' is a


general name for all male relatives standing to you in this third


degree. The other names employed under the Descriptive system are


among the words in most common use; yet it is to be noted that


the system cannot in practice be carried very far. We speak of


uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, cousin; but then we get to


great-uncle, grand-nephew, and so forth, and at length lose our


way amid complications of 'great' and 'grand' until we cease to


distinguish our distant kindred by particular designations. The


Roman technical law went considerably farther than we do with the


specific nomenclature of relatives; yet there is reason to think


that the popular dialects of Latin were more barren, and no


Descriptive system can go on indefinitely with the process. On


the other hand, the Classificatory system groups the relatives in


classes, often large ones, which have no necessary connection


with degrees. Under it a man's father and his uncles are grouped


together, sometimes his uncles on his father's side, sometimes on


the mother's side, sometimes on both; and perhaps they are all


inherently called his fathers. Similarly, a man's brothers and


all his male cousins may be classed together and called his


brothers. The effect of the system is in general to bring within


your mental grasp a much greater number of your kindred than is


possible under the system to which we are accustomed. This


advantage is gained, it is true, at the expense of the power of


discriminating between the members of the several classes, but


still it may be very important in certain states of society,


since each of the classes usually stands under some sort of


conjoint responsibility.


    I am not now concerned with the explanation of the


Classificatory system of Kinship. Mr. Morgan and the school to


which he belongs find it, as I said before, in a state of sexual


relations, alleged to have once prevailed universally throughout


the human race, and known now to occur in some obscure fragments


of it. The fullest account of the condition of society in which


these views of relationship are believed to have grown up may be


read in Mr McLennan's most original work on Primitive Marriage.


The point before us, however, is whether we have a trace of the


Classificatory system in the Irish division of the Family into


four small groups, no one of which is necessarily composed of


relatives of the same degree, and each of which has distinct


rights of its own, and stands under definite responsibilities.


Undoubtedly, the Descriptive system was that which the ancient


Irish generally followed; but still it would be an interesting,


and, in the opinion of pre-historic writers, an important fact,


if a distribution of the Family only intelligible as a relic of


the Classificatory system remained as a 'survival' among the


institutions reflected by the Brehon Laws. My own opinion, which


I will state at once, is that the resemblance between the Irish


classification of kindred and the modes of classification


described by Mr Morgan is only superficial and accidental. The


last explanation Mr. Morgan would admit of the remarkable ideas


concerning kinship which form the subject of his book would be


that they are connected with the Patria Potestas, that famous


institution which held together what he and his school consider


to be a relatively modern form of the Family. I think, however, I


can assign some at least plausible reasons for believing that


this perplexing four-fold division of the Celtic Family is


neither a mere survival from immemorial barbarism nor, as most


persons who have noticed it have supposed, a purely arbitrary


arrangement, but a monument of that Power of the Father which is


the first and greatest land -mark in the course of legal history.


    Let me repeat that the Irish Family is assumed to consist of


three groups of four persons and one group of five persons. I


have already stated that I consider the fifth person in the group


of five to be the parent from whom all the other members of the


four divisions spring, or with whom they are connected by


adoptive descent. Thus, the whole of the natural or adoptive


descendants are distributed into four groups of four persons


each, their rank in the Family being in the inverse order of


their seniority. The Geilfine group is several times stated by


the Brehon lawyers to be at once the highest and the youngest.


    Now, Mr Whitley Stokes has conveyed to me his opinion that


'Geilfine, means 'hand-family.' As I have reason to believe that


a different version of the term has been adopted by eminent


authority, I will give the reasons for Mr Stokes's view. 'Gil'


means 'hand' -- this was also the rendering of O'Curry -- and it


is, in fact, the Greek word cheir. In several Aryan languages the


term signifying 'hand' is an expressive equivalent for Power, and


specially for Family or Patriarchal Power. Thus, in Greek we have


upocheirios and cherus, for the person under the hand. In Latin


we have herus 'master,' from an old word, cognate to cheir; and


we have also one of the cardinal terms of ancient Roman Family


Law, manus, or hand, in the sense of Patriarchal authority. In


Roman legal phraseology, the wife who haS become in law her


husband's daughter by marriage is in manu. The son discharged


from Paternal Power is emancipated. The free person who has


undergone mancipation is in mancipio. In the Celtic languages we


have, with other words, 'Gilla,' a servant, a word familiar to


sportsmen and travellers in the Highlands and to readers of Scott


in its Anglicised shape, 'Gillie.'


    My suggestion, then, is that the key to the Irish


distribution of the Family, as to so many other things in ancient


law, must be sought in the Patria Potestas. It seems to me to be


founded on the order of emancipation from Paternal authority. The


Geilfine, the Hand-family, consists of the parent and the four


natural or adoptive sons immediately under his power. The other


groups consist of emancipated descendants, diminishing in dignity


in proportion to their distance from the group which, according


to archaic notions, constitutes the true or representative


family.


    The remains which we possess of the oldest Roman law point to


a range of ideas very similar to that which appears to have


produced the Irish institution. The Family under Patria Potestas


was, with the Pater-Familias, the true Roman Family. The children


who were emancipated from Paternal Power may have gained a


practical advantage, but they undoubtedly lost in theoretical


dignity. They underwent that loss of status which in ancient


legal phraseology was called a capitis deminutio. We know too


that, according to primitive Roman law, they lost all rights of


inheritance, and these were only gradually restored to them by a


relatively modern institution, the Equity of the Roman Praetor.


Nevertheless there are hints on all sides that, as a general


rule, sons as they advanced in years were enfranchished from


Paternal Power, and no doubt this practice supplies a partial


explanation of the durability of the Patria Potestas as a Roman


institution. The statements, therefore, which we find concerning


the Celtic Family would not be very untrue of the Roman. The


youngest children were first in dignity.


    Of course I am not contending for an exact resemblance


between the ancient Roman and ancient Celtic Family. We have no


trace of any systematised discharge of the sons from the Roman


Patria Potestas; their enfranchisement seems always to have been


dependent on the will of the Pater-Familias. The divisions of the


Celtic Family seem, on the other hand, to have been determined by


a self-acting principle. An even more remarkable distinction is


suggested by passages in the Book of Aicill which seem to show


that the parent, who retained his place in the Geilfine group,


might himself have a father alive. The peculiarity, which has no


analogy in ancient Roman law, may possibly have its explanation


in usages which many allusions in the Brehon law show to have


been followed by the Celts, as they were by several other ancient


societies. The older members of the Family or Joint Family seem


in advanced age to have become pensioners on it, and, like


Laertes in the Odyssee, to have vacated their privileges of


ownership or of authority. On such points, however, it is safest


to suspend the judgment till the Brehon law has been more


thoroughly and critically examined.


    At the date at which the Book of Aicill was put together the


Irish division of the Family seems only to have had importance in


the law of succession after death. This, however, is the rule in


all societies. When the ancient constitution of the Family has


ceased to affect anything else, it affects inheritance. All laws


of inheritance are, in fact, made up of the dbris of the various


forms which the Family has assumed. Our system of succession to


personalty, and the whole French law of inheritance, are derived


from Roman law, which in its latest condition is a mixture of


rules having their origin in successive ascertainable stages of


the Roman Family, and is a sort of compromise between them.


    The authors of the Brehon Law Tracts frequently compare the


Geilfine division of the Family to the human hand, but with them


the comparison has at first sight the air of being purely


fanciful. The Geilfine group has five members, and the hand has


five fingers. Dr Sullivan -- who, however, conceives the Geilfine


in a way materially different from the authorities whom I follow


-- tells us that 'as they represented the roots of the spreading


branches of the Family, they were called the cuic mera na Fine,


or the 'five fingers of the Fine.' If the explanation of


'Geilfine' which I have partly taken from Mr Whitley Stokes be


correct, we must suppose that, at the time at which the Brehon


tracts were thrown into their present form, the Patria Potestas


of the ancient Irish, though frequently referred to in the tracts


as the father's power of 'judgment, proof, and witness, over his


sons, had nevertheless considerably decayed, as it is apt to do


in all societies under unfavourable circumstances, and that with


this decay the association of the Geilfine group with 'hand' in


the sense of Paternal Power had also become faint. There is,


however, a real connection of another kind between the Geilfine


group and the five fingers of the hand. If you ask why in a large


number of ancient societies Five is the representative number, no


answer can be given except that there are five fingers on the


human hand. I commend to your attention on this point Mr Tylor's


most instructive chapter on the infancy of the Art of Counting,


in the first volume of his 'Primitive Culture.'


'Finger-counting,' he observes, 'is not only found among savages


and uneducated men, carrying on a part of their mental operations


where language is only partly able to follow it, but it also


retains a place and an undoubted use among the most cultured


nations as a preparation and means of acquiring higher


arithmetical methods, (I. 246.) Five is thus a primitive natural


maximum number. You will recollect that the early English


Township was represented by the Reeve and the four men. The


Council of an indian Village Community most commonly consists of


five persons, and throughout the East the normal number of a Jury


or Board of arbitrators is always five -- the punchayet familiar


to all who have the smallest knowledge of India. The Geilfine,


the representative group of the Irish Family, consisting of the


Parent and the four descendants still retained under his Patria


Potestas, falls in with this widely extended conception of


representation.


    The Patria Potestas seems to me the most probable source of a


well-known English custom which has occasioned no little surprise


to students of our law. 'Borough English,' under which the


youngest son and not the eldest succeeds to the burgage-tenements


of his father, has from time immemorial being recognised as a


widely disused usage of which it is the duty of our Courts to


take judicial notice, and many writers on our real property laws,


from Littleton downwards, have attempted to account for it.


Littleton thought he saw its origin in the tender age of the


youngest son, who was not so well able to help himself as the


rest of the brethren. Other authors, as Blackstone tells us,


explained it by a supposed right of the Seigneur or lord, now


very generally regarded as apocryphal, which raised a presumption


of the eldest son's illegitimacy. Blackstone himself goes as far


a-field as North-Eastern Asia for an explanation. He quotes from


Duhalde the statement that the custom of descent to the youngest


son prevails among the Tartars. 'That nation,' he says, 'is


composed totally of shepherds and herdsmen; and the elder sons,


as soon as they are capable of leading a pastoral life, migrate


from their father with a certain allotment of cattle, and go to


seek a new habitation. The youngest son, therefore, who continues


longest with the father, is naturally the heir of his house, the


rest being already provided for. And thus we find that, among


many other Northern nations, it was the custom for all the sons


but one to migrate from the father, which one now became his


heir.' The explanation was really the best which could be given


in Blackstone's day, but it was not necessary to go for it so far


from home. It is a remarkable circumstance that an institution


closely resembling Borough English is found in the Laws of Wales,


giving the rule of descent for all cultivating villeins. 'Cum


fratres inter se dividant haereditatem,' says a rule of that


portion of the Welsh Law which has survived in Latin; 'junior


debet habere tygdyn, i. e. aedificia patris sui, et octo acras de


terr*, si habuerint, (L. Wall., vol. ii. p. 780). And, when the


youngest son has had the paternal dwelling-house, eight acres of


land and certain tools and utensils, the other sons are to divide


what remains. It appears to me that the institution is founded on


the same ideas as those which gave a preference to the Geilfine


division of the Celtic family. The home-staying, unemancipated


son, still retained under Patria Potestas, is preferred to the


others. If this be so, there is no room for the surprise which


the custom of Borough English has excited, and which arises from


contrasting it with the rule of Primogeniture. But the two


institutions have a different origin. Primogeniture is not a


natural outgrowth of the family. It is a political not a tribal


institution, and comes to us not from the clansmen but from the


Chief. But the rule of Borough English, like the privileges of


the Geilfine, is closely connected with the ancient conception of


the Family as linked together by Patria Potestas. Those who are


most emphatically part of the Family when it is dissolved by the


death of its head are preferred in the inheritance according to


ideas which appear to have been once common to the primitive


Romans, to the Irish and Welsh Celts, and to the original


observers, whoever they were, of the English custom.













Lecture VI













The Chief and the Land













    The Brehon law-tracts strongly suggest that, among the things






which we in modern times have most forgotten, is the importance






of horned cattle, not merely in the infancy of society, but at a






period when it had made some considerable advance towards






maturity It is scarcely possible to turn over a page without






finding some allusion to beeves, to bulls, cows, heifers, and






calves. Horses appear, sheep, swine, and dogs; and bees, the






producers of the greatest of primitive luxuries, have a place






assigned to them as an article of property which has something






corresponding to it in old Roman law. But the animals much the






most frequently mentioned are kine. There are some few facts both






of etymology and of legal classification which point to the






former importance of oxen. Capitale -- kine reckoned by the






head-cattle -- has given birth to one of the most famous terms of






law and to one of the most famous terms of political economy,






Chattels and Capital. Pecunia was probably the word for money






which was employed by the largest part of mankind for the longest






time together. But oxen, though they have furnished a modern






synonym for personal property, were not, I need scarcely say,






classed in the lower order of commodities in all ancient systems






of law. The primitive Roman law placed them in the highest class,






and joined them with land and slaves as items of the Res Mancipi.






As in several other instances, the legal dignity of this






description of property among the Romans appears to answer to its






religious dignity among the Hindoos. Kine, which the most ancient






Sanscrit literature shows to have been eaten as food, became at






some unknown period sacred, and their flesh forbidden;






and.ultimately two of the chief 'Things which required a






Mancipation' at Rome, oxen and landed property, had their






counterpart in the sacred bull of Siva and the sacred land of






India.






    The subject has possibly been obscured by an impression that






horned cattle were only of preeminent importance to mankind in






that pastoral stage of society which has been the theme of so






much not altogether profitable speculation. The actual evidence






seems to show that their greatest value was obtained when groups






of men settled on spaces of land and betook themselves to the






cultivation of food-grains. It is very possible that kine were at






first exclusively valued for their flesh and milk, but it is






clear that in very early times a distinct special importance






belonged to them as the instrument or medium of exchange. In the






Homeric literature, they are certainly a measure of value; there






seems no reason to doubt the traditional story that the earliest






coined money known at Rome was stamped with the figure of an ox;






and at all events the connection between 'pecus' and 'pecunia' is






unmistakeable. Part, but by no means all, the prominence given by






the Brehon lawyers to horned cattle wises certainly from their






usefulness in exchange. Throughout the Brehon tracts fines, dues,






rents, and returns are calculated in live-stock, not exclusively






in kine, but nearly so. Two standards of value are constantly






referred to, 'sed' and 'cumhal.' 'Cumhal' is said to have






originally meant a female slave, just as 'ancilla' in medieval






Latinity sometimes means the price of a slave-girl; but 'sed' is






plainly used for an amount or quantity of live stock, probably to






some small extent variable. The next stage, however, in the






history of cattle is that at which their service to mankind is






greatest. They are now valued chiefly, in some communities






exclusively, for their use in tillage, for their labour and their






manure. Their place has been taken very generally in Western






Europe by horses as beasts of plough, but the change was even






there both gradual and comparatively modern; and there are still






large portions of the world where the horse is exclusively






employed, as it seems everywhere to have been at one time, for






war, for pleasure, or the chase. Oxen were thus almost the sole






representatives of what a Political Economist would now call






Capital applied to land. I think it probable that the economical






causes which led to the disuse of oxen as a medium of exchange






led also to the change in their legal position which we find to






have taken place at Rome and in India. The sanctification of the






ox among the Hindoos, rendering his flesh unlawful as food, must






certainly have been connected with the desire to preserve him for






tillage, and his elevation to a place among the Res Mancipi may






well have been supposed to have the same tendency, since it made






his alienation extremely difficult, and must have greatly






embarrassed his employment in exchange. At this point the history






of horned cattle becomes unhappily mixed up with that of large






portions of mankind. The same causes which we perceive altering






the position of the ox and turning him into an animal partially






adscriptus glebaei undoubtedly produced also a great extension of






slavery. The plentifulness of land, even in what are considered






old countries, down to comparatively recent times, and the






scarcity of capital even in its rudest forms, seem to me to be






placed in the clearest light by Mr Thorold Rogers's deeply






instructive volumes on Agriculture and Prices during the Middle






Ages; and much in history which has been only partially






intelligible is explained by them. The enormous importation of






slaves into the central territories of the Roman Commonwealth,






and the wholesale degradation of the free cultivating communities






of Western Europe into assemblages of villeins, seem to be






expedients of the same nature as restrictions on the alienation






of the ox and on its consumption for food, and to have been alike






suggested by the same imperious necessity of procuring and






preserving instruments for the cultivation of land.






    The importance of horned cattle to men in a particular state






of society must, as it seems to me, be carefully borne in mind if






we are to understand one of the most remarkable parts of the






ancient Irish law which relates to the practice of 'giving






stock.' I stated before that, though I did not draw the same






inferences from the fact, I agreed with the writers who think






that the land-system of ancient Ireland was theoretically based






on the division of the tribe-lands among the free tribesmen. But






I also said that in my opinion the true difficulty of those days






was not to obtain land but to obtain the means of cultivating it.






The want of capital, taken in its original sense, was the






necessity which pressed on the small holder of land and reduced






him occasionally to the sorest straits. On the other hand, the






great owners of cattle were the various Chiefs, whose primitive






superiority to the other tribesmen in this respect was probably






owing to their natural functions as military leaders of the






tribe. The Brehon law suggests to me that the Chiefs too were






pressed by a difficulty of their own, that of finding sufficient






pasturage for their herds. Doubtless their power over the






waste-lands of the particular group over which they happened to






preside was always growing, but the most fruitful portions of the






tribal territory would probably be those which the free tribesmen






occupied. The fact that the wealth of the Chiefs in cattle was






out of proportion to their power of dealing with the tribal






lands, and the fact that the tribesmen were every now and then






severely pressed by the necessity of procuring the means of






tillage, appear to me to supply the best explanation of the






system of giving and receiving stock, to which two sub-tracts of






the Senchus Mor are devoted, the Cain-Saerrath and the






Cain-Aigillne, the Law of Saer-stock tenure and the Law of






Daer-stock tenure.






    The interest of these two compendia is very great. In the






first place, they go far to show us how it was that the power of






the tribal Chief increased, not merely over his servile






dependants, but over the free tribesmen among whom he had been at






first only primus inter pares. In the next, they give us, from






the authentic records of the ancient usages of one particular






society, a perfectly novel example of a proceeding by which






feudal vassalage was created. I need scarcely dwell on the






historical importance of the various agencies by which the






relation of Lord and Vassal was first established. It was by them






that the Western europe of the Roman despotism was changed into






the Western Europe of the feudal sovereignties. Nothing can be






more strikingly unlike in external aspect than the states of






society which are discerned on either side of the stormy interval






filled with the movement and subsidence of the barbarian






invasions. Just before it is reached, we see a large part of






mankind arranged, so to speak, on one vast level surface






dominated in every part by the overshadowing authority of the






Roman Emperor. On this they lie as so many equal units, connected






together by no institutions which are not assumed to be the






creation of positive Roman law; and between them and their






sovereign there is nothing but a host of functionaries who are






his servants. When feudal Europe has been constituted, all this






is changed. Everybody has become the subordinate of somebody else






higher than himself and yet exalted above him by no great






distance. If I may again employ an image used by me before,






society has taken the form of a pyramid or cone. The great






multitude of cultivators is at its base; and then it mounts up






through ever-narrowing sections till it approaches an apex, not






always visible, but always supposed to be discoverable, in the






Emperor, or the Pope, or God Almighty. There is strong reason to






believe that neither picture contains all the actual detail, and






that neither the theory of the Roman lawyers on one side nor the






theory of the feudal lawyers on the other accounts for or takes






notice of a number of customs and institutions which had a






practical existence in their day. Either theory was, however,






founded upon the most striking facts of the epoch at which it was






framed.






    We know something, though not very much, of the formal






instrumentalities by which the later set of facts became so






extremely dissimilar to the earlier. Mr Stubbs ('Constitutional






History,' i. 252) has thus summarised the most modern views on






the subject. Feudalism 'had grown up from two great sources, the






Benefice and the practice of Commendation. The beneficiary system






originated partly in gifts of land made by the kings out of their






own estates to their kinsmen and servants, with a special






undertaking to be faithful, partly in the surrender by landowners






of their estates to churches or powerful men, to be received back






again and held by them as tenants for rent or service. By the






latter arrangement the weaker man obtained the protection of the






stronger, and he who felt himself insecure placed his title under






the defence of the Church. By the practice of Commendation, on






the other hand, the inferior put himself under the personal care






of a lord, but without altering his title or divesting himself of






his right to his estate; he became a vassal and did homage.'






Commendation, in particular, went on all over Western Europe with






singular universality of operation and singular uniformity of






result, and it helped to transform the ancient structure of






Teutonic society no less than the institutions of the Roman






Provincials. Yet there is considerable mystery about men's






motives for reporting to so onerous a proceeding, and the






statements of nearly all writers on the subject are general and






chiefly conjectural. Perhaps the most precise assertion which we






have been hitherto able to hazard as to the reasons of so large a






part of the world for voluntarily placing themselves in a






conditIon of personal subordination is, that they must have been






connected with the system of civil and criminal responsibility






which prevailed in those times. Families -- real or






artificial-natural or formed by agreement -- were responsible for






the offences and even for the civil liabilities of their members;






but corporate responsibility must have been replaced,






conveniently for all persons concerned, by the responsibility of






a single lord, who could prevent injury and pay compensation for






it, and whose testimony, in compurgation and other legal






proceedings, had a weight often assigned to it exceeding that of






several inferior persons combined. More generally, but with at






least equal plausibility, we can lay down that the general






disorder of the world had much to do with the growth of the new






institutions; and that a little society compactly united under a






feudal lord was greatly stronger for defence or attack than any






body of kinsmen or co-villagers and than any assemblage of






voluntary confederates. It would be absurd, however, to suppose






that we have materials for a confident opinion as to men's






motives for submitting themselves to a change which was probably






recommended to them or forced on them by very various






circumstances in different countries and in relatively different






stages of society.






    I do not wish to generalise unduly from the new information






furnished by the Brehon law, but there has long been a suspicion






(I cannot call it more) among learned men that Celtic usages






would throw some light on Commendation, and, at any rate, amid






the dearth of our materials, any addition to them from an






authentic source is of value. Let me again state the impression I






have formed of the ancient Irish land-system, in the stage at






which it is revealed to us by the Brehon tracts. The land of the






tribe, whether cultivated or waste, belongs to the tribe, and






this is true, whether the tribe be a joint-family of kinsmen or a






larger and more artificial assemblage. Such theoretically is the






principle, if the traditional view of the primitive state of






things may be called a theory. But much of the territory of the






larger tribes hag been permanently assigned to Chiefly families






or to smaller sub-divisions of tribesmen, and the land of the






smaller sub-divisions tends ever to become divided among their






members, subject to certain reserved rights of the collective






brotherhood. Every considerable tribe, and almost every smaller






body of men contained in it, is under a Chief, whether he be one






of the many tribal rulers whom the Irish records call Kings, or






whether he be one of those heads of joint-families whom the






Anglo-Irish lawyers at a later date called the Capita






Cognationum. But he is not owner of the tribal laid. his own land






he may have, consisting of private estate or of official domain,






or of both, and over the general tribal land he has a general






administrative authority, which is ever growing greater over that






portion of it which is unappropriated waste. He is meanwhile the






military leader of his tribesmen, and, probably in that capacity,






he has acquired great wealth in cattle. It has somehow become of






great importance to him to place out portions of his herds among






the tribesmen, and they on their part occasionally find






themselves through stress of circumstance in pressing need of






cattle for employment in tillage. Thus the Chiefs appear in the






Brehon law as perpetually 'giving stock,' and the tribesmen as






receiving it. The remarkable thing is, that out of this practice






grew, not only the familiar incidents of ownership, such as the






right to rent and the liability to pay it, together with some






other incidents less pleasantly familiar to the student of Irish






history, but, above and besides these, newly all the well-known






incidents of feudal tenure. It is by taking stock that the free






Irish tribesman becomes the Ceile or Kyle, the vassal or man of






his Chief, owing him not only rent but service and homage. The






exact effects of 'commendation' are thus produced, and the






interesting circumstance is that they are produced from a simple






and intelligible motive. The transaction between Chief and Vassal






is very burdensome to the latter, but the necessity which leads






to it is pressing, and the force of this necessity would be






greater the more primitive the society in which it arose, and the






more recent its settlement on its lands. All this is especially






instructive, because there is no reason whatever to suppose that






Beneficiary grants and Commendation arose suddenly in the world






at the disruption of the Roman Empire. They were probably, in






some form or other, deeply seated among the rudimentary usages of






all Aryan societies.






    The new position which the tribesman assumed through






accepting stock from a Chief varied according to the quantity of






stock he received. If he took much stock he sank to a much lower






status than if he had taken little. On this difference in the






quantity accepted there turns the difference between the two






great classes of Irish tenantry, the Saer and Daer tenants,






between whose status and that of the free and higher base tenants






of an English manor there is a resemblance not to be mistaken.






The Saer-stock tenant, distinguished by the limited amount of






stock which he received from the Chief, remained a freeman and






retained his tribal rights in their integrity. The normal period






of his tenancy was seven years, and at the end of it he became en






titled to the cattle which had been in his possession. Meantime






he had the advantage of employing them in tillage, and the Chief






on his part received the 'growth and increase and milk,' the






first two words implying the young and the manure. So far there






is nothing very remarkable in the arrangement, but it is






expressly laid down that besides this it entitled the Chief to






receive homage and manual labour; manual labour is explained to






mean the service of the vassal in reaping the Chief's harvest and






in assisting to build his castle or fort, and it is stated that,






in lieu of manual labour, the vassal might be required to follow






his Chief to the wars. Any large addition to the stock deposited






with the Saer-stock tenant, or an unusual quantity accepted in






the first instance by the tribesman, created the relation between






vassal and chief called Daer-stock tenancy. The Daer-stock tenant






had unquestionably parted with some portion of his freedom, and






his duties are invariably referred to as very onerous. The stock






given to him by the Chief consisted of two portions, of which one






was proportionate to the rank of the recipient, the other to the






rent in kind to which the tenant became liable. The technical






standard of the first was the tenant's 'honor-price,' the fine or






damage which was payable for injuring him, and which in these






ancient systems of law varies with the dignity of the person






injured. The relation between the second portion of stock and the






rent is elaborately defined in the Brehon law: 'The proportionate






stock of a calf of the value of a sack with its accompaniments,






and refections for three persons in the summer, and work for






three days, is three "samhaisc" heifers or their value'






('Cain-Aigillne,' p. 25); or, in other words, that the Chief may






entitle himself to the calf, the refections, and the labour, he






must deposit three heifers with the tenant. 'The proportionate






stock of a "dartadh " heifer with its accompaniment, is twelve






"seds,"' explained to mean twelve 'samhaisc' heifers, or six






cows. And so on in many places. The rent in kind, or food-rent,






which was thus proportioned to the stock received, unquestionably






developed in time in to a rent payable in respect of the tenant's






land; but it is certainly a curious and unexpected fact that the






rent of the class which is believed to have embraced a very large






part of the ancient Irish tenantry did not, in its earliest form,






correspond in any way to the value of the tenant's land, but






solely to the value of the Chief's property deposited with the






tenant. But the most burdensome obligation imposed on the






Daerstock tenant is that which, in the quotation just made by me,






is expressed by the word 'refections.' Beside the rent in kind






and the feudal services, the Chief who had given stock was






entitled to come, with a company of a certain number, and feast






at the Dear stock tenant's house, at particular periods, for a






fixed number of days. This 'right of refection,' and liability to






it, are among the most distinctive features of ancient Irish






custom, and their origin is probably to be explained by the






circumstance that the Irish Chief, though far more privileged






than his tenants, was little better housed and almost as poorly






furnished out, and could not have managed to consume at home the






provisions to which his gifts of stock entitled him. But the






practice had a most unhappy history. The Brehon law defines it






and limits it narrowly on all sides; but its inconvenience and






its tendency to degenerate into an abuse are manifest, and from






it are doubtless descended those oppressions which revolted such






English observers of Ireland as Spenser and Davis, the 'coin and






livery,' and the 'cosherings' of the Irish Chiefs, which they






denounce with such indignant emphasis. Perhaps there was no Irish






usage which seemed to Englishmen so amply to justify that which






as a whole I believe to have been a great mistake and a great






wrong, the entire judicial or legislative abolition of Irish






customs. The precautions by which the Brehon lawyers could fence






it in were not probably at any time very effectual, but, as I






before stated, they did what they could; and, moreover, as






defined by them, the relation out of which Daer-stock tenancy and






its peculiar obligations arose was not perpetual. After food-rent






and service had been rendered for seven years, if the Chief died,






the tenant became entitled to the stock; while, on the other






hand, if the tenant died, his heirs were partly, though not






wholly, relieved from their obligation. At the same time it is






very probable that Daer-stock tenancy, which must have begun in






the necessities of the tenant, was often from the same cause






rendered practically permanent.






    It has frequently been conjectured that certain incidents of






feudal tenure pointed back to some such system as the Brehon






tracts describe to us. The Heriot of English Copyhold tenure, the






'best beast' taken by the Lord on the death of a base tenant, has






been explained as an acknowledgment of the Lord's ownership of






the cattle with which he anciently stocked the land of his






villeins, just as the Heriot of the military tenant is believed






to have had its origin in a deposit of arms. Adam Smith






recognised the great antiquity of the Metayer tenancy, still






widely spread over the Continent, of which one variety was in his






day found in Scotland under the name of 'steelbow.' I am not at






all surprised that, in one of the Prefaces to the official






translation of the Brehon laws, a comparison should be instituted






between this tenancy and the Saer and Daer-stock tenancy of






ancient Irish law. The outward resemblance is considerable, and






the history of Metayer tenancy is so obscure that I certainly






cannot undertake to say that practices answering to those I have






described had not in some countries something to do with its






primitive form. But the distinctions between the ancient and the






modern tenancies are more important than the analogies. In






Metayer tenancy a landlord supplies the land and stock, a tenant






the labour only and the skill; but in Saer and Daer-stock tenancy






the land belonged to the tenant. Again, the effect of the ancient






Irish relation was to produce, not merely a contractual






liability, but a status. The tenant had his social and tribal






position distinctly altered by accepting stock. Further, the






acceptance of stock was not always voluntary. A tribesman, in one






stage of Irish custom at all events, was bound to receive stock






from his own 'King,' or, in other words, from the Chief of his






tribe in its largest extension; and everywhere the Brehon laws






seem to me to speak of the acceptance of stock as a hard






necessity. Lastly, the Tribe to which the intending tenant






belonged had in some cases a Veto on his adoption of the new






position, which was clearly regarded as a proceeding invasive of






tribal rights and calculated to enfeeble them. In order to give






the Tribe the opportunity of interposing whenever it had legal






power to do so, the acceptance of stock had to be open and






public, and the consequences of effecting it surreptitiously are






elaborately set forth by the law. It seems to me clear that it






was discouraged by the current popular morality. One of those






rules, frequent in ancient bodies of law, which are rather moral






precepts than juridical provisions, declares that 'no man should






leave a rent on his land which he did not find there.'






    The system which I have been describing must have contributed






powerfully to dissolve the more ancient tribal and family






organisation. If the Chief who gave and the Ceile who accepted






stock belonged to the same Tribe, the effect of the transaction






was to create a relation between them, not indeed altogether






unlike that of tribal connection, but still materially different






from it in many respects and much more to the advantage of the






chieftain. But the superior from whom a man took stock was not






always the Chief of his own Sept or Tribe. So far as the Brehon






law can be said to show any favour to the new system of






vassalage, it encourages it between natural chief and natural






tribesman; and, on the other hand, it puts difficulties in its






way when there is an attempt to establish it between a tribesman






and a strange Chief. But there seem to be abundant admissions






that freemen did occasionally commend themselves in this way to






superiors other than their Chiefs. avery nobleman, as I said






before, is assumed to be as a rule rich in cattle, and it appears






to have been an object with everyone to disperse his herds by the






practice of giving stock. The enriched peasant who was on his way






to be ennobled, the Bo-Aire, seems to have had Ceiles who






accepted stock from him, as well as had the nobles higher in






degree. Accordingly, the new groups formed of the Lord and his






Vassals -- if we may somewhat antedate these last words -- were






sometimes wholly distinct from the old groups composed of the






Chief and his Clan. Nor, again, was the new relation confined to






Aires, or noblemen, and Ceiles, or free but non-noble tribesmen.






The Bo-Aire certainly, and apparently the higher Chiefs also,






accepted stock on occasion from chieftains more exalted than






themselves; and in the end to 'give stock' came to mean the same






thing as to assert feudal superiority, and to 'accept stock' the






same thing, which in the language of other societies was called






'commendation.' It is strong evidence of the soundness of the






conclusions reached of late years by historical scholars (and,






among others, by Mr Bryce), as to the deep and wide influence






exercised by the Roman Empire, even in its later form, that (of






course by a fiction) the Brehon law represents the King of






Ireland as 'accepting stock' from the Emperor. 'When the King of






Erin is without opposition' -- that is, as the explanation runs,






when he holds the ports of Dublin, Waterford, and Limerick, which






were usually in the hands of the Danes -- 'he receives stock from






the King of the Romans' (S. M., ii. 225). The commentary goes on






to say that sometimes' it is by the successor of Patrick that the






stock is given to the King of Erin; 'and this remarkable passage






seems to show that an Irish writer spoke of the successor of St






Patrick, where a writer of the same approximate period in England






or on the European Continent would assuredly have spoken of the






Pope.






    I hope it is unnecessary for me to insist on the interest






which attaches to this part of the Brehon law, it has been not






uncommon, upon the evidence furnished by the usages of the






Scottish Highlanders, sharply to contrast Celtic tribal customs






with feudal rules; and doubtless between these customs and






feudalism in its perfected state there are differences of the






greatest importance. Yet, if the testimony of the Brehon tracts






may be trusted, such differences arose, not from essential






distinctions, but, in some measure at all events, from






distinctions of degree in comparative social development. The






germs of feudalism lay deep in the more ancient social forms, and






were ready to assert their vitality even in a country like






Ireland, which, after it was once Christianised, can have






borrowed next to no institutions from its neighbours, cut off as






it was from the Continent by distance, and from England by






stubborn national repulsion. It is also worthy of observation






that this natural growth of feudalism was not, as some eminent






recent writers have supposed, entirely distinct from the process






by which the authority of the Chief or Lord over the Tribe or






Village was extended, but rather formed part of it. While the






unappropriated waste-lands were falling into his domain, the






villagers or tribesmen were coming through natural agencies under






his personal power.






    The Irish practice of 'giving stock' seems to me also to






connect itself with another set of phenomena which have generally






been thought to belong to a very different stage of history. We






obtain from the law-tracts a picture of an aristocracy of wealth






in its most primitive form; and we see that the possession of






this wealth gave the nobles an immense power over the non-noble






freemen who had nothing but their land. Caesar seems to me to be






clearly referring to the same state of relations in the Celtic






sister society, when he speaks of the Gaulish chiefs, the






Equites, having one principal source of their influence in the






number of their debtors. (B. G., i. 4; B. G., vi. 13.) Now, you






will remember how uniformly, when our knowledge of the ancient






world commences, we find plebeian classes deeply indebted to






aristocratic orders. At the beginning of Athenian history we find






the Athenian commonalty the bondslaves through debt of the






Eupatrids; at the beginning of Roman history we find the Roman






Commons in money bondage to the Patricians. The fact has been






accounted for in many ways, and it has been plausibly suggested






that it was the occurrence of repeated bad seasons which placed






the small farmers of the Attic and Roman territory at the mercy






of wealthy nobles. But the explanation is imperfect unless we






keep in mind the chief lesson of these Brehon tracts, and






recollect that the relative importance of Land and Capital has






been altering throughout history. The general proposition that






Land is limited in quantity and is distinguished by this






limitation from all other commodities which are practically






capable of indefinite multiplication, has always of course been






abstractedly true; but, like many other principles of Political






Economy, its value depends on the circumstances to which it is






applied. In very ancient times land was a drug, while capital was






extremely perishable, added to with the greatest difficulty, and






lodged in very few hands. The proportionate importance of the two






requisites of cultivation changed very slowly, and it is only






quite recently that in some countries it has been well-nigh






reversed. The ownership of the instruments of tillage other than






the land itself was thus, in early agricultural communities, a






power of the first order, and, as it may be believed that a stock






of the primitive capital larger than usual was very generally






obtained by plunder, we can understand that these stocks were






mostly in the hands of noble classes whose occupation was war,






and who at all events had a monopoly of the profits of office.






The advance of capital at usurious interest, and the helpless






degradation of the borrowers, were the natural results of such






economical conditions. For the honour of the obscure and






forgotten Brehon writers of the Cain-Saerrath and the






Cain-Aigillne, let it not be forgotten that their undertaking was






essentially the same as that which went far to immortalise one






great Athenian legislator. By their precise and detailed






statements of the proportion which is to be preserved between the






stock which the Chief supplies and the returns which the tenant






pays, they plainly intend to introduce certainty and equity into






a naturally oppressive system. Solon, dealing with a state of






society in which coined money had probably not long taken the






place of something like the 'seds' of the Brehon law, had no






expedient open to him but the debasement of the currency and the






cancellation of debts; but he was attacking the same evil as the






Brehon lawyers, and equally interfering with that freedom of






contract which wears a very different aspect according to the






condition of the society in which it prevails.






    The great part played in the Brehon law by Cattle as the






oldest form of Capital ought further to leave no doubt of the






original objects of the system of 'eric'-fines, or pecuniary






composition for violent crime. As I said before, no Irish






institution was so strongly denounced by Englishmen as this, or






with so great a show of righteous indignation. As members of a






wealthy community, long accustomed to a strong government, they






were revolted partly by its apparent inadequacy and partly the






unjust impunity which it seemed to give to the rich man and to






deny to the poor. Although the English system of criminal






penalties which they sought to substitute for the Irish system of






compositions would nowadays be described by an ordinary writer in






pretty much as dark colours as those used by Spenser and Davis






for the Irish institution, it is very possible that in the






sixteenth century it would have been an advantage to Ireland to






have the English procedure and the English punishments. There is






much evidence that the usefulness of 'eric'-fines had died out,






and that they unjustly profited the rich and powerful. But that






only shows that the confusions of Ireland had kept alive beyond






its time an institution which in the beginning had been a great






step forwards from barbarism. If the modern writers who have






spoken harshly of these pecuniary compositions had come upon a






set of usages belonging to a society in which tribe was






perpetually struggling with tribe, and in which life was held






extraordinarily cheap, and had found that, by this customary law,






the sept or family to which the perpetrator of a crime belonged






forfeited a considerable portion of its lauds, I am not sure that






they would not have regarded the institution as showing for the






age an extremely strict police. But in the infancy of society a






fine on the cultivating communities, of the kind afterwards






called pecuniary, was a much severer punishment than the






forfeiture of land. They had plenty of land within their domains,






but very slight appliances for cultivating it; and it was out of






these last that compositions were paid. The system of course lost






its meaning as the communities broke up and as property became






unequally divided. In its day, nevertheless, it had been a great






achievement, and there are traces of it everywhere, even in Roman






law, where, however, it is a mere survival.






    Before I quit the subject let me say something on the






etymology of the famous word, Feodum, Feud, or Fief. The






derivation from Emphyteusis is now altogether abandoned, and






there is general, though not quite universal, agreement that






Feodum is descended from one or other of the numerous family of






old Teutonic terms which have their present representative in the






modern German Vieh, 'cattle.' There is supposed to have been much






the same transmutation of meaning which occurred with the






analogous Latin word. Pecunia, allied to pecus, signified first






money, and then property generally; the Roman lawyers, in fact,






tell us that it is the most comprehensive term for all a man's






property,' and in the same way 'feodum' is supposed to have come






to mean 'property,' from having originally meant 'cattle.' The






investigations we have been pursuing may perhaps, however,






suggest that the connection of 'feodum' with cattle is closer and






more direct than this theory assumes. Dr Sullivan, I ought to






add, assigns a different origin to 'feodum' from any hitherto put






forward (Introd. p. ccxxvi). He claims it as a Celtic word, and






connects it with fuidhir, the name of a class of denizens on






tribal territory whose status I am about to discuss.






    The territory of every Irish tribe appears to have had






settled on it, besides the Saer and Daer Ceiles, certain classes






of persons whose condition was much newer to slavery than that of






the free tribesman who, by accepting stock from the Chief, had






sunk lowest from his original position in the tribal society.






They are called by various names, Sencleithes, Bothachs, and






Fuidhirs; and the two last classes are again subdivided, like the






Ceiles, into Saer and Daer Bothachs, and Saer and Daer Fuidhirs.






There is evidence in the tracts, and especially in the






unpublished tract called the 'Corus Fine,' that the servile






dependants, like the freemen of the territory, had a family or






tribal organisation; and indeed all fragments of a society like






that of ancient Ireland take more or less the shape of the






prevailing model. The position of the classes, obscurely






indicated in Domesday and other ancient English records as Cotwii






and Bordarii, was probably very similar to that of the






Sencleithes and Bothachs; and in both cases it has been suspected






that these servile orders had an origin distinct from that of the






dominant race, and belonged to the older or aboriginal






inhabitants of the country. Families or sub-tribes formed out of






them were probably hewers of wood and drawers of water to the






ruling tribe or its subdivisions. Others were certainly in a






condition of special servitude to the Chief or dependence on him;






and these last were either engaged in cultivating his immediate






domain-land and herding his cattle, or were planted by him in






separate settlements on the waste land of the tribe. The rent or






service which they paid to him for the use of this land was






apparently determinable solely by the pleasure of the Chief.






    Much the most important, and much the most interesting of






these classes from the historical point of view, was that just






described as settled by the Chief on the unappropriated tribal






lands. Indeed, it has been suggested that its fortunes are






identical with those of the great bulk of the Irish people. It






consisted of the Fuidhirs, the strangers or fugitives from other






territories, men, in fact, who had broken the original tribal






bond which gave them a place in the community, and who had to






obtain another as best they might in a new tribe and a new place.






The Brehon law shows by abundant evidence that the class must






have been a numerous one. The desertion of their lands by






families or portions of families is repeatedly spoken of. Under






certain circumstances, indeed, the rupture of the tribal bond and






the flight of those who break it are eventualities distinctly






contemplated by the law. In the Brehon law, as in other ancient






juridical systems, the corporate responsibility of tribes,






sub-tribes, and families takes the place of that responsibility






for crime, and even to some extent of civil obligation, which,






under modern institutions, presses upon the individual. But the






responsibility might be prevented from attaching by compelling or






inducing a member of the group, habitually violent or vowed to






revenge, to withdraw from its circle; and the Book of Aicill






gives the legal procedure which is to be observed in the






expulsion, the tribe paying certain fines to the Chief and the






Church and proclaiming the fugitive. Such provisions assume a






certain order in the society to which they apply; yet we know as






a fact that for many centuries it was violently disordered. The






result was probably to fill the country with 'broken men,' and






such men could only find a home and protection by becoming






Fuidhir tenants. Everything, in short, which tended to disturb






the Ireland of the Brehon laws tended to multiply this particular






class.






    Now, the Fuidhir tenant was exclusively a dependant of the






Chief, and waS through him alone connected with the Tribe. The






responsibility for crime, which in the natural state of Irish






society attached to the Family or Tribe, attached, in the case of






the Fuidhir, to the Chief, who in fact became to this class of






tenants that which their original tribesmen or kindred had been.






Moreover, the land which they cultivated in their place of refuge






was not theirs but his. They were the first 'tenants at will,






known to Ireland, and there is no doubt that they were always






theoretically rackrentable. The 'three rents,' says the Senchus






Mor, are the 'rackrent from a person of a strange tribe, a fair






rent from one of the tribe, and the stipulated rent which is paid






equally by the tribe and the strange tribe.' The 'person from a






strange tribe' is undoubtedly the Fuidhir; and though the Irish






expression translated 'rackrent' cannot, of course, in the






ancient state of relation between population and land, denote an






extreme competition rent, it certainty indicates an extreme rent;






since in one of the glosses it is graphically compared to the






milk of a cow which is compelled to give milk every month to the






end of the year, At the same time there is no reason to suppose






that, in the first instance, the Fuidhir tenants were






oppressively treated by the Chiefs. The Chief had a strong






interest in encouraging them; 'he brings in Fuidhirs,' says one






of the tracts, to increase his wealth.' The interests really






injured were those of the Tribe, which may have become stronger






for defence or attack by the addition to the population of the






territory, but which certainly suffered as a body of joint






proprietors by the curtailment of the waste land available for






pasture. The process before described by which the status of the






tribesmen declined proportionately to the growth of the Chiefs'






powers, must have been indirectly hastened in several ways by the






introduction of Fuidhirs. Such indications of the course of






change as the Brehon laws furnish are curiously in harmony with a






passage from a work recently published, which, amid much other






valuable matter, gives a most vivid picture of agricultural life






in the backward Indian province of Orissa. Mr Hunter, the writer,






is speaking of the relation of landlord and tenant; but as the






'hereditary peasantry' referred to have, as against their






landlord, rights defined by law, they are not without analogy to






the tribesmen of an ancient Irish territory. 'The migratory






husbandman,' the Fuidhir of modern India, 'not only lost his






hereditary position in his own village, but he was an object of






dislike and suspicion among the new community into which he






thrust himself. For every accession of cultivators tended to






better the position of the landlord, and pro tanto to injure that






of the (older) cultivators. So long as the land on an estate






continued to be twice as much as the hereditary peasantry could






till, the resident husbandmen were of too much importance to be






bullied or squeezed into discontent. But once a large body of






immigrant cultivators had grown up, this primitive check on the






landlords' exactions was removed. The migratory tenants,






therefore, not only lost their position in their old villages,






but they were harassed in their new settlements. Worse than all,






they were to a certain extent confounded with the landless low






castes who, destitute of the local connections so keenly prized






in rural society as the evidences of respectability, wandered






about as hired labourers and temporary cultivators of surplus






village lands.' (Hunter, 'Orissa,' i. 57, 58)






    You will perhaps have divined the ground of the special






attention which has been claimed for these Fuidhir tenants, and






will be prepared to hear that their peculiar status has been






supposed to have a bearing on those agrarian difficulties which






have recurred with almost mysterious frequency in the history of






Ireland. It is certainly a striking circumstance that in the far






distance of Irish tradition we come upon conflicts between






rent-paying and rent-receiving tribes -- that, at the first






moment when our information respecting Ireland becomes full and






trustworthy, our informants dwell with indignant emphasis on the






'racking' of tenants by the Irish Chiefs -- and that the relation






of Irish landlord and Irish tenant, after being recognised ever






since the beginning of the century as a social difficulty of the






first magnitude, finally became a political difficulty , which






was settled only the other day. I do not say that there is not a






thread of connection between these stages of Irish agrarian






history, but there are two opposite errors into which we may be






betrayed if we assume the thread to have been uniform throughout.






In the first place, we may be tempted to antedate the influence






of those economical laws which latterly had such powerful






operation in Ireland until their energy was well-nigh spent






through the consequences of the great famine of 1845-6. An






overflowing population and a limited area of cultivable land had






much to do, and probably more than anything else to do, with the






condition of Ireland during that period; but neither the one nor






the other was a characteristic of the country at the end of the






sixteenth century. Next, we may perhaps be inclined, as some






writers of great merit seem to me to be, to post-date the social






changes which caused so large a portion of the soil of Ireland to






be placed under the uncontrolled Law of the Market, or, to adopt






the ordinary phraseology, which multiplied 'tenants at will' to






an unusual extent. Doubtless, if we had to found an opinion as to






these causes exclusively on ancient Irish law, and on modern






English real property law, we should perhaps come to the






conclusion that an archaic system, barely recognising absolute






ownership, had been violently and unnaturally replaced by a






system of far more modern stamp based upon absolute property in






land. But, by the end of the sixteenth century, our evidence is






that the Chiefs had already so much power over their tenants that






any addition to it is scarcely conceivable. 'The Lords of land,'






says Edmund Spenser, writing not later than 1596, 'do not there






use to set out their land to farme, for tearme of years, to their






tenants, but only from yeare to yeare, or during pleasure,






neither indeed will the Irish tenant or husbandman otherwise take






his land than so long as he list himselfe. The reason thereof in






the tenant is, for that the landlords there use most shamefully






to racke their tenants, laying upon them coin and livery at






pleasure, and exacting of them besides his covenants what he






pleaseth. So that the poore husbandman either dare not binde






himselfe to him for longer tearme, or thinketh, by his continuall






liberty of change, to keepe his landlord the rather in awe from






wronging of him. And the reason why the landlord will no longer






covenant with him is, for that he dayly looketh after change and






alteration, and hovereth in expectation of new worlds.' Sir John






Davis, writing rather before 1613, used still stronger language:






'The Lord is an absolute Tyrant and the Tennant a very slave and






villain, and in one respect more miserable than Bond Slaves. For






commonly the Bond Slave is fed by his Lord, but here the Lord is






fed by his Bond Slave.'






    There is very little in common bet ween the miserable






position of the Irish tenant here described and the footing of






even the baser sort of Ceiles, or villeins, who had taken stock






from the Chief. If the Brehon law is to be trusted, the Daer






Ceile was to be commiserated, rather because he had derogated






from his rights as a free tribesman of the same blood with the






Chief, than because he had exposed himself to unbridled






oppression. Besides paying dues more of the nature of modern






rent, he certainly stood under that unfortunate liability of






supplying periodical refection for his Chief and his followers.






But not only was the Mount of his dues settled by the law, but






the very size of the joints and the quality of the ale with which






he regaled his Chief were minutely and expressly regulated. And,






if one provision of the law is clearer than another, it is that






the normal period of the relation of tenancy or vassalage was not






one year, but seven years. How, then, are we to explain this






discrepancy ? Is the explanation that the Brehon theory never in






reality quite corresponded with the facts ? It may be so to some






extent, but the careful student of the Brehon tracts will be






inclined to think that the general bias of their writers was






rather towards exaggeration of the privileges of Chiefs than






towards Overstatement of the immunities of tribesmen. Is it, on






the other hand, likely that, as some patriotic Irishmen have






asserted, Spenser and Davis were under the influence of English






prejudice, and grossly misrepresented the facts of Irish life in






their day? Plenty of prejudice of a certain kind is disclosed by






their writings, and I doubt not that they were capable of






occasionally misunderstanding what they saw. Nothing, however,






which they have written suggests that they were likely wilfully






to misdescribe facts open to their observation. I can quite






conceive that some things in the relations of the Chiefs and






tenants escaped them, possibly a good deal of freely-given






loyalty on one side, and of kindliness and good humoured






joviality on the other. But that the Irish Chief had in their day






the power or right which they attribute to him cannot seriously






be questioned.






    The power of the Irish Chiefs and their severity to their






tenants in the sixteenth century being admitted, they have been






accounted for, as I before stated, by supposing that the Norman






nobles who became gradually clothed with Irish chieftainships --






the Fitzgeralds, the Burkes, and the Barrys -- abused an






authority which in native hands would have been subject to






natural limitations, and thus set an evil example to all the






Chiefs of Ireland. The explanation has not the antecedent






improbability which it might seem to have at first sight, but I






am not aware that there is positive evidence to sustain it. I owe






a far more plausible theory of the cause of change to Dr






Sullivan, who, in his Introduction (p. cxxvi), has suggested that






it was determined by the steady multiplication of Fuidhir






tenants. It must be recollected that this class of persons would






not be protected by the primitive or natural institutions






springing out of community of blood. The Fuidhir was not a






tribesman but an alien. In all societies cemented together by






kinship the position of the person who has lost or broken the






bond of union is always extraordinarily miserable. He has not






only lost his natural place in them, but they have no room for






him anywhere else. The wretchedness of the outcast in India,






understood as the man who has lost or been expelled from caste,






does not arise from his having been degraded from a higher to a






lower social standing, but from his having no standing whatever,






there being no other order of society open to receive him when he






has descended from his own. It was true that the Fuidhir, though






he had lost the manifold protection of his family and tribe, was






not actually exposed to violent wrong. From that he was protected






by the new Chief to whom he had attached himself, but between him






and this Chief there was nothing. The principle would always be






that he was at the mercy of the Chief. At the utmost, some usages






favourable to him might establish themselves through lapse of






time, but they would have none of the obligatory force belonging






to the rules which defined the rights of the Chief in respect of






his Saer-stock and Daerstock tenants. We can see that several of






the duties corresponding to these rights were of a kind to invite






abuse; much more certainly would obligations analogous to them,






but wholly imposed by the pleasure of the Chief, become cruelly






oppressive. The 'refections' of the Brehon law would, by a






miserable degradation, become (to borrow the language of Spenser






and Davis) coin and livery, cuttings, cosherings, and spendings,






in the case of the Fuidhirs. Meanwhile there were causes at work,






powerfully and for long periods of time, to increase the numbers






of this class. Even those Irishmen who believe that in the






distant past there was once a tolerably well-ordered Ireland






admit that for many centuries their country was racked with






perpetual disturbance. Danish piracies, intestine feuds,






Anglo-Norman attempts at conquest never consistently carried out






or thoroughly completed, the very existence of the Pale, and






above all the policy directed from it of playing off against one






another the Chiefs beyond its borders, are allowed by all to have






distracted the island with civil war, how ever the responsibility






for it is to be apportioned. But the process is one which must






have broken up tribes far and wide, and broken tribes imply a






multitude of broken men. Even in brief intervals of peace the






violent habits produced by constant disorder would bring about






the frequent expulsion by families of members for whom they






refused to remain responsible, and in the commoner eventuality of






war whole fragments would be from time to time torn away from






tribes and their atoms scattered in every part of Ireland. it is






therefore, a conjecture possessing a very high degree of






plausibility, that the tenantry of the Irish Chiefs whose






sufferings provoked the indignation of Spenser and Davis






consisted largely of Fuidhirs.






    The explanation may, however, be carried beyond this point.






You will bear in mind the passage quoted by me from Hunter's






'Orissa,' which shows how a tenantry enjoying hereditary rights






is injured, even under a Government which sternly compels peace






and order, by a large immigration of cultivators dependent on the






landlord or Zemnindar. They narrow the available waste land by






their appropriations; and, though they do not compete directly






for the anciently cultivated land with the tenants enjoying






hereditary rights, they greatly raise in the long run the






standard of rent, at the same time that they arm the landlord






with those powers of exacting it which in ancient Ireland






consisted in the strong hand of the Chief himself, and which






consist, in modern India, in the money which puts in motion the






arm of the law. I have no doubt whatever that a great






multiplication of Fuidhir tenants would always seriously alter






for the worse the position of the tenants by Saer-stock and I






Dear-stock tenure.





































Lecture XII





Sovereignty





    The historical theories commonly received among English


lawyers have done so much harm not only to the study of law but


to the study of history, that an account of the origin and growth


of our legal system, founded on the examination of new materials


and the re-examination of old ones, is perhaps the most urgently


needed of all additions to English knowledge. But next to a new


history of law, what we most require is a new philosophy of law.


If our country ever gives birth to such a philosophy, we shall


probably owe it to two advantages. The first of them is our


possession of a legal system which for many purposes may be


considered indigenous. Our national pride, which has sometimes


retarded or limited our advance in juridical enquiry, has kept


our law singularly pure from mixture with the stream of legal


rules flowing from the great fountain of the Roman Corpus Juris,


and thus, when we place it in juxtaposition with any other


European legal system, the results of the comparison are far more


fruitful of instruction than those obtained by contrasting the


various Continental bodies of law with one another. The second


advantage I believe to consist in the growing familiarity of


Englishmen with the investigations of the so-called Analytical


Jurists, of whom the most considerable are Jeremy Bentham and


John Austin. Of this advantage we have a monopoly. Bentham seems


to be exclusively known in France and Germany as the author of an


unpopular system of morals. Austin is apparently not known at


all. Yet to Bentham, and even in a higher degree to Austin, the


world is indebted for the only existing attempt to construct a


system of jurisprudence by strict scientific process and to found


it, not on * priori assumption, but on the observation,


comparison, and analysis of the various legal conceptions. There


is not the smallest necessity for accepting all the conclusions


of these great writers with implicit deference, but there is the


strongest necessity for knowing what those conclusions are. They


are indispensable, if for no other object, for the purpose of


clearing the head.


    An important distinction between Bentham and Austin is not as


often recognised as it ought to be. Bentham in the main is a


writer on legislation. Austin in the main is a writer on


jurisprudence, Bentham is chiefly concerned with law as it might


be and ought to be. Austin is chiefly concerned with law as it


is. Each trespasses occasionally on the domain of the other.


Unless Bentham had written the treatise called the 'Fragment on


Government,' Austin's 'Province of Jurisprudence Determined,'


which sets forth the basis of his system, would never probably


have been composed. On the other hand, Austin, in his singular


discussion of the theory of utility as an index to the Law of


God, has entered on an investigation of the class followed by


Bentham. Still the description which I have given of their


objects is sufficiently correct as a general description, and


those objects are widely different. Bentham aims at the


improvement of the law to be effected by the application of the


principles now indissolubly associated with his name. Almost all


of his more important suggestions have been adopted by the


English Legislature, but the process of engrafting on the law


what to each successive generation seem to be improvements is in


itself of indefinite duration, and may go on, and possibly will


go on, as long as the human race lasts. Austin's undertaking is


more modest. It would be completed, if a Code were produced


perfectly logical in order of arrangement and perfectly lucid in


statement of rule Jurisprudence, the science of positive law, is


sometimes spoken of nowadays as if it would bring the substance


of the law into a state of indefinite perfection. It would


doubtless, if it were carried far, lead indirectly to great legal


reforms by dispelling obscurities and dissipating delusions, but


the investigation of the principles on which the direct


improvement of substantive legal rules should be conducted


belongs nevertheless not to the theorist on jurisprudence but to


the theorist on legislation.


    The portion of Austin's Lectures which sets forth the basis


of his system, and which was published several years ago as the


'Province of Jurisprudence Determined,' has long been one of the


higher classbooks in this University; and, taken together with


the other lectures more recently given to the world (though


unhappily in a fragmentary shape), it must always, or for a long


time to come, be the mainstay of the studies prosecuted in this


Department. Making the utmost acknowledgment of the value of the


book, I find it impossible not to recognise the magnitude of the


difficulties which it occasions to the beginner. Those which have


their origin in peculiarities of style and which seem to be


attributable to the perpetual commerce of thought in which the


writer lived with his precursors, Bentham and Hobbes, I find to


be practically less grave than difficulties of another sort which


arise from the repulsion created in the mind by the shape in


which the conceptions of law, right, and duty are presented to it


by Austin's analysis. Of course, so far as this distaste is


caused by unpalatable truth, any tenderness shown to it would be


wasted; but even thus it is a misfortune, and, if it be in any


degree provoked by avoidable causes, such as methods of statement


or arrangement, no pains bestowed on the attempt to remove it to


this extent would be thrown away. A very frequent effect of


forcing on students of active mind and industrious habits a


system or subject which for some reason or other is repugnant to


them is to make them regard it as so much dogma, as something


resting on the personal authority of the writer with whose name


it happens to be associated. Now nothing could be more


unfortunate for the philosophy of law than that the system of the


'Province of Jurisprudence Determined' should come to be regarded


simply as Austin's system -- as standing by the side. of


Blackstone's or Hegel's or any other system -- as interchangeable


with it or equivalent to it. For, when certain assumptions or


postulates have been made, I am fully convinced that the great


majority of Austin's positions follow as of course and by


ordinary logical process. These assumptions do not appear to me


to be stated and described by Austin with sufficient fulness --


possibly because, though he is a comparatively modern writer, a


part of the enquiries necessary for such statement had in his day


been barely commenced -- but, whatever the cause, the result is


that he seems to me open to the same charge as some of the


greatest writers on Political Economy who have omitted to set


forth at the outset with adequate distinctness the limited


objects of their science, and who have thus attracted to it a


mass of prejudice of which it may never possibly get rid. The


present Lecture is an attempt to show what a certain number of


these assumptions or postulates are; in that which follows it, I


endeavour to show how these assumptions are affected by some


conclusions which we have arrived at in former Lectures during


our investigation of the early history of society. (Supra,


Lectures I to XI) I think it best for my purpose to begin with


calling attention to the definition of Sovereignty. Beyond all


doubt this is the logical order of the discussion undertaken by


Austin, and I find it difficult to understand, except on one


hypothesis, why, deserting the arrangement of Hobbes, he began


the discussion of this part of his subject by the analysis of


Law, Right and Duty, and ended it with an account of Sovereignty


which it seems to me should have come first. I imagine, however,


that Blackstone influenced him, as he did Bentham, so to speak,


by repulsion. Blackstone, following Roman Institutional writers,


begins with a definition of law and proceeds to give a theory of


the connection of the various legal conceptions. The desire to


expose the fallacies of this portion of the Commentaries


furnished Bentham with his principal motive for writing the


Fragment on Government, and Austin with his chief inducement to


determine the Province of Jurisprudence, and the latter seems to


me to have thought that the propositions he disputed would be


most effectually disposed of, if they were contradicted in the


order given them by their author. However that may be, the branch


of my subject on which I shall first have to enter may be


described as an enquiry into the probable mode in which Austin's


analysis would have been affected, if he had begun in his first


Lecture with the examination of the nature of Sovereignty. This


examination he placed in the Sixth, which, so far as the


'Province of Jurisprudence' is concerned, is the last of his


Lectures.


    I believe I may assume that most of my hearers are familiar


with the general character of the investigation prosecuted by


Austin in the Treatise to which I have referred, but, as his


definitions are not easily carried in the memory in their


complete shape, I will give his descriptions of an Independent


Political Society and of Sovereignty, the two conceptions being


interdependent and inseparable from one another.


    'If (he says) a determinate human superior, not in the habit


of obedience to a like superior, receive habitual obedience from


the bulk of a given society, that determinate superior is


Sovereign in that society, and the society, including the


superior, is a society political and independent.' 


    He then proceeds: 'To that determinate superior the other


members of the society are subject; or on that determinate


superior the other members of the society are dependent. The


position of its other members towards that determinate superior


is a state of subjection or a state of dependence. The mutual


relation which subsists between that superior and them, may be


styled the relation of Sovereign and Subject, or the relation of


Sovereignty and Subjection.'


    I may perhaps save the necessity for part of the


amplification and explanation of these definitions contained in


the Chapter in which they occur, if I state Austin's doctrine of


Sovereignty in another way -- more popularly, though without, I


think, any substantial inaccuracy. It is as follows: There is, in


every independent political community -- that is, in every


political community not in the habit of obedience to a superior


above itself -- some single person or some combination of persons


which has the power of compelling the other members of the


community to do exactly as it pleases. This single person or


group -- this individual or this collegiate Sovereign (to employ


Austin's phrase) -- may be found in every independent political


community as certainly as the centre of gravity in a mass of


matter. If the community be violently or voluntarily divided into


a number of separate fragments, then, as soon as each fragment


has settled down (perhaps after an interval of anarchy) into a


state of equilibrium, the Sovereign will exist and with proper


care will be discoverable in each of the now independent


portions. The Sovereignty over the North American Colonies of


Great Britain had its seat in one place before they became the


United States, in another place afterwards; but in both cases


there was a discoverable Sovereign somewhere. This Sovereign,


this person or combination of persons, universally occurring in


all independent political communities, has in all such


communities one characteristic, common to all the shapes


Sovereignty may take, the possession of irresistible force, not


necessarily exerted but capable of being exerted. According to


the terminology preferred by Austin, the Sovereign, if a single


person, is or should be called a Monarch; if a small group, the


name is an Oligarchy; if a group of considerable dimensions, an


Aristocracy. if very large and numerous, a Democracy. Limited


Monarchy, a phrase perhaps more fashionable in Austin's day than


it is now, is abhorred by Austin, and the Government of Great


Britain he classes with Aristocracies. That which all the forms


of Sovereignty have in common is the power (the power but not


necessarily the will) to put compulsion without limit on subjects


or fellow-subjects. It is sometimes extremely difficult to


discover the Sovereign in a given State, and, when he or it is


discovered, he may fall under no recognised designation, but,


where there is an independent political society not in a


condition of anarchy, the Sovereign is certainly there. The


question of determining his character is, you will understand,


always a question of fact. It is never a question of law or


morals. He who, when a particular person or group is asserted to


constitute the Sovereign in a given community, denies the


proposition on the ground that such Sovereignty is an usurpation


or a violation of constitutional principle, has completely missed


Austin's point of view.


    The definitions which I read from the Sixth Lecture furnish


Austin's tests for discovering the seat of Sovereignty in


independent states. I will again refer to a few of the most


important of them, though very briefly.


    First, the Sovereign is a determinate human superior. He is


not necessarily a single person; in the modern Western world he


is very rarely so; but he must have so much of the attributes of


a single person as to be determinate. If he is not a single


person, he must be a number of persons capable of acting in a


corporate or collegiate capacity. This part of the definition is


absolutely necessary, since the Sovereign must effect his


exertions of power, must issue his orders, by a definite exercise


of his will. The possession of physical power, which is one


characteristic of Sovereignty, has as matter of historical fact


repeatedly been for a time in the hands of a number of persons


not determinate, not so connected together as to be capable of


exercising volition, but such a state of things Austin would call


anarchy, though it might not have all the usually recognised


symptoms of a revolutionary interval. At the same time, the


limitation of Sovereignty to determinate groups, when the


Sovereign is not an individual, is extremely important, since it


qualities the notion of Sovereignty by rendering it subject to


the various artifices by which an exercise of volition is


elicited from a corporate body. Familiar to us as is the practice


of taking the opinion of a majority as the opinion of an entire


group, and natural as it seems, nothing can be more artificial.


    Again, the bulk of the society must obey the superior who is


to be called Sovereign. Not the whole of the society, for in that


case Sovereignty would be impossible, but the bulk, the large


majority, must obey. After the accession of the House of Hanover


to the British throne, a certain number of Jacobites and a


considerable portion of the Scottish Highlanders habitually


disobeyed or disregarded the commands of the British Crown and


Parliament, but the bulk of the nation, including no doubt the


bulk of the Jacobites themselves, gave to these commands a


practical obedience. On Austin's principles, therefore, there is


not the least ground for questioning the Sovereignty of George


the First and Second and of the Parliaments elected at their


summons. The Jacobite view, that the Hanoverian Kings were


exclusively Sovereign in Hanover, would at once be throw aside by


Austin as not raising that question of fact which is alone


disputable under his system.


    Next, the Sovereign must receive an habitual obedience from


the bulk of the community. In European societies professing the


Roman Catholic faith, the great majority of the population


receives a variety of directions on points of personal conduct,


either mediately or immediately, from the See of Rome. But,


compared with the number of times it submits itself to the laws


of the country it inhabits, its obedience to these extrinsic


commands is only occasional, and not habitual. At the same time a


dim appreciation of the principles brought into light by Austin


may be detected in several famous ecclesiastical controversies,


which sometimes tend to become disputes whether the obedience to


the See of Rome which is actually paid is or is not so frequent


as to fall under the description of habitual.


    A further characteristic of Sovereignty is immunity from the


control of every other human superior. The limitation is


obviously necessary, for otherwise the Governor-General of India


in Council would be Sovereign, and indeed would exhibit a closer


correspondence with the more salient features of Sovereignty than


almost any other potentate on the face of the globe.


    Those who have observed with what slowness definite


conceptions are developed in the field of history and politics


will be prepared to hear that this whole view of the nature of


Sovereignty is older than Austin's work. But, so far as my own


knowledge extends, I do not think that any material portion of it


is older than Hobbes. On the other hand, in the Leviathan of


Hobbes and in the Chapter De Cive in his Treatise first published


in Latin, called the Elementa Philosophiae, the analysis of


Government and Society and the determination of Sovereignty are


so nearly completed that little could be added to them by Bentham


and Austin. The originality of these later writers, and more


particularly of Austin, resides in their much fuller examination


of the conceptions dependent on the notion of Sovereignty --


positive law, positive duty, sanction and right -- in setting


forth the relations of these conceptions to others superficially


resembling them, in combating objections to the theory by which


the entire group of notions are connected together, and in


applying this theory to certain complex states of fact which had


arisen since Hobbes wrote. There is, however, one great


difference between Hobbes and his latest successor. The process


of Hobbes was scientific, but his object was less scientific than


political. When, with a keenness of intuition and lucidity of


statement which have never been rivalled, he has made out a case


for the universal theoretical existence of Sovereignty, it


becomes clear that he has, to say the least, a strong preference


for monarchies over aristocracies and democracies, or (to use the


phraseology of the school which he founded) for individual over


corporate Sovereignty. Those of his intellectual followers who


would have repudiated his politics have often asserted that he


has been misunderstood, and no doubt some superficial readers


have supposed that he was pointing at despotism when he was


really referring to the essentially unqualified power of the


Sovereign whatever the form of the Sovereignty. But I do not


think it can in candour be denied that his strong dislike of the


Long Parliament and of the English Common law, as the great


instrument of resistance to the Stuart Kings, has occasionally


coloured the language which he uses in examining the nature of


Sovereignty, Law, and Anarchy; nor is it matter for surprise that


he should have been charged during his life with having devised


his system with the secret intention of making his peace with the


Protector, though the accusation itself is sufficiently refuted


by dates. But Austin's object is strictly scientific. If he has


fallen into errors, he has been led into them by his philosophy,


and his language scarcely ever betrays the colour of his


political opinions.


    Another considerable difference is this. Hobbes, it is well


known, speculated on the origin of Government and Sovereignty. It


is the one fact which some persons seem to have learned about


him, and they appear to think his philosophy sufficiently


condemned by it. But Austin barely enters on this enquiry,. and


indeed he occasionally, though perhaps inadvertently, uses


language which almost seems to imply that Sovereignty and the


conceptions dependent on it have an * priori existence. Now in


this matter I myself hold that the method of Hobbes was correct.


It is true that nothing can be more worthless in itself than


Hobbes's conjectural account of the origin of society and


government. Mankind, he asserts, were originally in a state of


war. They then made a compact under which every man abandoned his


powers of aggression, and the result was Sovereignty, and through


Sovereignty law, peace, and order. The theory is open to every


sort of objection. There is no evidence of any stage of the


supposed history, and the little we know of primitive man


contradicts it. The universal disorder of the race in its infancy


may be true of the contests of tribe with tribe and of family


with family; but it is not true of the relations of individual


man with individual man, whom we, on the contrary, first discern


living together under a regimen which, if we are compelled to


employ modern phraseology, we must call one of ultra-legality.


And, in addition, the theory is open to precisely the same


objection as the counter-hypothesis of Locke, that it antedates


the modern juridical conception of Contract. But still I think


that Hobbes did correctly in addressing himself to the problem,


though he did little to solve it. The duty of enquiring, if not


how Sovereignty arose, at all events through what stages it has


passed, is in my judgment indispensable. It is only thus that we


can assure ourselves in what degree the results of the Austinian


analysis tally with facts.


    There is, in truth, nothing more important to the student of


jurisprudence than that he should carefully consider how far the


observed facts of human nature and society bear out the


assertions which are made or seem to be made about Sovereignty by


the Analytical Jurists. To begin with, these assertions must be


disentangled from one another. The first of them is that, in


every independent community of men, there resides the power of


acting with irresistible force on the several members of that


community. This may be accepted as actual fact. If all the


members of the community had equal physical strength and were


unarmed, the power would be a mere result from the superiority of


numbers; but, as a matter. of fact, various causes, of which much


the most important have been the superior physical strength and


the superior armament of portions of the community have conferred


on numerical minorities the power of applying irresistible


pressure to the individuals who make up the community as a whole.


The next assertion is that, in every independent political


community, that is in every independent community neither in a


state of nature on the one hand nor in a state of anarchy on the


other, the power of using or directing the irresistible force


stored-up in the society resides in some person or combination of


persons who belong to the society themselves. The truth of this


assertion is strongly suggested by a certain class of facts,


particularly by the political facts of the Western and Modern


world; but all the relevant facts, it must be recollected, have


not been fully observed. The whole world, of which theorists on


human nature are extremely apt to forget considerably more than


half, and the entire history of the whole world, would have to be


examined before we could be quite sure of the facts, and, if this


were done, it may be that a great n umber of the facts would not


so strongly suggest the conclusion, or, as I myself think, the


assertion which we are considering would not so much be shown to


be false as to be only verbally true, and therefore without the


value which it possesses in societies of the type to which our


own belongs. An assertion, however, which the great Analytical


Jurists cannot be charged with making, but which some of their


disciples go very near to hazarding, that the Sovereign person or


group actually wields the stored-up force of society by an


uncontrolled exercise of will, is certainly never in accordance


with fact. A despot with a disturbed brain is the sole


conceivable example of such Sovereignty. The vast mass of


influences, which we may call for shortness moral, perpetually


shapes, limits, or forbids the actual direction of the forces of


society by its Sovereign. This is the point which, of all others,


it is practically most necessary that the student should bear in


mind, because it does most to show what the Austinian view of


Sovereignty really is -- that it is the result of Abstraction. It


is arrived at by throwing aside all the characteristics and


attributes of Government and Society except one, and by


connecting all forms of political superiority together through


their common possession of force. The elements neglected in the


process are always important, sometimes of extreme importance,


for they consist of all the influences controlling human action


except force directly applied or directly apprehended ; but the


operation of throwing them aside for purposes of classification


is, I need hardly say, perfectly legitimate philosophically, and


is only the application of a method in ordinary scientific use.


    To put the same thing in another way, that which we reject in


the process of abstraction by which the conception of Sovereignty


is reached is the entire history of each community. First of all,


it is the history, the whole historical antecedents, of each


society by which it has been determined where, in what person or


group, the power of using the social force is to reside. The


theory of Sovereignty neglects the mode in which the result has


been arrived at, and thus is enabled to class together the


coercive authority of the great King of Persia, of the Athenian


Demos, of the later Roman Emperors, of the Russian Czar, and of


the Crown and Parliament of Great Britain. Next, it is its


history, the entire mass of its historical antecedents, which in


each community determines how the Sovereign shall exercise or


forbear from exercising his irresistible coercive power. All that


constitutes this -- the whole enormous aggregate of opinions,


sentiments, beliefs, superstitions, and prejudices, of ideas of


all kinds, hereditary and acquired, some produced by institutions


and some by the constitution of human nature -- is rejected by


the Analytical Jurists. And thus it is that, so far as the


restrictions confined in their definition of Sovereignty are


concerned, the Queen and Parliament of our own country might


direct all weakly children to be put to death or establish a


system of lettres de cachet.


    The procedure of the Analytical Jurists is closely analogous


to that followed in mathematics and political economy. It is


strictly philosophical, but the practical value of all sciences


founded on abstractions depends on the relative importance of the


elements rejected and the elements retained in the process of


abstraction. Tried by this test, mathematical science is of


greatly more value than political economy, and both of them than


jurisprudence as conceived by the writers I am criticising.


Similarly, the misconceptions to which the Austinian analysis


gives rise are very similar to those which might be conceived as


embarrassing the student of mixed mathematics, and which do


actually embarrass the student of political economy. Just as it


is possible to forget the existence of friction in nature and the


reality of other motives in society except the desire to grow


rich, so the pupil of Austin may be tempted to forget that there


is more in actual Sovereignty than force, and more in laws which


are the commands of sovereigns than can be got out of them by


merely considering them as regulated force. I am not prepared to


deny that Austin occasionally, and Hobbes frequently, express


themselves as if their system were not limited throughout by the


limitation which is at its base All the great masters of


Abstraction are, in fact, now and then betrayed into speaking or


writing as if the materials thrown aside in the purely mental


process were actually dross.


    When, however, it has once been seen that in Austin's system


the determination of Sovereignty ought to precede the


determination of Law, when it is once understood that the


Austinian conception of Sovereignty has been reached through


mentally uniting all forms of government in a group by conceiving


them as stripped of every attribute except coercive force, and


when it is steadily borne in mind that the deductions from an


abstract principle are never from the nature of the case


completely exemplified in facts, not only, as it seems to me, do


the chief difficulties felt by the student of Austin disappear,


but some of the assertions made by him at which the beginner is


most apt to stumble have rather the air of self-evident


propositions. I dare say you are sufficiently acquainted with his


treatise to make it enough for me to mention some of these


propositions, without the amplifications which are necessary for


their perfectly accurate statement. Jurisprudence is the science


of Positive Law. Positive Laws are Commands, addressed by


Sovereigns to their Subjects, imposing a Duty, or condition of


obligedness, or obligation, on those Subjects, and threatening a


Sanction, or Penalty, in the event of disobedience to the


Command. A Right is the faculty or power conferred by the


Sovereign on certain members of the community to draw down the


sanction on a fellow-subject violating a Duty. Now all these


conceptions of Law, Right, Duty and Punishment depend upon the


primary conception of Sovereignty, just as the lower links of a


chain hanging down depend upon the highest link. But Sovereignty,


for the purposes of Austin's system, has no attribute but force,


and consequently the view here taken of 'law' 'obligation' and


'right' is a view of them regarded exclusively as products of


coercive force. The 'sanction' thus becomes the primary and most


important member of the series of notions and gives its colour to


all the others. Probably nobody ever found a difficulty in


allowing that laws have the character given to them by Austin, so


far as such laws have proceeded from formal Legislatures. But


many persons, and among them some men of powerful mind, have


struggled against the position that the great mass of legal rules


which have never been prescribed by the organ of State,


conventionally known as the Legislature, are commands of the


Sovereign. The customary law of all countries which have not


included their law in Codes, and specially the English Common


law, have often had an origin claimed for them independently of


the Sovereign, and theories have been propounded on the subject


which Austin scouts as mysterious and unintelligible. The way in


which Hobbes and he bring such bodies of rules as the Common law


under their system is by insisting on a maxim which is of vital


importance to it -- 'Whatever the Sovereign permits, he


commands.' Until customs are enforced by Courts of Justice, they


are merely 'positive morality,' rules enforced by opinion, but,


as soon as Courts of Justice enforce them, they become commands


of the Sovereign, conveyed through the Judges who are his


delegates or deputies. It is a better answer to this theory than


Austin would perhaps have admitted that it is founded on a mere


artifice of speech, and that it assumes Courts of Justice to act


in a way and from motives of which they are quite unconscious.


But, when it is clearly comprehended that, in this system, there


are no associations with the Sovereign but force or power, the


position that what Sovereigns permit they command becomes more


easily intelligible. They command because, being by the


assumption possessed of uncontrollable force, they could innovate


without limit at any moment. The Common law consists of their


commands because they can repeal or alter or re-state it at


pleasure. The theory is perfectly defensible as a theory, but its


practical value and the degree in which it approximates to truth


differ greatly in different ages and countries. There have been


independent political communities, and indeed there would still


prove to be some of them if the world were thoroughly searched,


in which the Sovereign, though possessed of irresistible power,


never dreams of innovation, and believes the persons or groups,


by whom laws are declared and applied, to be as much part of the


necessary constitution of society as he is himself. There have


again been independent political societies in which the Sovereign


has enjoyed irresistible coercive power and has carried


innovation to the farthest point; but in which every single


association connected with law would have violence done to it if


laws were regarded as his commands. The Tyrant of a Greek city


often satisfied every one of Austin's tests of Sovereignty; yet


it was part of the accepted definition of a Tyrant that 'he


subverted the laws.' Let it be understood that it is quite


possible to make the theory fit in with such cases, but the


process is a mere straining of language. It is carried on by


taking words and propositions altogether out of the sphere of the


ideas habitually associated with them.


    Before proceeding to speak at some length in my next Lecture


of these historical limitations on the practical value of


Austin's theories, let me repeat my opinion that if the method of


discussion which seems to me correct had been followed in his


treatise, and if the examination of Sovereignty had preceded the


examination of the conceptions dependent on it, a considerable


number of the statements which he has made respecting these


latter conceptions would have appeared not merely innocent but


self-evident. Law is here regarded as regulated force, simply


because force is the one element which has been allowed to enter


into the primary notion upon which all the others depend. The one


doctrine of this school of jurists which is repugnant to lawyers


would lose its air of paradox if an assumption were made which,


in itself theoretically unobjectionable, manifestly approximates


to practical truth as the course of history proceeds -- the


assumption that what the Sovereign might alter, but does not


alter, he commands. The same arrangement would have a further


advantage, as it seems to me, through the modifications it would


necessitate in Austin's manner of discussing Morality, though the


subject is not one which can be here treated with completeness.


The position at which many readers have stumbled -- I do not


affect to do more than state it in popular language -- is that


the sanction of moral rules, as such, is the disapprobation which


one's fellow-men manifest at their violation. It is sometimes


construed to mean that the only motive for obeying moral rules is


the fear of such disapprobation. Such a construction of Austin's


language is an entire misconception of his meaning; but, if the


order of discussion which I advocate had been followed, I do not


think it could ever possibly occur to any mind. Let us suppose


Austin to have completed his analysis of Sovereignty and of the


conceptions immediately dependent on it, law, legal right, and


legal obligation. He would then have to examine that great mass


of rules, which men in fact obey, which have some of the


characteristics of laws, but which are not (as such) imposed by


Sovereigns on subjects, and which are not (as such) enforced by


the sanction supplied by Sovereign power. It would be, of course,


incumbent on the philosophical jurist to examine these rules,


because Sovereigns being by his hypothesis human superiors are,


as human beings, subject to them. Austin has, in fact, examined


them from this point of view in some of his most interesting


passages. While insisting that Sovereignty is from the nature of


the case incapable of legal limitation, he fully admits that


Sovereigns are restrained from issuing some commands and


determined to issue others by rules which, though they are not


laws, are of extreme cogency. The Crown and Parliament of Great


Britain are in his view Sovereign -- a sovereign aristocracy, as


he would call it -- but, though this aristocracy could for


purposes of argument do anything it pleased, it would be out


raging all experience to assert that it does this. That great


body of rules which is embodied in constitutional maxims keeps it


from doing some things; that great body of rules which in


ordinary usage are called moral keeps it from doing others. What


common characteristics has this aggregate of rules which operate


on men and on Sovereigns, like other men? Austin, as you know,


names it 'positive morality', and says that its sanction is


opinion, or the disapproval of the bulk of the community


following on its violation. Properly understood, this last is an


obviously true proposition, for what is meant is that public


disapprobation is the one sanction which all these rules have in


common. The rule which keeps the Crown and Parliament from


declaring murder legal, and the rule which keeps them from


allowing the Queen to govern without Ministers, are connected


together through the penalty attendant on a breach of them, which


is the strong disapprobation of a majority of Englishmen; and it


is their having a sanction of some kind which principally


connects both rules with laws proper. But, though fear of opinion


be a motive for obedience to both rules, it does not at all


follow that the sole motive for obedience to both rules is fear


of opinion. This fear would be allowed by most people to be the


chief, if not the exclusive, motive for obedience to


constitutional rules; but such an admission involves no necessary


assertion whatever as to the complete sanction of moral rules.


The truth is that Austin's system is consistent with any ethical


theory; and, if Austin seems to assert the contrary, I think the


cause is to be sought in his firm conviction of the truth of his


own ethical creed, which, I need not say, was Utilitarianism in


its earlier shape I do not, indeed, for a moment intend to deny


that the careful study of Austin would probably modify the


student's view of morals. The discussion of ethics, like many


others, is conducted amid much obscurity of thought, and there is


no specific more sovereign for dispelling such obscurity than the


association of the cardinal terms which enter into our enquiry


with absolutely consistent meanings, and the employment of the


terms with these meanings as a test for the detection of


equivocal phraseology. It is the one inestimable service of the


Analytical School to jurisprudence and morals that it furnishes


them with a rigidly consistent terminology. But there is not the


faintest reason for thinking that the intelligent and


appreciative student of the system must necessarily be an


utilitarian.


    I shall state hereafter what I believe to be the true point


of contact between Austin's system and the utilitarian


philosophy. Meantime, devotion to this philosophy, coupled with


what I hold to be a faulty arrangement, has produced the most


serious blemish in the 'Province of Jurisprudence Determined.'


The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Lectures are occupied with an attempt to


identify the law of God and the law of Nature (so far as these


last words can be allowed to have any meaning) with the rules


required by the theory of utility. The lectures contain many


just, interesting, and valuable observations; but the


identification, which is their object, is quite gratuitous and


valueless for any purpose. Written, I doubt not, in the honest


belief that they would help to obviate or remove prejudices, they


have attracted to Austin's system a whole cloud of prejudices


both from the theological and from the philosophical side. If,


however, following the order I have suggested, Austin, after


concluding the examination of the nature of Sovereignty and of


positive law, had entered on an enquiry into the nature of the


laws of God, it must have taken the form of an investigation of


the question how far the characteristics of the human superiors


called Sovereigns can be supposed to attach to an all-powerful


and non-human ruler, and how many of the conceptions dependent on


human Sovereignty must be considered as contained in his


commands. I much doubt whether such an enquiry would have seemed


called for in a treatise like Austin's. Taken at its best, it is


a discussion belonging not to the philosophy of law but to the


philosophy of legislation. The jurist, properly so called, has


nothing to do with any ideal standard of law or morals.
















Lecture 2






The Ancient Irish Law













    The great peculiarity of the ancient laws of Ireland, so far






as they are accessible to us, is discussed, with much instructive






illustration, in the General Preface to the Third Volume of the






official translations. They are not a legislative structure, but






the creation of a class of professional lawyers, the Brehons,






whose occupation became hereditary, and who on that ground have






been designated, though not with strict accuracy, a caste. This






view, which is consistent with all that early English authorities






on Ireland have told us of the system they call the Brehon law,






is certainly that which would be suggested by simple inspection






of the law tracts at present translated and published. The Book






of Aicill is probably the oldest, and its text is avowedly






composed of the dicta of two famous lawyers, Cormac and






Cennfeladh. The Senchus Mor does, indeed, profess to have been






produced by a process resembling legislation, but the pretension






cannot be supported; and, even if it could, the Senchus Mor would






not less consist of the opinions of famous Brehons. It describes






the legal rules embodied in its text as formed of the 'law of






nature', and of the 'law of the letter'. The 'law of the letter'






is the Scriptural law, extended by so much of Canon law as the






primitive monastic Church of Ireland can be supposed to have






created or adopted. The reference in the misleading phrase 'law






of nature', is not to be the memorable combination of words






familiar to the Roman lawyers, but to the text of St Paul in the






Epistle to the Romans: 'For when the Gentiles, which have not the






law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having






not the law, are the law unto themselves.' (Rom. ii. 14) The 'law






of nature' is, therefore, the ancient pre-Christian ingredient in






the system, and the 'Senchus Mor' says of it: 'The judgments of






true nature while the Holy Ghost had spoken through the mouths of






the Brehons and just poets of the men of Erin, from the first






occupation of Ireland down to the reception of the faith, were






all exhibited by Dubhthach to Patrick. What did not clash with






the Word of God in the written law and the New Testament and the






consciences of believers, was confirmed in the laws of the






Brehons by Patrick and by the ecclesiastics and chieftains of






Ireland; for the law of nature had been quite right except the






faith, and its obligations, and the harmony of the Church and






people. And this is the "Senchus Mor".'






    Dr Sullivan, on the other hand, whose learned and exhaustive






Introduction to O'Curry's Lectures forms the first volume of the






'Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish', affirms, on the






evidence of ancient records, that the institutions which in some






communities undoubtedly developed into true legislatures had






their counterparts in the Ireland to which the laws belonged, and






he does not hesitate to designate certain portions of the Irish






legal system 'statute-law'. In the present sate of criticism on






Irish documents it is not possible to hold the balance exactly






between the writers of the Introduction and of the General






Preface; but there is not the inconsistency between their






opinions which there might appear to be at first sight. In the






infancy of society many conceptions are found blended together






which are now distinct, and many associations which are now






inseparable from particular processes or institutions are not






found coupled with them. There is abundant proof that legislative






and judicial power are not distinguished in primitive thought;






nor, again, is legislation associated with innovation. In our day






the legislator is always supposed to innovate; the judge never.






But of old the legislator no more necessarily innovated than the






judge; he only, for the most part, declared pre-exiting law or






custom. It is impossible to determine how much new law there was






in the Laws of Solon, or in the Twelve Tables of Rome, or in the






Laws of Alfred and Canute, or in the Salic Law which is the






oldest of the so-called Leges Barbarorum, but in all probability






the quantity was extremely small. Thus, when a body of Brehon






judgments was promulgated by an Irish Chief to a tribal assembly,






it is probable than convenience was the object sought rather than






a new sanction. A remarkable poem, appended to O'Curry's






Lectures, tells us how certain Chiefs proceeded every third year






to the 'Fair of Carman' and there proclaimed 'the rights of every






law and the restraints'; but it does not at all follow that this






promulgation had any affinity for legislation in the modern






sense. The innovating legislatures of the modern world appear to






have grown up where certain conditions were present which were






viturally unknown to ancient Ireland -- where the primitive






groups of which society was formed were broken up with some






completeness, and where a central government was constituted






acting on individuals from a distance coercively and






irresistibly.






    There are, moreover, some independent reasons for thinking






that, among the Celtic races, the half-judicial,






half-legislative, power originally possessed by the tribal Chief,






or by the tribal Assembly, or by both in combination, passed very






early to a special class of learned persons. The Prefaces in






Irish found at the commencement of some of the law-tracts, which






are of much interest, but of uncertain origin and date, contain






several reference to the order in Celtic society which has






hitherto occupied men's thoughts more than any other, the Druids.






The word occurs in the Irish text. The writers of the prefaces






seem to have conceived the Druids as a class of heathen priests






who had once practised magical arts. The enchanters of Pharaoh






are, for instance, called the Egyptian Druids, in the Preface to






the Senchus Mor. The point of view seems to be the one familiar






enough to us in modern literature, where an exclusive prominence






is given to the priestly character of the Druids; nor do the






Brehon lawyers appear to connect themselves with a class of men






whom they regard as having belonged altogether to the old order






of the world. I am quite aware that, in asking whether the






historical disconnection of the Brehons and the Druids can be






accepted as a fact, I suggest an enquiry about which there hangs






a certain air of absurdity. There has been so much wild






speculation and assertion about Druids and Druidical antiquities






that the whole subject seems to be considered as almost beyond






the pale of serious discussion. Yet we are not at liberty to






forget that the first great observer of Celtic manners describes






the Celts of the Continent as before all things remarkable for






the literary class which their society included. Let me add that






in Caesar's account of the Druids there is not a word which does






not appear to me perfectly credible. The same remark may be made






of Strabo. But the source of at all events a part of the






absurdities which have clustered round the subject I take to be






the Natural History of Pliny, and they seem to belong to those






stories about plants and animals to which may be traced a great






deal of the nonsense written in the world.






    You may remember the picture given by Caesar of the






Continental Celts, as they appear to him when he first used his






unrivalled opportunities of examining them. He tells us that






their tribal societies consisted substantially of three orders he






calls the Equites, the Druids, and the Plebeians. Somebody has






said that this would be a not very inaccurate description of






French society just before the first Revolution, with its three






orders of Nobles, Clergy, and unprivileged Tiers-tat; but the






observation is a good deal more ingenious than true. We are now






able to compare Caesar's account of the Gauls with the evidence






concerning a Celtic community which the Brehon tracts supply; and






if we use this evidence as a test, we shall soon make up our






minds that, though his representation is accurate as far as it






goes, it errs in omission of detail. The Equites, or Chiefs,






though to some extent they were a class apart, did not stand in






such close relation to one another as they stood to the various






septs or groups over which they presided. 'Every chief,' says the






Brehon law, 'rules over his land, whether it be small or whether






it be large.' The Plebeians, again, so far from constituting a






great miscellaneous multitude, were distributed into every sort






of natural group, based ultimately upon the Family. The mistake,






so far as there was error, I conceive to have been an effect of






mental distance. It had the imperfections of the view obtained by






looking on the Gangetic plains from the slopes of the Himalayas.






The impression made is not incorrect, but an immensity of detail






is lost to the observer, and a surface varied by countless small






elevations looks perfectly flat. Caesar's failure to note the






natural divisions of the Celtic tribesmen, the families and septs






or sub-tribes, is to me particularly instructive. The theory of






human equality is of Roman origin; the comminution of human






society, and the unchecked competition among its members, which






have gone so far in the Western Europe of our days, had the most






efficient causes in the mechanism of the Roman State. Hence






Caesar's omissions seem to be those most natural in a Roman






general who was also a great administrator and trained lawyer;






and they are undoubtedly those to which an English ruler of India






is most liable at this moment. It is often said that it takes two






or three years before a Governor-General learns that the vast






Indian population is an aggregate of natural groups, and not the






mixed multitude he left at home; and some rulers of India have






been accused of never having mastered the lesson at all.






    There are a few very important points of detail to be noticed






in Caesar's description of what may be called the lay portion of






Celtic society. I shall afterwards call your attention to the






significance of what he states concerning the classes whom he






calls the clients and debtors of the Equites, and respecting the






increased power which they give to the Chief on whom they are






dependent. It is, however, remarkable that, when he speaks of the






Druids, his statements are greatly more detailed. Here there were






no home associations to mislead him, but, beyond that, it is






plain that his interest was strongly roused by the novel






constitution of this privileged order whom he places by the side






of the Chiefs. Let me recall, then, to you the principal points






of his description, from which I designedly omit all statements






concerning the priestly office of the class described. He tells






us that the Druids were supreme judges in all public and private






disputes; and that, for instance, all questions of homicide, of






inheritance, and of boundary were referred to them for decision.






He says that the Druids presided over schools of learning, to






which the Celtic youth flocked eagerly for instruction, remaining






in them sometimes (so he was informed) for twenty years at a






time. He states that the pupils in these schools learned an






enormous quantity of verses, which were never committed to






writing; and he gives his opinion that the object was not merely






to prevent sacred knowledge from being popularised, but to






strengthen the memory. Besides describing to us the religious






doctrine of the Druids, he informs us that they were extremely






fond of disputing about the nature of the material world, the






movements of the stars, and the dimensions of the earth and of






the universe. At their head there was by his account a chief






Druid, whose place at his death was filled by election, and the






succession occasionally gave rise to violent contests of arms






(B.G. vi, 13, 14).






    There are some strong and even startling points of






correspondence between the functions of the Druids, as described






by Caesar, and the office of the Brehon, as suggested by the






law-tracts. The extensive literature of law just disinterred






testifies to the authority of the Brehons in all legal matters,






and raises a strong presumption that they were universal referees






in disputes. Among their writings are separate treatises on






inheritance and boundary, and almost every page of the






translations contains a reference to the 'eric'-fine for






homicide. The schools of literature and law appear to have been






numerous in ancient Ireland, and O'Curry is able to give the






course of instruction in one of them extending over twelve years.






All literature, including even law, seems to have been identified






with poetry. the chief Druid of Caesar meets us on the very






threshold of the Senchus Mor, in the person of Dubhthach Mac ua






Lugair, the royal poet of Erin, the Brehon who was chosen by St






Patrick to arbitrate in a question of homicide, and whose 'mouth'






the saint 'blessed'. The mode of choosing the chief Druid, by






election, has its counterpart in the institution of Tanistry,






which within historical times determined the succession to all






high office in Ireland, and which was hateful to the English, as






affording smaller security for order than their own less archaic






form of primogeniture. Nor is that all. The Prefaces in Irish to






the tracts contain a number of discussions on subjects which are






in no way legal, or which are forced into some connection with






law by the most violent expedients. They leave on the mind the






impression of being a patchwork of materials, probably of very






various antiquity, which happen to have been fond in the archives






of particular law-schools. Now, the Preface to the Senchus Mor






actually contains disquisitions on all the matters about which






Caesar declares the Druids to have been specially fond of






arguing. It in one place sets forth how God made the heaven and






the earth, but the account is not the least like the Mosaic






account. It goes off, as Caesar's Druids did, into a number of






extraordinary statements, 'de sideribus atque eorum motu', 'de






mundi ac terrarum magnitudine'. Among other things, it declares






that God fixed seven divisions from the firmament to the earth,






and that the distance he measured from the moon to the sun was






244 miles. 'And the first form of the firmament was ordained






thus: as the shell is about the egg, so is the firmament round






the earth in fixed suspension... there are six windows in each






part through the firmament to shed light through, so that there






are sixty-six windows in it, and a glass shutter for each window;






so that the whole firmament is a might sheet of crystal and a






protecting bulwark round the earth, with three heavens, and three






heavens about it; and the seventh was arrange in three heavens.






this last, however, is not the habitation of angels, but is like






a wheel revolving round, nd the firmament is thus revolting, and






also the seven planets, since the time when they were created'.






Parts of the passage reflect the astronomical notions known to






have been current in the Middle Ages, but much of it reads like a






fragment of a heathen cosmology, to which a later revision has






given a faint Christian colouring. The same Preface contains also






some curious speculations on the etymology of law-terms, and the






Preface to the Book of Aicill enters, among other things, into






the question of the difference between genus and species.






    I suggest, therefore, that the same tendencies which produced






among the Celts of the Continent the class called the Druids






produced among the Celts of Ireland the class known to us as the






Brehons; nor does it seem to me difficult to connect the results






of these tendencies with other known phenomena of ancient






society. There is much reason to believe that the Tribe-Chief, or






King, whom the earliest Aryan records show us standing by the






side of the Popular Assembly, was priest and judge as well as






captain of the host. The later Aryan history shows us this






blended authority distributing or 'differentiating' itself, and






passing either to the Assembly or to a new class of depositaries.






Among the Achaeans of Homer, the Chief has ceased to be priest,






but he is still judge; and his judicial sentences, Themiotes, or






'dooms', however much they may be drawn in reality from






pre-exiting usage, are believed to be dictated to him from on






high. Among the Celts both of Gaul and of Ireland he has ceased






to be priest, and also probably to be judge, although some






measure of judicial authority may still belong to his office as a






'survival'. The order of change thus departs from that followed






in Athenian history, where the institution of kingship survived






only in the name of the King Archon, who was a judicial






functionary, and from that followed in Roman history, where the






Rex Sacrificulus was a hierophant or priest. The Popular






Assembly, meanwhile, which virtually attracted to itself the






whole civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Kings among the






Athenians, and which at Rome engrossed the whole administration






of criminal justice through the commissions it appointed, seems






to lose all judicial authority among the Celts. Perhaps I may be






permitted thus to describe the change I conceive to have taken






place among the Celts of Ireland. Themis, who in Homer is the






assessor of Zeus and the source of judicial inspiration to kings,






has (so to speak) set up for herself. Kings have delegated their






authority to a merely human assessor, and we see by the story






which begins the Senchus Mor that, even when a Saint is supposed






to be present, the inspiration of which he is the source does not






find expression through his lips, nor does it descend on the






King; it descends on the professional judge. When we obtain our






last glimpse of the class which has received this inheritance






from Chief or King -- the Brehons, Judges, or Authors of






Judgments -- they have sunk to the lowest depth of misery and






degradation through the English conquest. At an earlier date they






are seen divided into families or septs, the hereditary






law-advisers of some princely or powerful house. Hugh McEgan, who






wrote the note 'in his own father's book' which I read in the






last Lecture, was one of the hereditary Brehons attached to the






McCarthys. But, in the earliest Irish traditions, the functions






of the Brehon and the King run very much into one another. The






most ancient Brehons are described as of royal blood, sometimes






as king's sons. The Tanaists of the great Irish Chiefs, the






successors elected out of the kindred of each Chief to come after






him on his death, are said to have occasionally officiated as






judges; and one of the law-tracts, still unpublished, contains






the express rule that it is lawful for a king, though himself a






judge, to have a judge in his place. Cormac MacAirt, one of the






traditional authors of the Book of Aicill, was a King in






retirement. Apocryphal as his story may be, it is one of much






significance to the student of ancient institutions. He had been






accidently blinded of one eye,and is said to have been deposed






from his regal office or chieftiancy on account of the blemish.






Coirpri, his son and successor (says the Book of Aicill), 'in






every difficult case of judgment that came to him used to go and






ask his father about it, and his father used to say to him, "My






son, that thou mayest know"' -- and then proceeded to lay down






the law.






    If, without committing ourselves to any specific theory






concerning the exact extent of the correspondence, we can assume






that there was substantial identity between the literary class






which produced the law-tracts and the literary order attributed






to the Celtic races by Caesar, we not only do something to






establish an historical conclusion perhaps more curious than






important, but we remove some serious difficulties in the






interpretation of the interesting and instructive body of archaic






law now before us. The difference between the Druids and their






successors, the Brehons, would in that case be mainly this: the






Brehons would be no longer priests. All sacerdotal or religious






authority must have passed, on the conversion of the Irish Celts,






to the 'tribes of the saints' -- to the missionary monastic






societies founded at all points of the island -- and to that






multitude of bishops dependent on them, whom it is so difficult






to reconcile with any of our preconceived ideas as to ancient






ecclesiastical organisation. The consequence would be that the






religious sanctions of the ancient laws, the supernatural






penalties threatened on their violation, would disappear, except






so far as the legal rules exactly coincided with the rules of the






new Christian code, the 'law of the letter.' Now, the want of a






sanction is occasionally one of the great difficulties in






understanding the Brehon law. Suppose a man disobeyed the rule or






resisted its application, what would happen? The learned writer






of one of the modern prefaces prefixed to the Third Volume of the






Ancient Laws contents that the administration of the Brehon






system consisted in references to arbitration; and I certainly






think myself that, so far as the system is known, it points to






that conclusion. The one object of the Brehons was to force






disputants to refer their quarrels to a Brehon, or to some person






in authority advised by a Brehon, and thus a vast deal of the law






tends to run into the Law of Distress, which declares the various






methods by which a man can be compelled through seizure of his






property to consent to an arbitration. But then one cannot help






perpetually feeling that the compulsion is weak as compared with






the stringency of the process of modern Courts of Justice; and






besides that, why should not the man attempted to be distrained






upon constantly resist with success? Doubtless the law provides






penalties for resistance; but where is the ultimate sanction?






Caesar supplies an answer, which must, I think, contain a portion






of the truth. He says that if a Celt of Gaul refused to abide by






a Druid judgment he was excommunicated: which was esteemed the






heaviest of penalties. Another example which I can give you of






the want or weakness of the sanction in the Brehon law is a very






remarkable one, and I shall recur to it hereafter. If you have a






legal claim against a man of a certain rank and you are desirous






of compelling him to discharge it, the Senchus Mor tells you to






'fast upon him.' 'Notice', it says, 'precedes distress in the






case of the inferior grades, except it be by persons of






distinction or upon persons of distinction; fasting precedes






distress in their case' ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' vol. i, p.






113). The institution is unquestionably identical with one widely






diffused throughout the East, which is called by the Hindoos






'sitting dharna'. It consists in sitting at your debtor's door






and starving yourself till he pays. From the English point of






view the practice has always been considered barbarous and






immoral, and the Indian Penal Code expressly forbids it. It






suggests, however, the question -- what would follow if the






creditor simply allowed the debtor to starve? Undoubtedly the






Hindoo supposes that some supernatural penalty would follow;






indeed, he generally gives definiteness to it by retaining a






Brahmin to starve himself vicariously, and no Hindoo doubts what






would come of causing a Brahmin's death. We cannot but suppose






that the Brehon rule of fasting was once thought to have been






enforced in some similar way. Caesar states that the Druids






believed in the immortality and transmigration of the soul, and






considered it the key of their system. A Druid may thus very well






have taught that penal consequences in another world would follow






the creditor's death by starvation; and there is perhaps a pale






reflection of this doctrine in the language of the Senchus Mor:






'He who does not give a pledge to fasting is an evader of all; he






who disregards all things shall not be paid by God or man.' But






an Irish Brehon could scarcely make any distinct assertion on the






subject, since fasting had now become a specific ordinance of the






Christian Church, and its condition and spiritual effects were






expressly defined by the Christian priesthood. Theoretically, I






should state, a person who refused unjustly to yield to fasting






had his legal liabilities considerably increased, at least,






according to the dicta of the Brehon commentators; but such






provisions only bring us to the difficulty of which I first






spoke, and raise anew the question of the exact value of legal






rules at a period when Courts of Justice are not as yet armed






with resistless powers of compelling attendance and submission.






    If we are justified in tracing the pedigree of the Brehon






Code to a system enforced by supernatural sanctions, we are able






to contrast it in various ways with other bodies of law in






respect of its mode of development. It closely resembles the






Hindoo law, inasmuch as it consists of what was in all






probability an original basis of Aryan usage vastly enlarged by a






superstructure of interpretation which a long succession of






professional commentators have elected; but it cannot have had






any such sacredness, and consequently any such authority, as the






Brahminical jurisprudence. Both the Brahmins and the Brehons






assume that Kings and Judges will enforce their law, and






emphatically enjoin on them its enforcement; but, while the






Brahmin could declare that neglect or disobedience would be






followed by endless degradation and torment, the Brehon could






only assert that the unlearned brother who pronounced a false






judgment would find blotches come on his cheeks, and that the






Chief who allowed sound usage to be departed from would bring bad






weather on his country. The development of the Brehon law was






again parallel to that which there is strong reason for supposing






the Roman law to have allowed in early times. The writer of the






Preface to the Third Volume, from which I have more than once






quoted, cites some observations which I published several years






ago on the subject of the extension of the Roman jurisprudence by






the agency known as the Responsa Prudentum, the accumulated






answers (or, as the Brehon phrase is, the judgments) of many






successive generations of famous Roman lawyers; and he adopts my






account as giving the most probable explanation of the growth of






the Brehon law. But in the Roman State a test was always applied






to the 'answers of the learned,' which was not applied, or not






systematically applied, to the judgments of the Brehons. We never






know the Romans except as subject to one of the strongest of






central governments, which armed the law courts with the force at






its command. Although the Roman system did not work exactly in






the way to which our English experience has accustomed us, there






can, of course, be no doubt that the ultimate criterion of the






validity of professional legal opinion at Rome, as elsewhere, was






the action of Courts of Justice enforcing rights and duties in






conformity with such opinion. But in ancient Ireland it is at






least doubtful whether there was ever, in our sense of the words,






a central government; it is also doubtful whether the public






force at the command of any ruler or rulers was ever






systematically exerted through the mechanism of Courts of






Justice; and it is at least a tenable view that the institutions






which stood in the place of Courts of Justice only exercised






jurisdiction through the voluntary submission of intending






litigants.






    Perhaps, however, from our present point of view, the






strongest contrast is between the ancient law of Ireland and the






law of England at a period which an English lawyer would not call






recent. The administration of justice in England, from






comparatively early times, has been more strongly centralised






than in any other European country; but in Ireland there was no






central government to nerve the arm of the law. The process of






the English Courts has for centuries past been practically






irresistible; the process of the Irish Courts, even if it was






compulsory, was at the utmost extremely weak. The Irish law was






developed by hereditary commentators; but we in England have






always attributed far less authority than does any European






Continental community to the unofficial commentaries of the most






learned writers of textbooks. We obtain our law, and adjust it to






the needs of each successive generation, either through






legislative enactment or through the decisions of our judges on






isolated groups of facts established by the most laborious






methods. But, as I have already stated, the opinion to which I






incline is, that no part of the Brehon law had its origin in






legislation. The author of innovation and improvement was the






learned Brehon, and the Brehon appears to have invented at






pleasure the facts which he used as the framework for his legal






doctrine. His invention was necessarily limited by his






experience, and hence the cases suggested in the law-tracts






possess great interest, as throwing light on the society amid






which they were composed; but these cases seem to be purely






hypothetical, and only intended to illustrate the rule which






happens to be under discussion.






    In the volume of my own to which I referred a few moments ago






I said of the early Roman law that 'great influence must have






been exercised (over it) by the want of any distinct check on the






suggestion or invention of possible questions. When the data can






be multiplied at pleasure, the facilities for evolving a general






rule are immensely increased. As the law is administered among






ourselves (in England) the judge cannot travel out of the sets of






facts exhibited before him or before his predecessors.






Accordingly, each group of circumstances which is adjudicated






upon receives, to employ a Gallicism, a sort of consecration. It






acquires certain qualities which distinguish it from every other






case, genuine or hypothetical.' I do not think it can be doubted






that this English practice of never declaring a legal rule






authoritatively until a state of facts arises to which it can be






fitted, is the secret of the apparent backwardness and barrenness






of English law at particular epochs, as contrasted with the






richness and reasonableness of other systems which it more than






rivals in its present condition. It is true, as I said before,






even of the Brehon law, that it does not wholly disappoint the






patriotic expectations entertained of it. When they are






disencumbered of archaic phrase and form, there are some things






remarkably modern in it. I quite agree with one of the Editors






that, in the ancient Irish Law of Civil Wrong, there is a






singularly close approach to modern doctrines on the subject of






Contributory Negligence; and I have found it possible to extract






from the quaint texts of the Book of Aicill some extremely






sensible rulings on the difficult subject of the Measure of






Damages, for which it would be vain to study the writings of Lord






Coke, though these last are relatively of much later date. But






the Brehon law pays heavily for this apparent anticipation of the






modern legal spirit. It must be confessed that most of it has a






strong air of fancifulness and unreality. It seems as if the






Brehon lawyer, after forming (let us say) a conception of a






particular kind of injury, set himself, as a sort of mental






exercise, to devise all the varieties of circumstance under which






the wrong could be committed, and then to determine the way in






which some traditional principle of redress could be applied to






the cases supposed. This indulgence of his imagination drew him






frequently into triviality or silliness, and led to an






extraordinary multiplication of legal detail. Four pages of the






Book of Aicill (a very large proportion of an ancient body of






law) are concerned with injuries received from dogs in






dog-fights, and they set forth in the most elaborate way the






modification of the governing rule required in the case of the






owners -- in the case of the spectators -- in the case of the






'impartial interposer' -- in the case of the 'half-interposer,'






i. e. the man who tries to separate the dogs with a bias in






favour of one of them -- in the case of an accidental looker-on






-- in the case of a youth under age, and in the case of an idiot.






The same law-tract deals also with the curious subjects of






injuries from a cat stealing in a kitchen, from women using their






distaffs in a woman-battle, and from bees, a distinction being






drawn between the case in which the sting draws blood and the






case in which it does not. Numberless other instances could be






given; but I repeat that all this is mixed up with much that even






now has juridical interest, and with much which in that state of






society had probably the greatest practical importance.






    It is not, perhaps, as often noticed as it should be by






English writers on law that the method of enunciating legal






principles with which our Courts of Justice have familiarised us






is absolutely peculiar to England and to communities under the






direct influence of English practice. In all Western societies,






Legislation, which is the direct issue of the commands of the






sovereign state, tends more and more to become the exclusive






source of law; but still in all Continental countries other






authorities of various kinds are occasionally referred to, among






which are the texts of the Roman Corpus Juris, commentaries on






Codes and other bodies of written law, the unofficial writings of






famous lawyers, and other branches of the vast literature of law






holding at most a secondary place in the estimation of the






English Judges and Bar. Nowhere, however, is anything like the






same dignity as with us attributed to a decided 'case,' and I






have found it difficult to make foreign lawyers understand why






their English brethren should bow so implicitly to what Frenchmen






term the 'jurisprudence' of a particular tribunal. From one point






of view English law has doubtless suffered through this






reluctance to invent or imagine facts aS the groundwork of rules,






and it will continue to bear the marks of the injury until






legislative re-arrangement and re-statement fully disclose the






stores of common sense which are at present concealed by its






defects of language and form. On the other hand, these habits of






the English Courts seem to be closely connected with one of the






most honourable characteristics of the English system, its






extreme carefulness about facts. Nowhere else in the world is






there the same respect for a fact, unless the respect be of






English origin. The feeling is not shared by our European






contemporaries, and was not shared by our remote ancestors. It






has been said -- and the remark seems to me a very just one --






that in early times questions of fact are regarded as the






simplest of all questions. Such tests of truth as Ordeal and






Compurgation satisfy men's minds completely and easily, and the






only difficulty recognised is the discovery of the legal






tradition and its application to the results of the test. Up to a






certain point no doubt our own mechanism for the determination of






a fact is also a mere artifice. We take as our criterion of truth






the unanimous opinion of twelve men on statements made before






them. But then the mode of convincing, or attempting to convince,






them is exactly that which would have to be followed if it were






sought to obtain a decision upon evidence from the very highest






human intelligence. The old procedure was sometimes wholly






senseless, sometimes only distantly rational; the modern English






procedure is at most imperfect, and some of its imperfection






arises from the very constitution of human nature and human






society. I quite concur, therefore, in the ordinary professional






opinion that its view of facts and its modes of ascertaining them






are the great glory of English law. I am afraid, however, that






facts must always be the despair of the law reformer. Bentham






seems to me from several expressions to have supposed that if the






English Law of Evidence were re-constructed on his principles






questions of fact would cease to present any serious difficulty.






Almost every one of his suggestions has been adopted by the






Legislature, and yet enquiries into facts become more protracted






and complex than ever. The truth is that the facts of human






nature, with which Courts of Justice have chiefly to deal, are






far obscurer and more intricately involved than the facts of






physical nature; and the difficulty of ascertaining them with






precision constantly increases in our age, through the progress






of invention and enterprise, through the ever-growing






miscellaneousness of all modern communities, and through the ever






quickening play of modern social movements. Possibly we may see






English law take the form which Bentham hoped for and laboured






for; every successive year brings us in some slight degree nearer






to this achievement; and consequently, little as we may agree in






his opinion that all questions of law are the effect of some






judicial delusion or legal abuse, we may reasonably expect them






to become less frequent and easier of solution. But neither facts






nor the modes of ascertaining them tend in the least to simplify






themselves, and in no conceivable state of society will Courts of






Justice enjoy perpetual vacation.






    I have been at some pains to explain what sort of authority






the Irish Brehon law did not, in my opinion, possess. The 'law of






nature' had lost all supernatural sanction, except so far as it






coincided with the 'law of the letter.' It had not yet acquired,






or had very imperfectly acquired, that binding power which law






obtains when the State exerts the public force through Courts of






Justice to compel obedience to it. Had it, then, any authority at






all; and if so, what sort of authority? Part of the answer to






this question I endeavoured to give three years ago ('Village






Communities, in the East and West,' pp. 56, 57); and though much






more might be said on the subject, I defer it till another






opportunity. So far as the Brehon law declared actual ancient and






indigenous practices, it shared in the obstinate vitality of all






customs when observed by a society distributed into corporate






natural groups. But, besides this, it had another source of






influence over men's minds, in the bold and never flagging






self-assertion of the class which expounded it. A portion of the






authority enjoyed by the Indian Brahminical jurisprudence is






undoubtedly to be explained in the same way. The Brehon could






not, like the Brahmin, make any such portentous assertion as that






his order sprang from the head of Brahma, that it was an






embodiment of perfect purity, and that the first teacher of its






lore was a direct emanation from God. But the Brehon did claim






that St. Patrick and other great Irish saints had sanctioned the






law which he declared, and that some of them had even revised it.






Like the Brahmin, too, he never threw away an opportunity of






affirming the dignity of his profession. In these law-tracts the






heads of this profession are uniformly placed, where Caesar






placed the Druids, on the same level with the highest classes of






Celtic society. The fines payable for injury to them, and their






rights of feasting at the expense of other classes (a form of






right which will demand much attention from us hereafter), are






adjusted to those of Bishops and Sings. It is more than likely






that the believing multitude ended by accepting these






pretensions. From what we know of that stage of thought we can






hardly set limits to the amount of authority spontaneously






conceded to the utterances of a sole literary class. It must have






struck many that the influence of the corresponding class in our






own modern society far exceeds anything which could have been






asserted of it from the mere consideration of our social






mechanism. There is, perhaps, an impression abroad that the






influence it exerts increases as history goes on, an impression






possibly produced and certainly strengthened by the brilliant






passages in which Lord Macaulay contrasted the well-paid literary






labour of his own day with the miseries of the literary hack of






Grub Street a century before. I think that this opinion, if






broadly stated, is at the very least doubtful. The class which,






to use a modern neologism, 'formulates' the ideas dimly conceived






by the multitude -- which saves it mental trouble by collecting






through generalisation, which is an essentially labour-saving






process, the scattered fragments of its knowledge and experience






-- has not always consisted of philosophers, historians, and






novelists, but had earlier representatives in poets, priests, and






lawyers. It is not at all a paradoxical opinion that these last






were its most powerful members. For, nowadays, it has to cope






with the critical faculty, more or less found everywhere, and






enormously strengthened by observation of the methods of physical






discovery. No authority of our day is possibly comparable with






that of the men who, in an utterly uncritical age, simply said of






a legal rule, 'So it has been laid down by the learned,' or used






the still more impressive formula, 'It is thus written.'






    While, however, I fully believe that the Brehon law possessed






great authority, I think also that it was in all probability






irregularly and intermittently enforced, and that partial and






local departures from it were common all over ancient Ireland.






Anybody who interested himself in the question of its practical






application would have to encounter the very problems which are






suggested by the Brahminical Hindoo law. The student of this last






system, especially if he compares it with the infinity of local






usage practised in India, is constantly asking himself how far






was the law of the Brahmin jurists observed before the English






undertook to enforce it through their tribunals? The Editor of






the Third Volume of the Ancient Laws of Ireland has given a very






apposite example of a problem of the same kind (iii. 146), by






extracting from the Carew Papers the story of a famous dispute as






to the headship of the great irish house of O'Neill. Con O'Neill,






its chief, had two sons, Matthew and Shane. Matthew O'Neill was






heir to Con O'Neill's earldom of Tyrone, according to the






limitations of the patent. Shane O'Neill urged on the English






Government that these limitations were void, because the King, in






granting the earldom, could not have been aware that Matthew






O'Neill was an adulterine bastard, having been in truth born of






the wife of a smith in Dundalk. Shane O'Neill has been regarded






as the champion of purely Irish ideas (see Froude, 'English in






Ireland,' I. 43); but though the rule of legitimacy upon which he






insisted conforms to our notions, it is directly contrary to the






legal doctrine of the Book of Aicill, which in one of its most






surprising passages lays down formally the procedure by which the






natural father could bring into his family a son born under the






alleged circumstances of Matthew O'Neill, on paying compensation






to the putative parent. Unless Shane O'Neill's apparent ignorance






of this method of legitimation was merely affected for the






purpose of blinding the English Government, it would seem to






follow that the Book of Aicill, though its authorship was






attributed to King Cormac, had not an universally recognised






authority.






    I do not know that the omission of the English, when they had






once thoroughly conquered the country, to enforce the Brehon law






through the Courts which they established, has ever been reckoned






among the wrongs of Ireland. But if they had done this. they






would have effected the very change which at a much later period






they brought about in India, ignorantly, but with the very best






intentions. They would have given immensely greater force and a






much larger sphere to a system of rules loosely and occasionally






administered before they armed them with a new authority. Even as






it was, I cannot doubt that the English did much to perpetuate






the Brehon law in the shape in which we find it. The Anglo-Norman






settlement on the east coast of Ireland acted like a running






sore, constantly Stating the Celtic regions beyond the Pale, and






deepening the confusion which prevailed there. If the country had






been left to itself, one of the great Irish tribes would almost






certainly have conquered the rest. All the legal ideas which,






little conscious as we are of their source, come to us from the






existence of a strong central government lending its vigour to






the arm of justice would have made their way into the Brehon law;






and the gap between the alleged civilisation of England and the






alleged barbarism of Ireland during much of their history, which






was in reality narrower than is commonly supposed, would have






almost wholly disappeared.






    Before I close this chapter it is necessary to state that the






Brehon law has not been unaffected by the two main influences






which have made the modern law of Western Europe different from






the ancient, Christian morality and Roman jurisprudence. It has






been modified by Roman juridical ideas in some degree, though it






would be hazardous to lay down with any attempt at precision in






what degree. I have trustworthy information that, in the tracts






translated but not yet published, a certain number of Roman legal






maxims are cited, and one Rowan jurisconsult is mentioned by






name. So far as the published tracts afford materials for an






opinion, I am inclined to think that the influence of the Roman






law has been very slight, and to attribute it not to study of the






writings of the Roman lawyers, but to contact with Churchmen






imbued more Or less with Roman legal notions. We may be quite






sure that the Brehons were indebted to them for one conception






which is present in the tracts -- the conception of a Will; and






we may probably credit the Church with the comparatively advanced






development of another conception which we find here -- the






conception of a Contract. The origin of the rules concerning






testamentary bequest which are sometimes found in Western bodies






of law otherwise archaic has been much considered of late years;






and the weight of learned opinion inclines strongly to the view






that these rules had universally their source in Roman law, but






were diffused by the influence of the Christian clergy. This






assertion cannot be quite so confidently made of Contracts; but






the sacredness of bequests and the sacredness of promises were of






about equal importance to the Church, as the donee of pious






gifts; and, as regards the Brehon law, it is plain upon the face






of the published sub-tract which is chiefly concerned with






Contract, the Corus Bescna, that the material interests of the






Church furnished one principal motive for its compilation. The






Corus Bescna, in which, I may observe, a certain confusion (not






uncommon in ancient law) may be remarked between contracts and






grants, between the promise to give and the act or operation of






giving, contains some very remarkable propositions on the subject






of contract. Here, and in other parts of the Senchus Mor, the






mischiefs of breach of contract are set forth in the strongest






language. 'The world would be in a state of confusion if verbal






contracts were not binding.' 'There are three periods at which






the world dies: the period of a plague, of a general war, of the






dissolution of verbal contracts.' 'The world is worthless at the






time of the dissolution of contracts.' At first sight this looks






a good deal liker the doctrine of the eighteenth century than of






any century between the sixth and the sixteenth. Let us see,






however, what follows when the position thus broadly stated has






to be worked out. We come, in the Corus Bescna, upon the






following attempt at classification, which I fear would have






deeply shocked Jeremy Bentham and John Austin: 'How many kinds of






contracts are there?' asks the Brehon textwriter. 'Two,' is the






answer. 'A valid contract, and an invalid contract.' This, no






doubt, is absurd, but the explanation appears to be as follows.






The principle of the absolute sacredness of contracts was






probably of foreign origin, and was insisted upon for a






particular purpose. It was therefore laid down too broadly for






the actual state of the law and the actual condition of Irish






Celtic society. Under such circumstances a treatise on Contract






takes necessarily the form in great measure of a treatise on the






grounds of invalidity in contracts, on the manifold exceptions to






an over-broad general rule. Anciently, the power of contracting






is limited on all sides. It is limited by the rights of your.






family, by the rights of your distant kinsmen, by the rights of






your co-villagers, by the rights of your tribe, by the rights of






your Chief, and, if you contract adversely to the Church, by the






rights of the Church. The Corus Bescna is in great part a






treatise on these archaic limitations. At the same time some of






the modern grounds of invalidity are very well set forth, and the






merit may possibly be due to the penetration of Roman doctrine






into the Brehon law-schools.






    Something must be said on the extent to which Christian






opinion has leavened these Brehon writings. Christianity has






certainly had considerable negative influence over them. It






became no longer possible for the Brehon to assert that the






transgressor of his rules would incur a supernatural penalty, and






the consequences of this were no doubt important. But still, as






you have seen, in the case of 'fasting on a man,' or 'sitting






dharna,' the heathen rule remained in the system, though its






significance was lost. Again, one positive result of the






reception by the Brehons of the so-called 'law of the letter'






appears to have been the development of a great mass of rules






relating to the territorial rights of the Church, and these






constitute a very interesting department of the Brehon law. But






there has certainty been nothing like an intimate






interpenetration of ancient Irish law by Christian principle. If






this kind of influence is to be looked for anywhere, it must be






in the law of Marriage, and the cognate branches of Divorce,






Legitimacy, and Inheritance. These, however, are the very






portions of the Brehon law which have been dwelt upon by writers






convinced that, as regards the relations of the sexes, the






primitive Irish were near akin to those Celts of Britain of whose






practices Caesar had heard. (B. G., v. 14.) The 'Book of Aicill'






provides for the legitimation not only of the bastard, but of the






adulterine bastard, and measures the compensation to be paid to






the putative father. The tract on 'Social Connections ' appears






to assume that the temporary cohabitation of the sexes is part of






the accustomed order of society, and on this assumption it






minutely regulates the mutual rights of the parties, showing an






especial care for the interests of the woman, even to the extent






of reserving to her the value of her domestic services during her






residence in the common dwelling. One remark ought, however, to






be made on these provisions of the Brehon law. It is not






inconceivable that, surprising as they are, they may be the index






to a social advance. Caesar plainly found the Celts of the






Continent polygamous, living in families held together by






stringent Paternal Power. He, a Roman, familiar with a Patria






Potestas as yet undecayed, thinks it worthy of remark that the






head of a Gallic household had the power of life and death over






his wives as well as his children, and notices with astonishment






that, when a husband died under suspicious circumstances, his






wives were treated with the same cruelty as a body of household






slaves at Rome whose master had been killed by an unknown hand.






(B. G., vi. 19.) Now, though very much cannot be confidently said






about the transition (which, nevertheless, is an undoubted fact)






of many societies from polygamy to monogamy under influences






other than those of religion, it may plausibly be conjectured






that here and there it had its cause in liberty of divorce. The






system which permitted a plurality of wives may have passed into






the system which forbade more than one wife at a time, but which






did not go farther. The monogamy of the modern and Western world






is, in fact, the monogamy of the Romans, from which the license






of divorce has been expelled by Christian morality. There are






hardly any materials for an opinion upon the degree of influence






exercised by the Church over the transformation of






marriage-relations in Ireland, but there are several indications






that the ecclesiastical rules as to the conditions of a valid






marriage established themselves very slowly among the ruder races






on the outskirts of what had been the Roman Empire. Mr Burton






('History of Scotland,' ii. 213), in speaking of the number of






illegitimate claimants who brought their pretensions to the Crown






of Scotland before Edward the First, observes: 'That they should






have pushed their claims only shows that the Church had not yet






absolutely established the rule that from her and her ceremony






and sacrament could alone come the union capable of transmitting






a right of succession to offspring.' The tract on 'Social






Connexions' notices a 'first' wife, and the recognition may be






attributable to the Church, but on the whole my impression






certainly is that the extremely ascetic form under which






Christianity was introduced into Ireland was unfavourable to its






obtaining a hold on popular morality. The common view seems to






have been that chastity was the professional virtue of a special






class, for the Brehon tracts, which make the assumptions I have






described as to the morals of the laity, speak of irregularity of






life in a monk or bishop with the strongest reprobation and






disgust. At the present moment Ireland is probably the one of all






Western countries in which the relations of the sexes are most






nearly on the footing required by the Christian theory; nor is






there any reasonable doubt that this result has been brought






about in the main by the Roman Catholic clergy. But this






purification of morals was effected during the period through






which monks and monasticism were either expelled from Ireland or






placed under the ban of the law.






    I will take this opportunity of saying that the influence of






Christianity on a much more famous system than the Brehon law has






always seemed to me to be greatly overstated by M. Troplong and






other well-known juridical writers. There is, of course, evidence






of Christian influence on Roman law in the disabilities imposed






on various classes of heretics and in the limitations of that






liberty of divorce which belonged to the older jurisprudence.






But, even in respect of divorce, the modifications strike me as






less than might have been expected from what we know of the






condition of opinion in the Roman world; and, as regards certain






improvements said to have been introduced by Christianity into






the Imperial law of slavery, they were probably quickened by its






influence, but they began in principles which were of Stoical






rather than of Christian origin. I do not question the received






opinion that Christianity greatly mitigated and did much to






abolish personal and predial slavery in the West, but the






Continental lawyers of whom I spoke considerably antedate its






influence, and take far too little account of the prodigious






effects subsequently produced by the practical equality of all






men within the pale of the Catholic priesthood. But I principally






deprecate these statements, which in some countries have almost






become professional commonplaces, for two reasons. They slur over






a very instructive fact, the great unmalleability of all bodies






of law. and they obscure an interesting and yet unsettled,






problem, the origin of the Canon law. The truth seems to be that






the Imperial Roman law did not satisfy the morality of the






Christian communities, and this is the most probable reason why






another body of rules grew up by its side and ultimately almost






rivalled it.
























Lecture III













Kinship as the Basis of Society













    The most recent researches into the primitive history of






society point to the conclusion that the earliest tie which






knitted men together in communities was Consanguinity or Kinship.






The subject has been approached of late years from several






different sides, and there has been much dispute as to what the






primitive blood-relationship implied, and how it arose; but there






has been general agreement as to the fact I have stated. The






caution is perhaps needed that we must not form too loose a






conception of the kinship which once stood in the place of the






multiform influences which are now the cement of human societies.






It was regarded as an actual bond of union, and in no respect as






a sentimental one. The notion of what, for want of a better






phrase, I must call a moral brotherhood in the whole human race






has been steadily gaining ground during the whole course of






history, and we have now a large abstract term answering to this






notion -- Humanity, he most powerful of the agencies which have






brought about this broader and laxer view of kinship has






undoubtedly been Religion, and indeed one great Eastern religion






extended it until for some purposes it embraced all sentient






nature. All this modern enlargement of the primitive conception






of kinship must be got rid of before we can bring it home to






ourselves. There was no brotherhood recognised by our savage






forefathers except actual consanguinity regarded as a fact. If a






man was not of kin to another there was nothing between them. He






was an enemy to be slain, or spoiled, or hated, as much as the






wild beasts upon which the tribe made war, as belonging indeed to






the craftiest and the cruellest order of wild animals. It would






scarcely be too strong an assertion that the dogs which followed






the camp had more in common with it than the tribesmen of an






alien and unrelated tribe.






    The tribes of men with which the student of jurisprudence is






concerned are exclusively those belonging to the races now






universally classed, on the ground of linguistic affinities, as






Aryan and Semitic. Besides these he has at most to take into






account that portion of the outlying mass of mankind which has






lately been called Uralian, the Turks, Hungarians, and Finns. The






characteristic of all these races, when in the tribal state, is






that the tribes themselves, and all subdivisions of them, are






conceived by the men who compose them as descended from a single






male ancestor. Such communities see the Family group with which






they are familiar to be made up of the descendants of a single






living man, and of his wife or wives; and perhaps they are






accustomed to that larger group, formed of the descendants of a






single recently deceased ancestor, which still survives in India






as a compact assemblage of blood-relatives, though it is only






known to us through the traces it has left in our Tables of






Inheritance. The mode of constituting groups of kinsmen which






they see proceeding before their eyes they believe to be






identical with the process by which the community itself was






formed. Thus the theoretical assumption is that all the tribesmen






are descended from some common ancestor, whose descendants have






formed sub-groups, which again have branched off into others,






till the smallest group of all, the existing Family, is reached.






I believe I may say that there is substantial agreement as to the






correctness of these statements so long as they are confined to






the Aryan, Semitic, and Uralian races. At most it is asserted






that, among the recorded usages of portions of these races, there






are obscure indications of another and an earlier state of






things. But then a very different set of assertions from these






are made concerning that large part of the human race which






cannot be classed as Aryan, Semitic, or Uralian. It is, first of






all, alleged that there is evidence of the wide prevalence among






them of ideas on the subject of Consanguinity which are






irreconcileable with the assumption of common descent from a






single ancestor. Next, it is pointed out that some small,






isolated, and very barbarous communities -- perhaps long hidden






in inaccessible Indian valleys, or within the ring of a coral






reef in the  Southern Seas -- still follow practices which it






would be incorrect and unjust to call immoral, because, in the






view we are considering, they are older than morality. The






suggestion is finally made that if these practices were, in an






older stage of the world's history, very much more widely






extended than at present, the abnormal, non-Aryan, non-Semitic,






non-Uralian notions about kinship of which I have spoken would






find their explanation. If, indeed, the conclusion here pointed






at expresses the truth, and if these practices were really at one






time universal, it would be an undeserved compliment to the human






race to say that it once followed the ways of the lower animals,






since, in point of fact, all the lower animals do not follow the






practices thus attributed to them. But, whatever be the interest






of such enquiries, they do not concern us till the Kinship of the






higher races can be distinctly shown to have grown out of the






Kinship now known only to the lower, and even then they concern






us only remotely. No doubt several recent writers do believe in






the descent of one form of consanguinity from the other. Mr Lewis






Morgan, of New York, the author of a remarkable and very






magnificent volume on 'Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity in






the Human Family,' published by the Smithsonian Institute at






Washington, reckons no less than ten stages (p: 486) through






which communities founded on kinship have passed before that form






of the family was developed out of which the Aryan tribes






conceive themselves to have sprung. But Mr Morgan also says of






the system known upon the evidence actually to prevail among the






Aryan, Semitic, and Uralian divisions of mankind that (p. 469) it






'manifestly proceeds upon the assumption of the existence of






marriage between single pairs, and of the certainty of parentage






through the marriage relation.' 'Hence,' he adds, 'it must have






come into existence after the establishment of marriage between






single pairs.'






    A remark of considerable importance to the student of early






usage has now to be made respecting the bond of union recognised






by these greater races. Kinship, as the tie binding communities






together, tends to be regarded as the same thing with subjection






to a common authority. The notions of Power and Consanguinity






blend, but they in nowise SUpersede one another. We have a






familiar example of this mixture of ideas in the subjection of






the smallest group, the Family, to its patriarchal head. Wherever






we have evidence of such a group, it becomes difficult to say






whether the persons compiled in it are most distinctly regarded






as kinsmen, or as servile or semi-servile dependents of the






person who was the source of their kinship. The confusion,






however, if we may so style it, of kinship with subjection to






patriarchal power is observable also in the larger groups into






which the Family expands. In some cases the Tribe can hardly be






otherwise described than as the group of men subject to some one






chieftain. This peculiar blending of ideas is undoubtedly






connected with the extension (a familiar fact to most of us) of






the area of ancient groups of kindred by artifices or fictions.






Just as we find the Family recruited by strangers brought under






the paternal power of its head by adoption, so we find the Tribe,






or Clan, including a number of persons, in theory of kin to it,






yet in fact connected with it only by common dependence on the






Chief. I do not affect to give any simple explanation of the






subjection of the various assemblages of kindred to forms of






power of which the patriarchal power of the head of the family is






the type. Doubtless it is partly to be accounted for by






deep-seated instincts. But Mr Morgan's researches seem to me to






have supplied another partial explanation. He has found that






among rude and partially nomad communities great numbers of






kindred, whom we should keep apart in mind, and distinguish from






one another in language, are grouped together in great classes






and called by the same general names. Every man is related to an






extraordinary number of men called his brothers, to an






extraordinary number called his sons, to an extraordinary number






called his uncles. Mr Morgan explains the fact in his own way,






but he points out the incidental convenience served by this






method of classification and nomenclature. Though the point may






not at first strike us, kinship is a clumsy basis for communities






of any size, on account of the difficulty which the mind, and






particularly the untutored mind, has in embracing all the persons






bound to any one man by tie of blood, and therefore (which is the






important matter) connected with him by common responsibilities






and rights. A great extension and considerable relaxation of the






notion of kinship gets over the difficulty among the lower races,






but it may be that, among the higher, Patriarchal Power answers






the same object. It simplifies the conceptions of kinship and of






conjoint responsibility, first in the Patriarchal Family and






ultimately -- in the Clan or Tribe.






    We have next to consider the epoch, reached at some time by






all the portions of mankind destined to civilisation, at which






tribal communities settle down upon a definite space of land. The






liveliest account which I have read of this process occurs in an






ancient Indian record which has every pretension to authenticity.






In a very interesting volume published by the Government of






Madras, and called 'Papers on Mirasi Right' (Madras, 1862), there






are printed some ancient Memorial Verses, as they are called,






which describe the manner in which the Vellalee, a possibly Aryan






tribe, followed their chief into Tondeimandalam, a region roughly






corresponding with a state once famous in modern Indian history,






Arcot. There the Vellalee conquered and extirpated, or enslaved,






some more primitive population and took permanent possession of






its territory. The poetess -- for the lines are attributed to a






woman -- compares the invasion to the flowing of the juice of the






sugar-cane over a flat surface. ('Mirasi Papers,' p. 233.) The






juice crystallises, and the crystals are the various






village-communities. In the middle is one lump of peculiarly fine






sugar, the place where is the temple of the god. Homely as is the






image, it seems to me in one respect peculiarly felicitous. It






represents the tribe, though moving in a fused mass of men, as






containing within itself a principle of coalescence which began






to work as soon as the movement was over. The point is not always






recollected. Social history is frequently considered as beginning






with the tribal settlement, and as though no principles of union






had been brought by the tribe from an older home. But we have no






actual knowledge of any aboriginal or autochthonous tribe.






Wherever we have any approximately trustworthy information






concerning the tribes which we discern in the far distance of






history, they have always come from some more ancient seat. The






Vellalee, in the Indian example, must have been agriculturists






somewhere, since they crystallised at once into






village-communities.






    It has long been assumed that the tribal constitution of






society belonged at first to nomad communities, and that, when






associations of men first settled down upon land, a great change






came over them. But the manner of transition from nomad to






settled life, and its effects upon custom and idea, have been too






much described, as it seems to me, from mere conjecture of the






probabilities; and the whole process, as I have just observed,






has been conceived as more abrupt than such knowledge as we have






would lead us to believe it to have been. attention has thus been






drawn off from one assertion on this subject which may be made, I






think, upon trustworthy evidence -- that, from the moment when a






tribal community settles down finally upon a definite space of






land, the Land begins to be the basis of society in place of the






Kinship. The change is extremely gradual, and in some particulars






it has not even now been fully accomplished, but it has been






going on through the whole course of history. The constitution of






the Family through actual blood-relationship is of course an






observable fact, but, for all groups of men larger than the






Family, the Land on which they live tends to become the bond of






union between them, at the expense of Kinship, ever more and more






vaguely conceived. We can trace the development of idea both in






the large and now extremely miscellaneous aggregation s of men






combined in States or Political Communities, and also in the






smaller aggregations collected in Village-Communities and Manors,






among whom landed property took its rise. The barbarian invaders






of the Western Roman Empire, though not uninfluenced by former






settlements in older homes, brought back to Western Europe a mass






of tribal ideas which the Roman dominion had banished from it;






but, from the moment of their final occupation of definite






territories, a transformation of these ideas began. Some years






ago I pointed out ('Ancient Law,' pp. 103 et seq.) the evidence






furnished by the history of International Law that the notion of






territorial sovereignty, which is the basis of the international






system, and which is inseparably connected with dominion over a






definite area of land, very slowly substituted itself for the






notion of tribal sovereignty. Clear traces of the change are to






be seen in the official style of kings. Of our own kings, King






John was the first who always called himself King of England.






(Freeman, 'Norman Conquest,' I. 82, 84.) His predecessors






commonly or always called themselves Kings of the English. The






style of the king reflected the older tribal sovereignty for a






much longer time in France. The title of King of France may no






doubt have come into use in the vernacular soon after the






accession of the dynasty of Capet, but it is an impressive fact






that, even at the time of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, the






Kings of France were still in Latin 'Reges Francorum;' and Henry






the Fourth only abandoned the designation because it could not be






got to fit in conveniently on his coins with the title of King of






Navarre, the purely feudal and territorial principality of the






Bourbons. (Freeman, loc. cit.) We may bring home to ourselves the






transformation of idea in another way. England was once the






country which Englishmen inhabited. Englishmen are now the people






who inhabit England. The descendants of our forefathers keep up






the tradition of kinship by calling themselves men of English






race, but they tend steadily to become Americans and Australians.






I do not say that the notion of consanguinity is absolutely lost;






but it is extremely diluted, and quite subordinated to the newer






view of the territorial constitution of nations. The blended






ideas are reflected in such an expression as 'Fatherland,' which






is itself an index to the fact that our thoughts cannot separate






national kinship from common country. No doubt it is true that in






our day the older conception of national union through






consanguinity has seemed to be revived by theories which are






sometimes called generally theories of Nationality, and of which






particular forms are known to us as Pan-Sclavism and






Pan-Teutonism. Such theories are in truth a product of modern






philology, and have grown out of the assumption that linguistic






affinities prove community of blood. But wherever the political






theory of Nationality is distinctly conceived, it amounts to a






claim that men of the same race shall be included, not in the






same tribal, but in the same territorial sovereignty.






    We can perceive, from the records of the Hellenic and Latin






city-communities, that there, and probably over a great part of






the world, the substitution of common territory for common race






as the basis of national union was slow, and not accomplished






without very violent struggles. 'The history of political ideas






begins,' I have said elsewhere, 'with the assumption that kinship






in blood is the sole possible ground of community in political






functions; nor is there any of those subversions of feeling which






we emphatically term revolutions so startling and so complete as






the change which is accomplished when some other principle --






such as that, for instance, of local contiguity -- establishes






itself for the first time as the basis of common political






action.' The one object of ancient democracies was, in fact, to






be counted of kin to the aristocracies, simply on the ground that






the aristocracy of old citizens, and the democracy of new, lived






within the same territorial circumscription. The goal was reached






in time both by the Athenian Demos and by the Roman Plebs; but






the complete victory of the Roman popular party was the source of






influences which have not spent themselves at the present moment,






since it is one of the causes why the passage from the Tribal to






the Territorial conception of Sovereignty was much more easy and






imperceptible in the modern than in the older world. I have






before stated that a certain confusion, or at any rate






indistinctness of discrimination, between consanguinity and






common subjection to power is traceable among the rudiments of






Aryan thought, and no doubt the mixture of notions has helped to






bring about that identification of common nationality with common






allegiance to the King, which has greatly facilitated the






absorption of new bodies of citizens by modern commonwealths. But






the majesty with which the memory of the Roman Empire surrounded






all kings has also greatly contributed to it, and without the






victory of the Roman Plebeians there would never have been, I






need hardly say, any Roman Empire.






    The new knowledge which has been rapidly accumulating of late






years enables us to track precisely the same transmutation of






ideas amid the smaller groups of kinsmen settled on land and






forming, not Commonwealths, but Village-Communities. The






historian of former days laboured probably under no greater






disadvantage than that caused by his unavoidable ignorance of the






importance of these communities, and by the necessity thus






imposed upon him of confining his attention to the larger






assemblages of tribesmen. It has often, indeed, been noticed that






a Feudal Monarchy was an exact counterpart of a Feudal Manor, but






the reason of the correspondence is only now beginning to dawn






upon us, which is, that both of them were in their origin bodies






of assumed kinsmen settled on land and undergoing the same






transmutation of ideas through the fact of settlement. The






history of the larger groups ends in the modern notions of






Country and Sovereignty; the history of the smaller in the modern






notions of Landed Property. The two courses of historical






development were for a long while strictly parallel, though they






have ceased to be so now.






    The naturally organised, self-existing, Village-Community can






no longer be claimed as an institution specially characteristic






of the Aryan races. M. de Laveleye, following Dutch authorities,






has described these communities as they are found in Java; and M






Renan has discovered them among the obscurer Semitic tribes in






Northern Africa. But, wherever they have been examined, the






extant examples of the group suggest the same theory of its






origin which Mr Freeman ('Comparative Politics,' p. 103) has






advanced concerning the Germanic village-community or Mark; 'This






lowest political unit was at first, here (i. e. in England) as






elsewhere, formed of men bound together by a tie of kindred, in






its first estate natural, in a later stage either of kindred






natural or artificial.' The evidence, however, is now quite ample






enough to furnish us with strong indications not only of the mode






in which these communities began, but of the mode in which they






transformed themselves. The world, in fact, contains examples of






cultivating groups in every stage, from that in which they are






actually bodies of kinsmen, to that in which the merest shadow of






consanguinity survives and the assemblage of cultivators is held






together solely by the land which they till in common. The great






steps in the scale of transition seem to me to be marked by the






Joint Family of the Hindoos, by the House-Community of the






Southern Sclavonians, and by the true Village-Community, as it is






found first in Russia and next in India. The group which I have






placed at the head, the Hindoo-Joint Family, is really a body of






kinsmen, the natural and adoptive descendants of a known






ancestor. Although the modern law of India gives such facilities






for its dissolution that it is one of the most unstable of social






compounds, and rarely lasts beyond a couple of generations,






still, so long as it lasts, it has a legal corporate existence,






and exhibits, in the most perfect state, that community of






proprietary enjoyment which has been so often observed, and (let






me add) so often misconstrued, in cultivating societies of






archaic type. 'According to the true notion of a joint undivided






Hindoo family,' said the Privy Council, 'no member of the family,






while it remains undivided, can predicate of the joint undivided






property that he, that particular member, has a certain definite






share.... The proceeds of undivided property must be brought,






according to the theory, into the common chest or purse, and then






dealt with according to the modes of enjoyment of the members of






an undivided family.' (Per Lord Westbury, Appovier v. Rama Subba






Aiyan, 11 Moore's Indian Appeals, 75.) While, however, these






Hindoo families, 'joint in food, worship, and estate,' are






constantly engaged in the cultivation of land, and dealing with






its produce 'according to the modes of enjoyment of an undivided






family,' they are not village-communities. They are only






accidentally connected with the land, however extensive their






landed property may be. What holds them together is not land, but






consanguinity, and there is no reason why they should not occupy






themselves, as indeed they frequently do, with trade or with the






practice of a handicraft. The House-Community, which comes next






in the order of development, has been examined by M. de Laveleye






(P. et 8. F. P., p. 201), and by Mr. Patterson ('Fortnightly






Review,' No. xliv.), in Croatia, Dalmatia, and Illyria, countries






which, though newer to us than India, have still much in common






with the parts of the East not brought completely under Mahometan






influences; but there is reason to believe that neither Roman law






nor feudalism entirely crushed it even in Western Europe. It is a






remarkable fact that assemblages of kinsmen, almost precisely the






counterpart of the House-Communities surviving among the






Sclavonians, were observed by M. Dupin, in 1840, in the French






Department of the Nivre, and were able to satisfy him that even






in 1500 they had been accounted ancient. These House-Communities






seem to me to be simply the Joint-Family of the Hindoos, allowed






to expand itself without hindrance and settled for ages on the






land. All the chief characteristics of the Hindoo institution are






here -- the common home and common table, which we always in






theory the centre of Hindoo family life; the collective enjoyment






of property and its administration by an elected manager.






Nevertheless, many instructive change s have begun which show how






such a group modifies itself in time The community is a community






of kinsmen; but, though the com m on ancestry is probably to a






great extent real, the tradition has become weak enough to admit






of considerable artificiality being introduced into the






association, as it is found at any given moment, through the






absorption of strangers from outside. Meantime, the land tends to






become the true basis of the group; it is recognized as of






pre-eminent importance to its vitality, and it remains common






property, while private ownership is allowed to show itself in






moveables and cattle. In the true Village-Community, the common






dwelling and common table which belong alike to the Joint Family






and to the House-Community, are no longer to be found. The






village itself is an assemblage of houses, contained indeed






within narrow limits, but composed of separate dwellings, each






jealously guarded from the intrusion of a neighbour. The village






lands are no longer the collective property of the community; the






arable lands have been divided between the various households;






the pasture lands have been partially divided; only the waste






remains in common. In comparing the two extant types of






Village-Community which have been longest examined by good






observers, the Russian and the Indian, we may be led to think






that the traces left on usage and idea by the ancient collective






enjoyment are faint exactly in proportion to the decay of the






theory of actual kinship among the co-villagers. The Russian






peasants of the same village really believe, we are told, in






their common ancestry, and accordingly we find that in Russia the






arable lands of the village are periodically re-distributed, and






that the village artificer, even should he carry his tools to a






distance, works for the profit of his co-villagers. In India,






though the villagers are still a brotherhood, and though






membership in the brotherhood separates a man from the world






outside, it is very difficult to say in what the tie is conceived






as consisting. Many palpable facts in the composition of the






community are constantly inconsistent with the actual descent of






the villagers from any one ancestor. Accordingly, private






property in land has grown up, though its outlines are not always






clear; the periodical re-division of the domain has become a mere






tradition, or is only practised among the ruder portions of the






race; and the results of the theoretical kinship are pretty much






confined to the duty of submitting to common rules of cultivation






and pasturage, of abstaining from sale or alienation without the






consent of the co-villagers, and (according to some opinions) of






refraining from imposing a rack-rent upon members of the same






brotherhood. Thus, the Indian Village-Community is a body of men






held together by the land which they occupy: the idea of common






blood and descent has all but died out. A few steps more in the






same course of development -- and these the English law is






actually hastening -- will diffuse the familiar ideas of our own






country and time throughout India; the Village-Community will






disappear, and landed property,in the full English sense, will






come into existence. Mr Freeman tells us that Uffington,






Gillingham, and Tooting were in all probability English






village-communities originally settled by the Uffingas,






Gillingas, and Totingas, three Teutonic joint-families. But






assuredly all men who live in Tooting do not consider themselves






brothers; they barely acknowledge duties imposed on them by their






mutual vicinity; their only real tie is through their common






country.






    The 'natural communism' of the primitive cultivating groups






has sometimes been described of late years, and more particularly






by Russian writers, as an anticipation of the most advanced and






trenchant democratic theories. No account of the matter could in






my judgment be more misleading. If such terms as 'aristocratic'






and 'democratic' are to be used at all, I think it would be a






more plausible statement that the transformation and occasional






destruction of the village-communities were caused, over much of






the world, by the successful assault of a democracy on an






aristocracy. The secret of the comparatively slight departure of






the Russian village-communities from what may be believed to have






been the primitive type, appears to me to lie in the ancient






Russian practice of colonisation, by which swarms were constantly






thrown off from the older villages to settle somewhere in the






enormous wastes; but the Indian communities, placed in a region






of which the population has from time immemorial been far denser






than in the North, bear many marks of past contests between the






ancient brotherhood of kinsmen and a class of dependants outside






it struggling for a share in the land, or for the right to use it






on easy terms. I am aware that there is some grotesqueness at






first sight in a comparison of Indian villagers, in their






obscurity and ignorance, and often in their squalid misery, to






the citizens of Athens or Rome; yet no tradition concerning the






origin of the Latin and Hellenic states seems more trustworthy






than that which represents them as formed by the coalescence of






two or more village-communities, and indeed, even in their most






glorious forms, they appear to me throughout their early history






to belong essentially to that type. It has often occurred to me






that Indian functionaries, in their vehement controversies about






the respective rights of the various classes which make up the






village-community, are unconsciously striving to adjust, by a






beneficent arbitration, the claims and counter-claims of the






Eupatrids and the Demos, of the Populus and the Plebs. There is






even reason to think that one well-known result of long civil






contention in the great states of antiquity has shown itself






every now and then in the village-communities, and that all






classes have had to submit to that sort of authority which






assumed its most innocent shape in the office of the Roman






Dictator, its more odious in the usurpation of the Greek Tyrant.






The founders of a part of one modern European aristocracy, the






Danish, are known to have been originally peasants who fortified






their houses during deadly village struggles and then used their






advantage.






    Such commencements of nobility as that to which I have just






referred, appear, however, to have been exceptional in the






Western world, and other causes must be assigned for that great






transformation of the Village-Community which has been carried






out everywhere in England, a little less completely in Germany,






much less in Russia and in all Eastern Europe. I have attempted






in another work ('Village-Communities in the East and West,' pp.






131 et seq.) to give an abridged account of all that is known or






has been conjectured on the subject of that 'Feudalisation of






Europe' which has had the effect of converting the Mark into the






Manor, the Village-Community into the Fief; and I shall presently






say much on the new light which the ancient laws of Ireland have






thrown on the early stages of the process. At present I will only






observe that, when completed, its effect was to make the Land the






exclusive bond of union between men. The Manor or Fief was a






social group wholly based upon the possession of land, and the






vast body of feudal rules which clustered round this central fact






are coloured by it throughout. That the Land is the foundation of






the feudal system has, of course, been long and fully recognised;






but I doubt whether the place of the fact in history has been






sufficiently understood. It marks a phase in a course of change






continued through long ages and in spheres much larger than that






of landed property. At this point the notion of common kinship






has been entirely lost. The link between Lord and Vassal produced






by Commendation is of quite a different kind from that produced






by Consanguinity. When the relation which it created had lasted






some time, there would have been no deadlier insult to the lord






than to attribute to him a common origin with the great bulk of






his tenants. Language still retains a tinge of the hatred and






contempt with which the higher members of the feudal groups






regarded the lower; and the words of abuse traceable to this






aversion are almost as strong as those traceable to differences






of religious belief. There is, in fact, little to choose between






villain, churl, miscreant, and boor.






    The break-up of the feudal group, far advanced in most






European countries, and complete in France and England, has






brought us to the state of society in which we live. To write its






course and causes would be to re-write most of modern history,






economical as well as political. It is not, however, difficult to






see that without the ruin of the smaller social groups, and the






decay of the authority which, whether popularly or autocratically






governed, they possessed over the men composing them, we should






never have had several great conceptions which lie at the base of






our stock of thought. Without this collapse, we should never have






had the conception of land as an exchangeable commodity,






differing only from others in the limitation of the supply; and






hence, without it, some famous chapters of the science of






Political economy would not have been written. Without it, we






should not have had the great increase in modern times of the






authority of the State-one of many names for the more extensive






community held together by common country. Consequently, we






should not have had those theories which are the foundation of






the most recent systems of jurisprudence -- the theory of






Sovereignty, or (in other words) of a portion in each community






possessing unlimited coercive force over the rest -- and the






theory of Law as exclusively the command of a sovereign One or






Number. We should, again, not have had the fact which answers to






these theories -- the ever-increasing activity of Legislatures;






and, in all probability, that famous test of the value of






legislation, which its author turned into a test of the soundness






of morals, would never have been devised -- the greatest






happiness of the greatest number.






    In saying that the now abundant phenomena of primitive






ownership open to our observation strongly suggest that the






earliest cultivating groups were formed of kinsmen, that these






gradually became bodies of men held together by the land which






they cultivated, and that Property in Land (as we now understand






it) grew out of the dissolution of these latter assemblages, I






would not for a moment be understood to assert that this series






of changes can be divided into stages abruptly separated from one






another. The utmost that can be affirmed is that certain periods






in this history are distinguished by the predominance, though not






the exclusive existence, of ideas proper to them. Here, as






elsewhere, the world is full of 'survivals,' and the view of






society as held together by kinship still survives when it is






beginning to be held together by land. Similarly, the feudal






conception of social relations still exercises. powerful






influence when land has become a merchantable commodity. There is






no country in which the theory of land as a form of property like






any other has been more unreservedly accepted than our own. Yet






English lawyers live in faece feodorum. Our law is saturated with






feudal principles, and our customs and opinions are largely






shaped by them. Indeed, within the last few years we have even






discovered that vestiges of the village-community have not been






wholly effaced from our law, our usages, and our methods of






tillage.






    The caution that the sequence of these stages does not imply






abrupt transition from any one to the next seems to me especially






needed by the student of the Ancient Laws of Ireland. Dr






Sullivan, of whose Introduction to the lately published lectures






of O'Curry I have already spoken, dwells with great emphasis on






the existence of private property among the ancient Irish, and on






the jealousy with which it was guarded. But though it is very






natural that a learned Irishman, stung by the levity which has






denied to his ancestors all civilised institutions, should attach






great importance to the indications of private ownership in the






Brehon law, I must say that they do not, in my judgment,






constitute its real interest. The instructiveness of the Brehon






tracts, at least to the student of legal history, seems to me to






arise from their showing that institutions of modern stamp may be






in existence with a number of rules by their side which savour of






another and a greatly older order of ideas. It cannot be doubted,






I think, that the primitive notion of kinship, as the cement






binding communities together, survived longer among the Celts of






Ireland and the Scottish Highlands than in any Western society,






and that it is stamped on the Brehon law even more clearly than






it is upon the actual land-law of India. It is perfectly true






that the form of private ownership in land which grew out of the






appropriation of portions of the tribal domain to individual






households of tribesmen is plainly recognised by the Brehon






lawyers; yet the rights of private owners are limited by the






controlling rights of a brotherhood of kinsmen, and the control






is in some respects even more stringent than that exercised over






separate property by an indian village-community. It is also true






that another form of ownership in land, that which had its origin






in the manorial authority of the lord over the cultivating group,






has also begun to show itself; yet, though the Chief of the Clan






is rapidly climbing to a position answering to the Lordship of a






Manor, he has not fully ascended to it, and the most novel






information contained in the tracts is that which they supply






concerning the process of ascent.






    The first instructive fact which strikes us on the threshold






of the Brehon law is, that the same word, 'Fine,' or Family, is






applied to all the subdivisions of Irish society. It is used for






the Tribe in its largest extension as pretending to some degree






of political independence, and for all intermediate bodies down






to the Family as we understand it, and even for portions of the






Family (Sullivan, 'Introduction, clxii). It seems certain that






each of the various groups into which ancient Celtic society was






divided conceived itself as descended from some one common






ancestor, from whom the name, or one of the names, of the entire






body of kinsmen was derived. Although this assumption was never






in ancient Ireland so palpable a fiction as the affiliation of






Greek races or communities on an heroic eponymous progenitor, it






was probably at most true of the Chief and his house so far as






regarded the Irish Tribe taken as a political unit. But it is






probable that it was occasionally, and even often true of the






smaller group, the Sept, sub-Tribe, or Joint Family, which






appears to me to be the legal unit of the Brehon tracts. The






traditions regarding the eponymous ancestor of this group were






distinct and apparently trustworthy, and its members were of kin






to one another in virtue of their common descent from the






ancestor who gave his name to all. The chief for the time being






was, as the Anglo-Irish judges called him in the famous 'Case of






Gavelkind,' the caput cognationis.






    Not only was the Tribe or Sept named after this eponymous






ancestor, but the territory which it occupied also derived from






him the name which was in commonest use. I make this remark






chiefly because a false inference has been drawn from an






assertion of learned men concerning the connection between names






of families and names of places, which properly understood is






perfectly sound. It has been laid down that, whenever a family






and place have the same name, it is the place which almost






certainly gave its name to the family. This is no doubt true of






feudalised countries, but it is not true of countries as yet






unaffected by feudalism. It is likely that such names as






'O'Brien's Country' and 'Macleod's Country' are as old as any






appropriation of land by man; and this is worth remembering when






we are tempted to gauge the intelligence of an early writer by






the absurdity of his etymologies. 'Hibernia' from an eponymous






discoverer, 'Hyber,' sounds ridiculous enough; but the chronicler






who gives it may have been near enough the age of tribal society






to think that the connection between the place and the name was






the most natural and probable he could suggest. Even the most






fanciful etymologies of the Greeks, such as Hellespont, from






Helle, may have been 'survivals' from a primitive tribal system






of naming places. In the relation between names and places, as in






much more important matters, feudalism has singularly added to






the importance of land.






    Let me now state the impression which, partly from the






examination of the translated texts, legal and non-legal, and






partly by the aid of Dr. Sullivan's Introduction, I have formed






of the agrarian organisation of an Irish Tribe. It has been long






settled, in all probability, upon the tribal territory. It is of






sufficient size and importance to constitute a political unit,






and possibly at its apex is one of the numerous chieftains whom






the Irish records call Kings. The primary assumption is that the






whole of the tribal territory belongs to the whole of the tribe,






but in fact large portions of it have been permanently






appropriated to minor bodies of tribesmen. A part is allotted in






a special way to the Chief as appurtenant to his office, and






depends from Chief to Chief according to a special rule of






succession. Other portions are occupied by fragments of the






tribe, some of which are under minor chiefs or 'flaiths,' while






others, though not strictly ruled by a chief, have somebody of a






noble class to act as their representative. All the






unappropriated tribe-lands are in a more especial way the






property of the tribe as a whole, and no portion can






theoretically be subjected to more than a temporary occupation.






Such occupations are, however, frequent, and among the holders of






tribe-land, on these terms, are groups of men calling themselves






tribesmen, but being in reality associations formed by contract,






chiefly for the purpose of pasturing cattle. Much of the common






tribe-land is not occupied at all, but constitutes, to use the






English expression, the 'waste' of the tribe. Still this waste is






constantly brought under tillage or permanent pasture by






settlements of tribesmen, and upon it cultivators of servile






status are permitted to squat, particularly towards the border.






It is the part of the territory over which the authority of the






Chief tends steadily to increase, and here it is that he settles






his 'fuidhir,' or stranger-tenants, a very important class -- the






outlaws and 'broken' men from other tribes who come to him for






protection, and who are only connected with their new tribe by






their dependence on its chief, and through the responsibility






which he incurs for them.






    There is probably great uniformity in the composition of the






various groups occupying, permanently or temporary, the tribal






territory. Each seems to be more or less a miniature of the large






tribe which includes them all. Each probably contains freemen and






slaves, or at all events men varying materially in personal






status, yet each calls itself in some sense a family. Each very






possibly has its appropriated land and its waste, and conducts






tillage and grazing on the same principles. Each is either under






a Chief who really represents the common ancestor of all the free






kinsmen, or under somebody who has undertaken the






responsibilities devolving according to primitive social idea






upon the natural head of the kindred. In enquiries of the class






upon which we are engaged the important fact which I stated here






three years ago should always be borne in mind. When the first






English emigrants settled in New England they distributed






themselves in village communities; so difficult is it to strike






out new paths of social life and new routes of social habit. It






is all but certain that, in such a society as that of which we






are speaking, one single model of social organisation and social






practice would prevail, and none but slight or insensible






departures from it would be practicable or conceivable.






    But still the society thus formed is not altogether






stationary. The temporary occupation of the common tribe-land






tends to become permanent, either through the tacit sufferance or






the active consent of the tribesmen. Particular families manage






to elude the theoretically periodical re-division of the common






patrimony of the group; others obtain allotments with its consent






as the reward of service or the appanage of office; and there is






a constant transfer of lands to the Church, and an intimate






intermixture of tribal rights with ecclesiastical rights. The






establishment of Property in Severalty is doubtless retarded both






by the abundance of land and by the very law under which, to






repeat the metaphor of the Indian poetess, the tribal society has






crystallised, since each family which has appropriated a portion






of tribe-land tends always to expand into an extensive assemblage






of tribesmen having equal rights. But still there is a






co-operation of causes always tending to result in Several






Property, and the Brehon law shows that by the time it was put






into shape they had largely taken effect. As might be expected,






the severance of land from the common territory appears to have






been most complete in the case of Chiefs, many of whom have large






private estates held under ordinary tenure in addition to the






demesne specially attached to their signory.






    Such is the picture of Irish tribal organisation in relation






to the land which I have been able to present to my own mind. All






such descriptions must be received with reserve: among other






reasons, because even the evidence obtainable from the law-tracts






is still incomplete. But if the account is in any degree correct,






all who have attended to this class of subjects will observe at






once that the elements of what we are accustomed to consider the






specially Germanic land system are present in the territorial






arrangements of the Irish tribe. Doubtless there are material






distinctions. Kinship as yet, rather than landed right, knits the






members of the Irish groups together. The Chief is as yet a very






different personage from the Lord of the Manor. And there are no






signs as yet even of the beginnings of great towns and cities.






Still the assertion, which is the text of Dr Sullivan's treatise,






may be hazarded without rashness, that everything in the Germanic






has at least its embryo in the Celtic land system. The study of






the Brehon law leads to the same conclusion pointed at by so many






branches of modern research. It conveys a stronger impression






than ever of a wide separation between the Aryan race and races






of other stocks, but it suggests that many, perhaps most, of the






differences in kind alleged to exist between Aryan sub-races are






really differences merely in degree of development. It is to be






hoped that contemporary thought will before long make an effort






to emancipate itself from those habits of levity in adopting






theories of race which it seems to have contracted. Many of these






theories appear to have little merit except the facility which






they give for building on them inferences tremendously out of






proportion to the mental labour which they cost the builder.












































Lectures on the Early History of Institutions






by Henry Sumner Maine






1875


















Preface













    In the Lectures printed in this Volume an attempt is made to






carry farther in some particulars the line of investigation






pursued by the Author in an earlier work on 'Ancient Law'. The






fortunes of the legal system which then supplied him with the






greatest number of his illustrations have been strikingly unlike






those of another body of law from which he has now endeavoured to






obtain some new materials for legal and social history. The Roman






Law has never ceased to be spoken of with deep respect, and it is






in fact the source of the greatest part of the rules by which






civil life is still governed in the Western World. The Ancient






Irish Law, the so-called Brehon Law, has been for the most part






bitterly condemned by the few writers who have noticed it; and,






after gradually losing whatever influence it once possessed in






the country in which it grew up, in the end it was forcibly






suppressed. Yet the very cases which have denied a modern history






to the Brehon Law have given it a especial interest of its own in






our day through the arrest of its development; and this interest,






the Author hopes, is sufficient to serve as his excuse for making






the conclusions it suggests the principal subject of the Lectures






now published, except the last three.






    The obligations o* the Author to various Gentlemen for






instruction derived from their published writings or private






communications are acknowledged in the body of the work, but he






has to express his especial thanks to the Bishop of Limerick, and






to Professor Thaddeus O'Mahony, for facilities of access to the






still unpublished translations of Brehon manuscripts, as well as






for many valuable suggestions. 






    The Lectures (with the omission of portions) have all been






delivered at Oxford. 













        27 Cornwall Gardens, London, S.W.;






            November 1874.













Lecture One.













New Materials for the Early History of Institutions













    The sources of information concerning the early history of






institutions which have been opened to us are numerous and






valuable. On one subject in particular, which may be confidently






said to have been almost exclusively investigated till lately by






writers who had followed a false path, the additions to our






knowledge are of special interest and importance. We at length






know something concerning the beginnings of the great institution






of Property in Land. The collective ownership of the soil by






groups of men either in fact united by blood-relationships, or






believing or assuming that they are so united, is now entitled to






take rank as an ascertained primitive phenomenon, once






universally characterising those communities of mankind between






whose civilisation and our own there is any distinct connection






or analogy. The evidence has been found on all sides of us, dimly






seen and verifiable with difficulty in countries which have






undergone the enormous pressure of the Roman Empire, or which






have been strongly affected by its indirect influence, but






perfectly plain and unmistakeable in the parts of the world,






peopled by the Aryan race, where the Empire has made itself felt






very slightly or not at all. As regards the Sclavonic






communities, the enfranchisement of the peasantry of the Russian






dominions in Europe has given a stimulus to enquiries which






formerly had attractions for only a few curious observers, and






the amount of information collected has been very large. We now






know much more clearly than we did before that the soil of the






older provinces of the Russian Empire has been, from time






immemorial, almost exclusively distributed among groups of






self-styled kinsmen, collected in cultivating






village-communities, self-organised and self-governing; and,






since the great measure of the present reign, the collective






rights of these communities, and the rights and duties of their






members in respect of one another, are no longer entangled with






and limited by the manorial privileges of an owner-in-chief.






There is also fresh evidence that the more backward of the






outlying Sclavonic societies are constituted upon essentially the






same model; and it is one of the facts with which the Western






world will some day assuredly have to reckon, that the political






ideas of so large a portion of the human race, and its ideas of






property also, are inextricably bound up with the notions of






family interdependency, of collective ownership, and of natural






subjection to patriarchal power. The traces of the ancient social






order in the Germanic and Scandinavian countries are, I need






scarcely say, considerably fainter, and tend always to become






more obscured; but the re-examination of the written evidence






respecting ancient Teutonic life and custom proceeds without






intermission, and incidentally much light has been thrown on the






early history of property by the remarkable work of Sohm






('Frankische Reichs-und Gerichtsverfassung'). The results






obtained by the special method of G.L. Von Maurer have meantime






been verified by comparison with phenomena discovered in the most






unexpected quarters. The researches of M. de Laveleye, in






particular, have been conducted over a field of very wide extent;






and, although I dissent from some of the economic conclusions to






which he has been led, I cannot speak too highly of the value of






the materials collected by him, and described in the recently






published volume which he has entitled "La Propriete et ses






Formes Primitives". I have not observed that the vestiges left on






the soil and law of England and of the Scottish Lowlands by the






ancient Village-Community have been made the subject of any






published work since the monograph of Nasse on the "Land






Community of the Middle Ages" was given to the world, and since






the lectures delivered in this place three years since appeared






in print. Nobody, however, who knows the carefulness with which






an English Court of Justice sifts the materials brought before it






will wonder at my attaching a special importance to the judgment






of Lord Chancellor Hatherley, given in a difficult case which






arose through a dispute between different classes of persons






interested in a manor, Warrick against Queen's college, Oxford






(reported in 6 Law Reports, Chancery Appeals, 716). It appears to






me to recognise the traces of a state of things older than the






theoretical basis of English Real Property Law, and, so far as it






goes, to allow that the description of it given here was correct.






Meanwhile, if I may judge from the communications which do not






cease to reach me from India, and from various parts of this






country, the constitution of the Village-Community, as it exists,






and as it existed, is engaging the attention of a large number of






industrious observers, and the facts bearing upon the subject,






which I hope will some day be made public, prove to exist in






extraordinary abundance.






    There was not set of communities which until recently






supplied us with information less in amount and apparent value






concerning the early history of law than those of Celtic origin.






This was the more remarkable, because one particular group of






small Celtic societies, which have engrossed more than their






share of the interest of this country -- the clans of the






Scottish Highlands -- had admittedly retained many of the






characteristics, and in particular the political characteristics






of a more ancient condition of the world, almost down to our own






day. But the explanation is, that all Celtic societies were until






recently seen by those competent to observe them through a






peculiarly deceptive medium. A veil spread by the lawyers, a veil






woven of Roman law and of the comparatively modern combination of






primitive and Roman law which we call feudalism, hung between the






Highland institutions and the shrewd investigating genius of the






Scottish Lowlanders. A thick mist of feudal law hid the ancient






constitution of Irish society from English observation, and led






to unfounded doubts respecting the authenticity of the laws of






Wales. The ancient organisation of the Celts of Gaul, described






by Caesar with the greatest clearness and decisiveness, appeared






to have entirely disappeared from France, partly because French






society was exclusively examined for many centuries by lawyers






trained either in Roman or in highly feudalised law, but partly






also because the institutions of the Gallic Celts had really






passed under the crushing machinery of Roman legislation. I do






not, indeed, mean to say that this darkness has not recently






given signs of lifting. It has been recognized that the






collections of Welsh laws published by the Record Commission,






though their origin and date are uncertain, are undoubtedly






bodies of genuine legal rules; and, independently of the






publications to which I am about to direct attention, the group






of Irish scholars, which has succeeded a school almost infamous






for the unchastened license of its speculations on history and






philology, had pointed out many things in Irish custom which






connected it with the archaic practices known to be still






followed or to have been followed by the Germanic races. As early






as 1837 Mr W.F. Skene, in a work of much value called "The






Highlanders of Scotland", had corrected many of the mistakes on






the subject of Highland usage into which writers exclusively






conversant with feudal rules had been betrayed; and the same






eminent antiquarian, in an appendix to his edition of the






Scottish chronicler, Fordun, published in 1872, confirms evidence






which had reached me in considerable quantities from private






sources to the effect that village-communities with 'shifting






severalties' existed in the Highlands within living memory. Quite






recently, also, M. Le Play and others have come upon plain traces






of such communities in several parts of France. A close






re-examination of the Custumals or manuals of feudal rules






plentiful in French legal literature, led farther to some highly






interesting results. It clearly appeared from them that






communities of villeins were constantly found on the estates of






the French territorial nobility. The legal writers have always






represented these as voluntary associations which were rather






favoured by the lord on account of the greater certainty and






regularity with which their members rendered him suit and






service. As a rule, when a tenant holding by base tenure died,






the lord succeeded in the first instance to his land, a rule of






which there are plain traces in our English law of copyhold. But






it is expressly stated that, in the case of an association of






villeins, the lord did not resume their land, being supposed to






be compensated by their better ability to furnish his dues. Now






that the explanation has once been given, there can be no doubt






that these associations were not really voluntary partnerships,






but groups of kinsmen; not, however, so often organised on the






ordinary type of the Village-Community as on that of the






House-Community, which has recently been examined in Dalmatia and






Croatia. Each of them was what the Hindoos call a Joint Undivided






Family, a collection of assumed descendants from a common






ancestor, preserving a common hearth and common meals during






several generations. There was no escheat of the land to the lord






on a death, because such a corporation never dies, and the






succession is perpetual.






    But much the most instructive contribution to our knowledge






of the ancient Celtic societies has been furnished by the Irish






Government, in the translations of the Ancient Laws of Ireland,






which have been published at its expense. The first volume of






these translations was published in 1865; the second in 1869; the






third, enriched with some valuable prefaces, has only just






appeared. No one interested in the studies which are now






occupying us could fail to recognise the importance of the






earlier volumes, but there was much difficulty in determining






their exact bearing on the early history of Celtic institutions.






The bulk of the law first published consisted in a collection of






rules belonging to what in our modern legal language we should






call the Law of Distress. Now, in very ancient bodies of rules






the Law of Distress, as I shall endeavour to explain hereafter,






is undoubtedly entitled to a very different place from that which






would be given to it in any modern system of jurisprudence; but






still it is a highly special branch of law in any stage of






development. There is, however, another more permanent and more






serious cause of embarrassment in drawing conclusions from these






laws. Until comparatively lately they were practically






unintelligible; and they were restored to knowledge by the






original translators, Dr O'Donovan and Dr O'Curry, two very






remarkable men, both of whom are now dead. The translations have






been carefully revised by the learned editor of the Irish text;






but it is probable that several generations of Celtic scholars






will have had to interchange criticisms on the language of the






laws before the reader who approaches them without any pretension






to Celtic scholarship can be quite sure that he has the exact






meaning of every passage before him. The laws, too, I need






scarcely say, are full of technical expressions; and the greatest






scholar who has not had a legal training -- and, indeed, up to a






certain point when he has had a legal training -- may fail to






catch the exact excess or defect of meaning which distinguishes a






word in popular use from the same word employed technically. Such






considerations suggest the greatest possible caution in dealing






with this body of rules. In what follows I attempt to draw






inferences only when the meaning and drift of the text seem






reasonably certain, and I have avoided some promising lines of






enquiry which would lead us through passages of doubtful






signification.






    The value which the Ancient Laws of Ireland, the so-called






Brehon laws, will possess when they are completely published and






interpreted, may, I think, be illustrated in this way. Let it be






remembered that the Roman Law, which, next to the Christian






Religion, is the most plentiful source of the rules governing






actual conduct throughout Western Europe, is descended from a






small body of Aryan customs reduced to writing in the fifth






century before Christ, and known as the Twelve Tables of Rome.






Let it farther be recollected that this law was at first expanded






and enveloped, not at all, or very slightly, by legislation, but






by a process which we may perceive still in operation in various






communities -- the juridical interpretation of authoritative






texts by successive generations of learned men. Now, the largest






collection of Irish legal rules, which has come down to us,






professes to be an ancient Code, with an appendage of later






glosses and commentaries; and, if its authenticity could be fully






established, this ancient Irish Code would correspond






historically to the Twelve Tables of Rome, and to many similar






bodies of written rules which appear in the early history of






Aryan societies. There is reason, however, to think that its






claims to antiquity cannot be sustained to their full extent, and






that the Code itself is an accretion of rules which have






clustered round an older nucleus. But that some such kernel or






perhaps several such kernels of written law existed, is highly






probable, and it is also probable that the whole of the Brehon






law consists of them and of accumulations formed upon them. It is






farther probable that the process by which these accumulations






were formed was, as in the infancy of the Roman State, juridical






interpretation. According to the opinion which I follow, the






interesting fact about the ancient Irish law is, that this






process was exclusive, and that none of the later agencies by






which law is transformed came into play. The Brehon laws are in






no sense a legislative construction, and thus they are in no






sense a legislative construction, and thus they are not only an






authentic monument of a very ancient group of Aryan institutions;






they are also a collection of rules which have been gradually






developed in a way highly favourable to the preservation of






archaic peculiarities. Two causes have done most to obscure the






oldest institutions of the portion of the human race to which we






belong: one has been the formation throughout the West of strong






centralised governments, concentrating in themselves the public






force of the community, and enabled to give to that force upon






occasion the special form of legislative power; the other has






been the influence, direct and indirect, of the Roman Empire,






drawing with it an activity in legislation unknown to the parts






of the world which were never subjected to it. Now, Ireland is






allowed on all hands to have never formed part of the Empire; it






was very slightly affected from a distance by the Imperial law;






and, even if it be admitted that, during certain intervals of its






ancient history, it had a central government, assuredly this






government was never a strong one. Under these circumstances it






is not wonderful that the Brehon law, growing together without






legislation upon an original body of Aryan custom, and formed






beyond the limit of that cloud of Roman juridical ideas which for






many centuries overspread the whole Continent, and even at its






extremity extended to England, should present some very strong






analogies to another set of derivative Aryan usages, the Hindoo






law, which was similarly developed. The curious and perplexing






problems which such a mode of growth suggests have to grappled






with by the student of either system.






    The ancient laws of Ireland have come down to us as an






assemblage of law-tracts, each treating of some one subject or of






a group of subjects. The volumes officially translated and






published contain the two largest of these tracts, the Senchus






Mor, or Great Book of the Ancient Law, and the Book of Aicill.






While the comparison of the Senchus Mor and of the Book of Aicill






with other extant bodies of archaic rules leaves no doubt of the






great antiquity of much of their contents, the actual period at






which they assumed their present shape is extremely uncertain. Mr






Whitley Stokes, one of the most eminent of living Celtic






scholars, believes, upon consideration of its verbal forms, that






the Senchus Mor was compiled in or perhaps slightly before the






eleventh century; and there appears to be internal evidence which






on the whole allows us to attribute the Book of Aicill to the






century preceding. The Senchus Mor, it is true, expressly claims






for itself a far earlier origin. In a remarkable preface, of






which I shall have much to say hereafter, it gives an account,






partly in verse, of the circumstances under which it was drawn






up, and it professes to have been compiled during the life and






under the personal influence of St Patrick. These pretensions






have been ingeniously supported, but there is not much temerity,






I think, in refusing to accept the fifth century as the date of






the Senchus Mor. At the same time it is far from impossible that






the writing of the ancient Irish laws began soon after the






Christianisation of Ireland. It was Christianity, a 'religion of






a book', which for the first time introduced many of the ruder






nations outside the Empire to the art of writing. We cannot






safely claim for the Christian era, precisely the same degree of






culture which Caesar attributes to the Celts of the Continent in






the first century before Christ; but, even if we could do so,






Caesar expressly states of the Gauls that, though they were






acquainted with writing, they had superstitious scruples about






using written characters to preserve any part of their sacred






literature, in which their law would then be included. Such






objections would, however, necessarily disappear with the






conversion of the Irish people to Christianity. On the whole






there is no antecedent improbability in the tradition that, soon






after this conversion, the usages of the Irish began to be stated






in writing, and Celtic scholars have detected not a little






evidence that parts of these more venerable writings are imbedded






in the text of the Book of Aicill and of the Senchus Mor.






    It is extremely likely that the most ancient law was






preserved in rude verse or rhythmical prose. In the oldest Irish






traditions the lawyer is distinguished with difficulty from the






poet, poetry from literature. Both in the Senchus Mor and in the






Book of Aicill the express statement of the law is described as






'casting a thread of poetry' about it, and the traditional






authors of the Senchus Mor are said to have exhibited 'all the






judgements and poetry of the men of Erin.' Modern Irish






scholarship has, in fact, discovered that portions of the Senchus






Mor are really in verse. The phenomenon is not unfamiliar. Mr






Grote, speaking of the Elegiacs of Solon, and of the natural






priority of verse to prose, says (History of Greece, iii. 119),






'the acquisitions as well as the effusions of an intellectual






man, even in the simplest form, (then) adjusted themselves not to






the limitations of the period and semicolon, but to those of the






hexameter and pentameter.' There is no question, I conceive, that






this ancient written verse is what is now called a survival,






descending to the first ages of written composition from the ages






when measured rhythm was absolutely essential, in order that the






memory might bear the vast burdens placed upon it. It is now






generally agreed that the voluminous versified Sanscrit






literature, which embraces not only the poetry of the Hindoos,






but most of their religion, much of what stands to them in place






of history, and something even of their law, was originally






preserved by recollection and published by recitation; and even






now, in the Sanscrit schools which remain, the pupil is trained






to exercises of memory which are little short of the miraculous






to an Englishman.






    The tracts are of very unequal size, and the subjects they






embrace are of very unequal importance. But all alike consist of






an original text, divided into paragraphs. Above or over against






the principal words of the text glosses or interpretations are






written in a smaller hand, and a paragraph is constantly followed






by an explanatory commentary, also in a smaller hand, written in






the space which separates the paragraph from the next. The






scarcity of material for writing may perhaps sufficiently account






for the form taken by the manuscripts; but the Celts seem to have






had a special habit of glossing, and you may have heard that the






glosses written by early Irish monks between the lines or on the






margin of manuscripts belonging to religious houses on the






Continent had much to do with the wonderful discoveries of Zeuss






in Celtic philology. A facsimile of part of two Brehon






manuscripts, one in the British Museum, and the other in the






Library of Trinity College, Dublin, may be seen at the beginning






of the second published volume of the translations. It seems






probable that each tract was the property, and that it sets forth






the special legal doctrines, of some body of persons who, in






modern legal phrase, had perpetual succession, a Family or Law






School; there is ample evidence of the existence of such law






schools in ancient Ireland, and they are another feature of






resemblance to the India of the past and in some degree to the






India of the present.






    The text of each of the published tracts appears to have been






put together by one effort, no doubt from pre-existing materials,






and it may have been written continuously by some one person; but






the additions to it must be an accumulation of explanations and






expositions of various dates by subsequent possessors of the






document. I quite agree with the observation of the Editors,






that, while the text is for the most part comparatively






consistent and clear, the commentary is often obscure and






contradictory. Precisely the same remark is frequently made by






Anglo-Indian Judges on the Brahminical legal treatises, some of






which are similarly divided into at text and a commentary. As






regards the ancient Irish law, the result of the whole process is






anything but satisfactory to the modern reader. I do not know






that, in any extant body of legal rules, the difficulty of






mastering the contents has ever been so seriously aggravated by






the repulsiveness of the form. One of the editors has unkindly,






but not unjustly, compared a Brehon tract to the worst kind of






English law-book, without even the moderate advantage of an






alphabetical arrangement.






    The exact date at which the existing manuscripts were written






cannot be satisfactorily settled until they are all made






accessible, which unfortunately they are not at present. But we






know one MS. of the Senchus Mor to be at least as old as the






fourteenth century, since a touching note has been written on it






by a member of the family to which it belonged: "One thousand






three hundred two and forty years from the birth of Christ till






this night; and this is the second year since the coming of the






plague into Ireland. I have written this in the 20th year of my






age. I am Hugh, son of Conor McEgan, and whoever reads it let him






offer a prayer of mercy for my son! This is Christmas night, and






on this night I place myself under the protection of the King of






Heaven and Earth, beseeching that he will bring me and my friends






safe through the plague. Hugh wrote this in his own father's book






in the year the great plague."






    The system of legal rules contained in these law tracts is






undoubtedly the same with that repeatedly condemned by






Anglo-Irish legislation, and repeatedly noticed by English






observers of Ireland down to the early part of the seventeenth






century. It is the same law which, in 1367, a statute of Kilkenny






denounces as 'wicked and damnable'. It is the same law which






Edmund Spencer, in his 'View of the State of Ireland,' describes






as 'a rule of right unwritten, but delivered by tradition from






one to another, win which oftentimes there appeareth a great show






of equity, in determining the right between party and party, but






in many things repugning quite both to God's law and man's'. It






is the same 'lewd' and 'unreasonable' custom which Sir John Davis






contrasts with the 'just and honourable law of England,' and to






which he attributes such desolation and barbarism in Ireland, 'as






the like as never seen in any country that professed the name of






Christ.' It is not our business in this department of study to






enquire how far this violent antipathy was politically






justifiable. Even if the worst that has been said by Englishmen






of the Brehon law down to our own day were true, we might console






ourselves by turning our eyes to spheres of enquiry fuller of






immediate promise to the world than ours, and observing how much






of the wealth of modern thought has been obtained from the dross






which earlier generations had rejected. Meanwhile, happily, it is






a distinct property of the Comparative Method of investigation to






abate national prejudices. I myself believe that the government






of India by the English has been rendered appreciably easier by






the discoveries which have brought home to the educated of both






races the common Aryan parentage of Englishman and Hindoo.






Similarly, I am not afraid to anticipate that there will some day






be more hesitation in repeating the invectives of Spenser and






Davis, which it is once clearly understood that the 'lewd'






institutions of the Irish were virtually the same institutions as






those out of which the 'just and honourable law' of England grew.






Why these institutions followed in their development such






different paths it is the province of History to decide; but,






when it gives an impartial decision, I doubt much its wholly






attributing the difference to native faults of Irish character.






We, who are able here to examine coolly the ancient Irish law in






an authentic form, can see that it is a very remarkable body of






archaic law, unusually pure from its origin. It has some






analogies with the Roman law of the earliest times, some with






Scandinavian law, some with the law of the Sclavonic races, so






far as it is known, some (and these particularly strong) with the






Hindoo law, and quite enough with old Germanic law of all kinds,






to render valueless, for scientific purposes, the comparison






which the English observers so constantly institute with the laws






of England. It is manifestly the same system in origin and






principle with that which has descended to us as the Laws of






Wales, but these last have somehow undergone the important






modifications which arise from the establishment of a






comparatively strong central authority. Nor does the Brehon law






altogether disappoint the expectations of the patriotic Irishmen






who, partly trusting to the testimony of Edmund Spenser, the






least unkind of the English critics of Ireland, though one of the






most ruthless in his practical suggestions, looked forward to its






manifesting, when it was published, an equity and reasonableness






which would put to shame the barbarous jurisprudence of England.






Much of it -- I am afraid I must say, most of it -- is worthless






save for historical purposes, but on some points it really does






come close to the most advanced legal doctrines of our day. The






explanation -- which I will hereafter give at length -- I believe






to lie in the method of its development, which has not been






through the decision of courts, but by the opinions of lawyers on






hypothetical states of fact.






    I think I may lay down that, wherever we have any knowledge






of a body of Aryan custom, either anterior to or but slightly






affected by the Roman Empire, it will be found to exhibit some






strong points of resemblance to the institutions which are the






basis of the Brehon law. The depth to which the empire has






stamped itself on the political arrangements of the modern world






has been illustrated of late years with much learning; but I






repeat my assertion that the great difference between the Roman






Empire and all other sovereignties of the ancient world lay in






the activity of its legislation, through the Edicts of the






Praetor and the Constitution of the Emperors. For many races, it






actually repealed their customs and replaced them by new ones.






For others, the results of its legislation mixed themselves






indistinguishably with their law. With others, it introduced or






immensely stimulated the habit of legislation; and this is one of






the ways in which it has influenced the stubborn body of Germanic






custom prevailing in Great Britain. But wherever the institutions






of any Aryan race have been untouched by it, or slightly touched






by it, the common basis of Aryan usage is perfectly discernible;






and thus it is that these Brehon law-tracts enable us to connect






the races at the eastern and western extremities of a later Aryan






world, the Hindoos and the Irish.






    The Lectures which follow will help, I trust, to show what






use the student of comparative jurisprudence may make of this






novel addition to our knowledge of ancient law. Meantime, there






is some interest in contrasting the view of its nature, origin,






and growth, which we are obliged to take here, with that to which






the ancient Irish practitioners occasionally strove hard to give






currency. The Senchus Mor, the Great Book of the Ancient Law, was






doubtless a most precious possession of the law-school or family






to which it belonged; and its owners have joined it to a preface






in which a semi-divine authorship is boldly claimed for it.






Odhran, the charioteer of St Patrick -- so says this preface --






had been killed, and the question arose whether Nuada, the






slayer, should die, or whether the saint was bound by his own






principles to unconditional forgiveness. St Patrick did not






decide the point himself; the narrator, in true professional






spirit, tells us that he set the precedent according to which a






stranger from beyond the sea always selects a legal adviser. He






chose 'to go according to the judgment of the royal poet of the






men of Erin, Dubhthach Mac ua Lugair,' and he 'blessed the mouth'






of Dubhthach. A poem, doubtless of much antiquity and celebrity,






is then put into the mouth of the arbitrator, and by the judgment






embodied in it Nuada is to die; but he ascends straight to heaven






through the intercession of St Patrick. "Then King Laeghaire






said, "It is necessary for you, O men of Erin, that every other






law should be settled and arranged by us as well as this." "It is






better to do so," said Patrick. It was then that all the






professors of the sciences in Erin were assembled,and each of






them exhibited his art before Patrick, in the presence of every






chief in Erin. It was then Dubhthach was ordered to exhibit all






the judgments and all the poetry of Erin, and every law which






prevailed among the men of Erin... This is the Cain Patraic, and






no human Brehon of the Gaedhil is able to abrogate anything that






is found in the Senchus Mor.'






    The inspired award of Dubhthach that Nuada must die suggests






to the commentator the following remark: "What is understood from






the above decision which God revealed to Dubhthach is, that it






was a middle course between forgiveness and retaliation; for






retaliation prevailed in Erin before Patrick, and Patrick brought






forgiveness with him; that is, Nuada was put to death for his






crime, and Patrick obtained heaven for him. At this day we keep






between forgiveness and retaliation; for as at present no one has






the power of bestowing heaven, as Patrick had at that day, so no






one is put to death for his intentional crimes, so long as 'eric'






fine is obtained; and whenever 'eric' fine is not obtained, he is






put to death for his intentional crime, and placed on the sea for






his unintentional crimes." It is impossible, of course, to accept






the statement that this wide-spread ancient institution, the






pecuniary fine levied on tribes or families for the wrongs done






by their members, had its origin in Christian influences; but






that it succeeded simple retaliation is in the highest degree






probable, and no doubt in its day it was at least as great an






advantage to the communities among whom it prevailed as was that






stern administration of criminal justice to which the Englishmen






of the sixteenth century were accustomed, and on which they so






singularly prided themselves. but by the sixteenth century it may






well have outlived its usefulness, and so may have partially






justified the invectives of its English censors, who generally






have the 'eric'-fine for homicide in view when they denounce the






Brehon law as 'contrary to God's law and man's.'
















Lecture VIII





The Growth and Diffusion of Primitive Ideas









    Mr Tylor has justly observed that the true lesson of the new


science of Comparative Mythology is the barrenness in primitive


times of the faculty which we most associate with mental


fertility, the Imagination. Comparative Jurisprudence, as might


be expected from the natural stability of law and custom, yet


more strongly suggests the same inference, and points to the


fewness of ideas and the slowness of additions to the mental


stock as among the most general characteristics of mankind in its


infancy.


    The fact that the generation of new ideas does not proceed in


all states of society as rapidly as in that to which we belong,


is only not familiar to us through our inveterate habit of


confining our observation of human nature to a small portion of


its phenomena. When we undertake to examine it, we are very apt


to look exclusively at a part of Western Europe and perhaps of


the American Continent. We constantly leave aside India, China,


and the whole Mahometan East. This limitation of our field of


vision is perfectly justifiable when we are occupied with the


investigation of the laws of Progress. Progress is, in fact, the


same thing as the continued production of new ideas, and we can


only discover the law of this production by examining sequences


of ideas where they are frequent and of considerable length. But


the primitive condition of the progressive societies is best


ascertained from the observable condition of those which are


non-progressive; and thus we leave a serious gap in our knowledge


when we put aside the mental state of the millions upon millions


of men who fill what we vaguely call the East as a phenomenon of


little interest and of no instructiveness. The fact is not


unknown to most of us that, among these multitudes, Literature,


Religion, and Art -- or what corresponds to them -- move always


within a distinctly drawn circle of unchanging notions; but the


fact that this condition of thought is rather the infancy of the


human mind prolonged than a different maturity from that most


familiar to us, is very seldom brought home to us with a


clearness rendering it fruitful of instruction.


    I do not, indeed, deny that the difference between the East


and the West, in respect of the different speed at which new


ideas are produced, is only a difference of degree. There were


new ideas produced in India even during the disastrous period


just before the English entered it, and in the earlier ages this


production must have been rapid. There must have been a series of


ages during which the progress of China was very steadily


maintained, and doubtless our assumption of the absolute


immobility of the Chinese and other societies is in part the


expression of our ignorance. Conversely, I question whether new


ideas come into being in the West as rapidly as modern literature


and conversation sometimes suggest. It cannot, indeed, be doubted


that causes, unknown to the ancient world, lead among us to the


multiplication of ideas. Among them are the never ceasing


discovery of new facts of nature, inventions changing the


circumstances and material conditions of life, and new rules of


social conduct; the chief of this last class, and certainly the


most powerful in the domain of law proper, I take to be the


famous maxim that all institutions should be adapted to produce


the greatest happiness of the greatest number. Nevertheless,


there are not a few signs that even conscious efforts to increase


the number of ideas have a very limited success. Look at Poetry


and Fiction. From time to time one mind endowed with the


assemblage of qualities called genius makes a great and sudden


addition to the combinations of thought, word, and sound which it


is the province of those arts to produce; yet as suddenly, after


one or a few such efforts, the productive activity of both


branches of invention ceases, and they settle down into


imitativeness for perhaps a century at a time. An humbler example


may be sought in rules of social habit. We speak of the caprices


of Fashion; yet, on examining them historically, we find them


singularly limited, so much so, that we are sometimes tempted to


regard Fashion as passing through cycles of form ever repeating


themselves. There are, in fact, more natural limitations on the


fertility of intellect than we always admit to ourselves, and


these, reflected in bodies of men, translate themselves into that


weariness of novelty which seems at intervals to overtake whole


Western societies, including minds of every degree of information


and cultivation.


    My present object is to point out some of the results of


mental sterility at a time when society is in the stage which we


have been considering. Then, the relations between man and man


were summed up in kinship. The fundamental assumption was that


all men, not united with you by blood, were your enemies or your


slaves. Gradually the assumption became untrue in fact, and men,


who were not blood relatives, became related to one another on


terms of peace and mutual tolerance or mutual advantage Yet no


new ideas came into being exactly harmonising with the new


relation, nor was any new phraseology invented to express it. The


new member of each group was spoken of as akin to it, was treated


as akin to it, was thought of as akin to it. So little were ideas


changed that, as we shall see, the very affections and emotions


which the natural bond evoked were called forth in extraordinary


strength by the artificial tie. The clear apprehension of these


facts throws light on several historical problems, and among them


on some of Irish history. Yet they ought not greatly to surprise


us, since, in a modified form, they make part of our everyday


experience. Almost everybody can observe that, when new


circumstances arise, we use our old ideas to bring them home to


us; it is only afterwards, and sometimes long afterwards, that


our ideas are found to have changed. An English Court of Justice


is in great part an engine for working out this process. New


combinations of circumstance are constantly arising, but in the


first instance they are exclusively interpreted according to old


legal ideas. A little later lawyers admit that the old ideas are


not quite what they were before the new circumstances arose.


    The slow generation of ideas in ancient times may first be


adduced as necessary to the explanation of that great family of


Fictions which meet us on the threshold of history and historical


jurisprudence. Specimens of these fictions may be collected on


all sides from bodies of archaic custom or rudimentary systems of


law, but those most to our present purpose are fictitious


assumptions of blood-relationship. Elsewhere I have pointed out


the strange conflict between belief or theory and what seems to


us notorious fact, which is observable in early Roman and


Hellenic society. 'It may be affirmed of early commonwealths that


their citizens considered all the groups in which they claimed


membership to be founded on common lineage. What was obviously


true of the Family was believed to be true first of the House,


next of the Tribe, lastly of the State. And yet we find that,


along with this belief, each community preserved records or


traditions which distinctly showed that the fundamental


assumption was false. Whether we look to the Greek States, or to


Rome, or to the Teutonic aristocracies in Ditmarsh which


furnished Niebuhr with so many valuable illustrations, or to the


Celtic clan associations, or to that strange social organisation


of the Sclavonic Russians and Poles which has only lately


attracted notice, everywhere we discover traces of passages in


their history when men of alien descent were admitted to, and


amalgamated with, the original brotherhood. Adverting to Rome


singly, we perceive that the primary group, the Family, was being


constantly adulterated by the practice of adoption, while stories


seem to have been always current respecting the exotic extraction


of one of the original Tribes, and concerning a large addition to


the Houses made by one of the early Kings. The composition of the


State uniformly assumed to be natural was nevertheless known to


be in great measure artificial.' (Ancient Law, pp. 129, 130.) The


key to these singular phenomena has been recently sought in the


ancient religions, and has been supposed to be found in the


alleged universal practice of worshipping dead ancestors. Very


striking illustrations of them are, however, supplied by the law


and usage of Ireland after it had been Christianised for


centuries, and long after any Eponymous progenitor can be


conceived as worshipped . The Family, House, and Tribe of the


Romans -- and, so far as my knowledge extends, all the analogous


divisions of Greek communities -- were distinguished by separate


special names. But in the Brehon Law, the same word, Fine (or


'family'), is used for the Family as we ordinarily understand it


-- that is, for the children of a living parent and their


descendants -- for the Sept or, in phrase of Indian law, the


Joint Undivided Family, that is, the combined descendants of an


ancestor long since dead -- for the Tribe, which was the


political unit of ancient Ireland, and even for the large Tribes


in which the smaller units were sometimes absorbed. Nevertheless


the Irish Family undoubtedly received additions through Adoption.


The Sept, or larger group of kindred, had a definite place for


strangers admitted to it on stated conditions, the Fine Taccair.


The Tribe avowedly included a number of persons, mostly refugees


from other Tribes, whose only connection with it was common


allegiance to its Chief. Moreover the Tribe in its largest


extension and considered a political as well as a social unit


might have been absorbed with others in a Great or Arch Tribe,


and here the sole source of the kinship still theoretically


maintained is Conquest. Yet all these groups were in some sense


or other Families.


    Nor does the artificiality solely consist in the extension of


the sphere of kinship to classes known to have been originally


alien to the true brotherhood. An even more interesting example


of it presents itself when the ideas of kinship and the


phraseology proper to consanguinity are extended to associations


which we should now contemplate as exclusively founded on


contract, such as partnerships and guilds. There are no more


interesting pages in Dr Sullivan's Introduction (pp. ccvi et


seq.) than those in which he discusses the tribal origin of


Guilds. He claims for the word itself a Celtic etymology, and he


traces the institution to the grazing partnerships common among


the ancient Irish. However this may be, it is most instructive to


find the same words used to describe bodies of co-partners,


formed by contract, and bodies of co-heirs or co-parceners formed


by common descent. Each assemblage of men seems to have been


conceived as a Family. As regards Guilds, I certainly think, as I


thought three years ago, that they have been much too confidently


attributed to a relatively modern origin; and that many of them,


and much which is common to all of them, may be suspected to have


grown out of the primitive brotherhoods of co-villagers and


kinsmen. The trading guilds which survive in our own country have


undergone every sort of transmutation which can disguise their


parentage. They are artificial to begin with, though the


hereditary principle has a certain tendency to assert itself.


They have long since relinquished the occupations which gave them


a name. They mostly trace their privileges and constitution to


some royal charter; and kingly grants, real or fictitious, are


the great cause of interruption in English History. Yet anybody


who, with a knowledge of primitive law and history, examines the


internal mechanism and proceedings of a London Company will see


in many parts of them plain traces of the ancient brotherhood of


kinsmen, 'joint in food, worship, and estate;' and I suppose that


the nearest approach to an ancient tribal holding in Ireland is


to be found in those confiscated lands which are now the property


of several of these Companies.


    The early history of Contract, I need scarcely tell you, is


almost exclusively to be sought in the history of Roman law. Some


years ago I pointed to the entanglement which primitive Roman


institutions disclose between the conveyance of property and the


contract of sale. Let me now observe that one or two others of


the great Roman contracts appear to me, when closely examined, to


afford evidence of their having been gradually evolved through


changes in the mechanism of primitive society. You have seen how


brotherhoods of kinsmen transform themselves into alliances


between persons whom we can only call partners, but still at


first sight the link is missing which would enable us to say that


here we have the beginning of the contract of partnership. Look,


however, at the peculiar contract called by the Romans 'societas


omnium (or universorum) bonorum.' It is commonly translated


'partnership with unlimited liability,' and there is no doubt


that the elder form of partnership has had great effect on the


newer form. But you will find that, in the societas omnium


bonorum, not only were all the liabilities of the partnership the


liabilities of the several partners, but the whole of the


property of each partner was brought into the common stock and


was enjoyed as a common fund. No such arrangement as this is


known in the modern world as the result of ordinary agreement,


though in some countries it may be the effect of marriage. It


appears to me that we are carried back to the joint brotherhoods


of primitive society, and that their development must have given


rise to the contract before us. Let us turn again to the contract


of Mandatum or Agency. The only complete representation of one


man by another which the Roman law allowed was the representation


of the Paterfamilias by the son or slave under his power. The


representation of the Principal by the Agent is much more


incomplete, and it seems to me probable that we have in it a


shadow of that thorough coalescence between two individuals which


was only possible anciently when they belonged to the same


family.


    The institutions which I have taken as my examples are


institutions of indigenous growth, developed probably more or


less within all ancient societies by the expansion of the notion


of kinship. But it sometimes happens that a wholly foreign


institution is introduced from without into a society based upon


assumed consanguinity, and then it is most instructive to observe


how closely, in such a case, material which antecedently we


should think likely to oppose the most stubborn resistance to the


infiltration of tribal ideas assimilates itself nevertheless to


the model of a Family or Tribe. You may be aware that the ancient


Irish Church has long been a puzzle to ecclesiastical historians.


There are difficulties suggested by it on which I do not pretend


to throw any new light, nor, indeed, could they conveniently be


considered here. Among perplexities of this class are the


extraordinary multiplication of bishops and their dependence,


apparently an almost servile dependence, on the religious houses


to which they were attached. But the relation of the various


ecclesiastical bodies to one another was undoubtedly of the


nature of tribal relation. The Brehon law seems to me fully to


confirm the account of the matter given, from the purely


ecclesiastical literature, by Dr Todd, in the Introduction to his


Life of St Patrick. One of the great Irish or Scotic


Missionaries, who afterwards nearly invariably reappears as a


Saint, obtains a grant of lands from some chieftain or tribe in


Ireland or Celtic Britain, and founds a monastery there, or it


may be that the founder of the religious house is already himself


the chieftain of a tribe. The House becomes the parent of others,


which again may in their turn throw out minor religious


establishments, at once monastic and missionary. The words


signifying 'family' or 'tribe' and 'kinship' are applied to all


the religious bodies created by this process. Each monastic


house, with its monks and bishops, constitutes a 'family' or


'tribe;' and its secular or servile dependants appear to be


sometimes included under the name. The same appellation is given


to the collective assemblage of religious houses formed by the


parent monastery and the various churches or monastic bodies


sprung from it. These make up together the 'tribe of the saint,'


but this last expression is not exclusively employed with this


particular meaning. The abbot of the parent house and all the


abbots of the minor houses are the 'comharbas' or co-heirs of the


saint, and in yet another sense the 'family' or 'tribe' of the


saint means his actual tribesmen or blood-relatives. Iona, or Hy,


was, as you know, the famous religious house founded by St


Columba near the coast of the newer Scotia. 'The Abbot of Hy',


says Dr Todd, 'or Co-arb of Columba, was the common head of


Durrow, Kells, Swords, Drumcliff, and other houses in Ireland


founded by Columba, as well as of the parent monastery of Hy, and


the "family of Colum-kille" was composed of the congregations or


inmates and dependants of all those monasteries. The families,


therefore, of such monasteries as Clomacnois or Durrow might


muster a very respectable body of fighting men.' Let me add, that


there is very good evidence that these 'families of the saints'


were occasionally engaged in sanguinary little wars. But, 'in


general' (I now quote again from Dr Todd), 'the "family" meant


only the monks or religious of the house.'


    It will be obvious to you that this application of the same


name to all these complicated sets of relations is every now and


then extremely perplexing, but the key to the difficulty is the


conception of the kindred branching off in successive generations


from the common stock, planting themselves occasionally at a


distance, but never altogether breaking the bond which connected


them with their original family and chief. Nothing, let me


observe, can be more curious than the way in which, throughout


these artificial structures, the original natural principle upon


which they were modelled struggles to assert itself at the


expense of the imitative system. In all the more modern guilds,


membership always tended to become hereditary, and here we have


the Brehon law striving to secure a preference, in elections to


the Abbacy, to the actual blood-relatives of the sainted founder.


The ecclesiastical rule, we know, required election by the monks,


but the Corus Bescna declares that, on a vacancy, the 'family of


the saint' (which here means the founder's sept), if there be a


qualified monk among them, ought to be preferred in elections to


the Abbacy -- 'though there be but a psalm-singer of them, if he


be fit, he shall have it.' And it proceeds to say that, if no


relative or tribesman of the saint be qualified, the Abbacy shall


go to some member of the tribe which originally granted the land.


    A very modern example of this plasticity of the notion of


kinship has recently been brought to my notice. The co-villagers


of an Indian village call themselves brothers, although, as I


have frequently observed, the composition of the community is


often artificial and its origin very miscellaneous. The


appellation, at the same time, is distinctly more than a mere


word. Now, some of the Christian missionaries have recently tried


an experiment which promises to have much success, and have


planted in villages converts collected from all sorts of


different regions. Yet these persons, as I am informed, fall into


a 'brotherhood' quite as easily and talk the language and assume


the habits appropriate to it quite as naturally as if they and


their forefathers had been members from time immemorial of this


peculiarly Indian association, the village-community.


    There is, however, another set of phenomena which belong to


the same class, but which seem to me to have been much


misunderstood. When men, under the influence of the cast of


thought we are discussing, are placed in circumstances which


naturally breed affection and sympathy, or when they are placed


in a relation which they are taught to consider especially


sacred, not only their words and ideas but their feelings,


emotions, and prejudices mould themselves on the pattern of those


which naturally result from consanguinity. We have, I believe, a


striking example of the process in the history of the Christian


Church. You know, I dare say, that Spiritual Relationship or the


tie between a sponsor and a baptized person, or between Sponsors,


or even between the sponsors and the family of the baptized,


became by degrees the source of a great number of prohibitions


against intermarriage, which stood on the same level with those


based on affinity, and almost with those founded on


consanguinity. The earliest evidence we have that this order of


ideas was stirring the Christian community is, I believe, a


Constitution of Justinian in the Code (v. 4. 26), which forbids


the marriage of the sponsor with the baptized; but the


prohibitions were rapidly extended by the various authorities


which contributed to the Canon law, and were finally regulated


and somewhat narrowed by the Council of Trent. Nowadays, I am


told that they merely survive formally in the Roman Catholic


Church, and that dispensations relaxing them are obtainable as of


course. The explanation of the system by technical theologians is


that it is based on the wish to give a peculiar sacredness to the


bond created by sponsorship, and this I believe to be a true


account of its origin. But I do not believe that Spiritual


Relationship, a structure based on contract, would in every stage


of thought have assimilated itself to natural relationship. The


system developed itself just when Christianity was being diffused


among races whose social organisation was founded on kinship, and


I cannot but think that their ideas reacted on the Church. With


such races a very sacred tie was necessarily of the nature of a


family tie, and carried with it the same associations and the


same order of feeling. I do not, therefore, consider that such


terms as Gossipred, Godfather, Godson -- to which there are


counterparts in several languages -- were created by the theory


of Spiritual Relationship, but rather that they mark the process


by which that theory was formed.


    It seems to me accordingly in the highest degree natural that


Spiritual Relationship, when introduced into a tribal society


like that of the ancient Irish, should closely assimilate itself


to blood-relationship. We know in fact that it did so, and that


the stringency of the relation and the warmth of the affections


which it produced moved the scorn, the wrath, and the


astonishment of several generations of English observers,


deriving their ideas from a social order now become very unlike


that of Ireland. But by the side of Gossipred, or Spiritual


Relationship, there stood another much more primitive


institution, which was extraordinarily developed among the


ancient Irish, though not at all peculiar to them. This was


Fosterage, the giving and taking of children for nurture. Of the


reasons why this practice, now known to have been widely diffused


among Aryan communities, should have had an exceptional


importance and popularity in ireland, we can say little more than


that they probably belong to the accidents of Irish history and


of Irish social life. But of the fact there is no doubt. An


entire sub-tract in the Senchus Mor is devoted to the Law of


Fosterage, and sets out with the greatest minuteness the rights


and duties attaching to all parties when the children of another


family were received for nurture and education. It is classed,


with Gossipred, as one of the anomalies or curses of Ireland by


all her English critics, from Giraldus Cambrensis in the twelfth


century to Spenser in the sixteenth. It seemed to them monstrous


that the same mother's milk should produce in Ireland the same


close affections as did common paternity in their own country.


The true explanation was one which is only now dawning On us. It


was, that Fosterage was an institution which, though artificial


in its commencements, was natural in its operations; and that the


relation of foster-parent and foster-child tended, in that stage


of feeling, to become indistinguishable from the relation of


father and son.


    The form of Fosterage which has most interest for the modern


enquirer is called by the Translators of the Brehon tracts


Literary Fosterage. It was an institution nearly connected with


the existence of the Brehon Law Schools, and it consists of the


various relations established between the Brehon teacher and the


pupils he received into his house for instruction in the Brehon


lore. However it may surprise us that the connection between


Schoolmaster and Pupil was regarded as peculiarly sacred by the


ancient Irish, and as closely resembling natural fatherhood, the


Brehon tracts leave no room for doubt on the point. It is


expressly laid down that it created the same Patria Potestas as


actual paternity; and the literary fosterfather, though he


teaches gratuitously, has a claim through life upon portions of


the property of the literary foster-son. Thus the Brehon with his


pupils constituted not a school in our sense but a true family.


While the ordinary foster-father was bound by the law to give


education of some kind to his foster-children -- to the sons of


chiefs instructions in riding, shooting with the bow, swimming,


and chess-playing, and instruction to their daughters in sewing,


cutting out, and embroidery -- the Brehon trained his foster-sons


in learning of the highest dignity, the lore of the chief


literary profession. He took payment, but it was the law which


settled it for him. It was part of his status, and not the result


of a bargain.


    There are some faint traces of Fosterage in the Hindoo law,


but substantially it has dropped out of the system. The vestiges


of Literary Fosterage are, however, tolerably abundant and very


plain. According to the general custom of India, the Brahmin


teacher of Brahmin pupils receives no payment for his services,


but the Hindoo law repeatedly reserves to him a remote succession


to their property. In each of four Brahminical law-tracts of


great authority, the Vyavahara Mayukha, the Daya-Bhaga, the


Mitakshara, and the Daya-Krama-Sangraha, the same ancient text is


quoted (sometimes but not always attributed to Manu), which is to


the effect that 'If there be no male issue the nearest kinsman


inherits; or in default of kindred, the preceptor, or failing him


the disciple.' One commentator explains that the preceptor is the


instructor in the Vedas, and another describes him as the person


who affords religious instruction to his pupil after investing


him with the Brahminical thread. These writers add that if


neither teacher nor pupil have survived the deceased his


fellow-student will succeed. Modern cases turning on these


peculiar rules of succession may be found in the Anglo-Indian Law


Reports.


    We are thus brought face to face with a problem which


possesses interest in proportion to its difficulty -- the problem


of the origin of Castes. I cannot profess to do more than


approach it, but the opportunity of throwing even the least light


on a subject so dark ought not to be neglected. First let me say


that, among the comparatively few English writers who have


noticed the Brehon lawyers, some have loosely described them as a


caste. But this is an improper use of the word, though it is one


not uncommon in India. As regards the position of the Brehons in


very early times, the evidence of the Irish records is consistent


with the testimony of Caesar as to the literary class of the


Gallic Celts, and seems to show that anyone who went through a


particular training might become a Brehon. When, however, Ireland


began to be examined by English observers, it is plain that the


art and knowledge of the Brehon had become hereditary in certain


families who were attached to or dependent on the Chiefs of


particular tribes. There is nothing remarkable in this change,


which has obviously occurred with a vast number of trades and


professions in India, now popularly called castes. In societies


of an archaic type, a particular craft or kind of knowledge


becomes in time an hereditary profession of families, almost as a


matter of course. The difficulty with a native of India,


unsophisticated by English ideas, is not to find a reason why a


son should succeed to the learning of his father, and


consequently to his office and duties; his difficulty would


rather be to explain to himself why it should not be so, and how


the public interests could be consulted by any other arrangement.


The States governed by native Indian Princes are becoming a good


deal Anglicised, but still in them it is the practically


universal rule that office is hereditary. We do not, however,


thus arrive at a complete account of the growth of those castes


which are definite sections of great populations one only of


these castes really survives in India, that of the Brahmins, and


it is strongly suspected that the whole literary theory of Caste,


which is of Brahmin origin, is based on the existence of the


Brahmin caste atone. Now, the tendency of knowledge to become


hereditary is, by itself, consistent with a great variety of


religious and literary cultivation; but, as a fact, the Brahmins


of India are a remarkably homogeneous class, admitting (though no


doubt with considerable local qualifications) a general


brotherhood of all members of the order.


    While, then, I cannot say that our scanty information


respecting changes in the status of the Brehon lawyers helps us


much towards a comprehension of the beginnings of Caste in the


true sense, I certainly think that we learn something more than


we knew before from the references in the Brehon tracts to


Literary Fosterage. They appear to me to give a new emphasis and


point to the rules of Hindoo Law respecting the remote succession


of the 'spiritual preceptor' to the property of families. It


seems as if in the most ancient state of both systems Literary or


Religious fatherhood had been closely assimilated to actual


fatherhood. Under these circumstances, if great schools of Vedaic


learning existed in India in very ancient times, as we have


strong reason to think they did, the relation between Teacher and


Pupil would closely follow and imitate the relation between


father and son. A great profession would thus be formed, with


stores of common knowledge; but the tie between the members would


not be purely intellectual; it would from the first be conceived


as of the nature of kinship. Such a system, as the old ideas


decayed, would tend infallibly to become one of real


consanguinity. The aptitude for sacred know ledge would come to


be thought to run in the blood of sons whose fathers had been


instructed in it, and none but such sons would be received into


the schools. A Caste would thus be formed, in the eyes of its


members the type of all Castes.


    We have thus strong reason for thinking that societies still


under the influence of primitive thought labour under a certain


incapacity for regarding men, grouped together by virtue of any


institutions whatsoever, as connected otherwise than through


blood-relationship. We find that, through this barrenness of


conception, they are apt to extend the notion of consanguinity


and the language beginning in it to institutions of their own not


really founded on community of blood, and even to institutions of


foreign origin. We find also that the association between


institutions arising from true kinship and institutions based on


artificial kinship is sometimes so strong, that the emotions


which they respectively call forth are practically


indistinguishable. These phenomena of early thought and feeling


appear to me amply to account for some facts of Irish history


which nearly all English writers on Ireland have noticed with


extreme surprise or indignation. The expressions of Sir John


Davis, while stating that many of the early Anglo-Norman


adventurers settled in Ireland became in time pure Irish


chieftains, reflect the violent astonishment and anger which the


transformation excited in Englishmen. 'The English Colonists did


embrace and use the Irish custom, after they had rejected the


Civil and Honourable Laws and Customs of England, whereby they


became degenerate and metamorphosed like Nebuchadnezzar, who,


although he had the face of a man, had the heart of a beast; or


like those who had drunk of Circe's cup and were turned into very


beasts, and yet took such pleasure in their beastly manner of


life as they would not return to their shape of men again;


insomuch as within less time than the age of a man, they had no


marks or difference left among them of that noble nation from


which they were descended.' The fact, stated in this bitter


language, is not especially marvellous. We have seen the general


complexion of Irish society giving its colour to institutions of


all sorts -- associations of kinsmen shading off into assemblages


of partners and guild-brothers -- foster parentage, spiritual


parentage, and preceptorship taking their hue from natural


paternity -- ecclesiastical organisation blending with tribal


organisation. The Anglo-Norman captain who had thought to conquer


for himself an Irish signory passed insensibly in the same way


into the chieftain of an Irish tribe. The dependants who


surrounded him did not possibly draw any clear distinction


between the actual depositary of power and the natural depositary


of power, and, as the contagiousness of ideas is in proportion to


their fewness, it is intelligible that he too was affected by the


mental atmosphere in which he lived. Nor were other motives


wanting. The extreme poverty and constant distractions of Ireland


did not prevent an extraordinary amount of the pride of


authority, of the pride of birth, and even of the pride of wealth


from centring in the dignity of an Irish Chief.


















Lecture IX













The Primitive Forms of Legal Remedies













                            I.













    I stated on a former occasion (Lecture 1. p. 8) that the






branch of law which we now call the Law of Distress occupies the






greatest part of the largest Brehon law-tract, the Senchus Mor.






The importance thus given to Distress is a fact of much






significance, and in this and the following Lecture I propose to






discuss the questions it raises and the conclusions it suggests.






    The value of the precious discovery made by Niebuhr, when he






disinterred in 1816 the manuscript of Gaius, does not solely






arise from the new light which was at once thrown on the






beginnings of the legal system which is the mountain of the






greatest part of civilised jurisprudence. There are portions of






the treatise then restored to the world which afford us glimpses






of something older than law itself, and which enable us to






connect with law the practices dictated to barbarous men by






impulses which it has become the prime office of all law to






control. At the head of the passages in the work of Gaius which






allow the mind's eye to penetrate some little way into the chaos






out of which social order sprang, I place the fragmentary and






imperfect account, given near the commencement of the Fourth






Book, of the old Legis Actiones, which in the age of Gaius






himself had ceased to have more than an historical and






antiquarian interest.






    Legis Actio, of which the exact meaning does not seem to have






been known to Gaius, may be conjectured to have been the






substantive form of the verbal expression, legem or lege agere,






and to have been equivalent to what we now call Procedure. It has






been several times observed that among the Legis Actiones are






included several proceedings which are not of the nature of






Actions or Suits, but are rather modes of executing decrees. The






fact seems to be that, by a course of change which may be traced






in the history of Roman law, one portion, 'Actio,' of the






venerable phrase 'Legis Actio' has been gradually disjoined from






the rest, and has come to denote that stage of the administration






of justice which is directly conducted by the Court, together, in






some judicial systems, with the stage immediately preceding it. I






suppose that originally lex, used of the assumed written basis of






Roman law, and legis actio, corresponded roughly to what many






centuries afterwards were called Substantive and Adjective Law,






the law declaring rights and duties and the rules according to






which the law declaring rights and duties is administered. On the






expression just mentioned, Adjective Law, with which Bentham and






his school have familiarised us, I will make a remark which






applies to much in the phraseology and classifications of the






Analytical Jurists, that it is correct and convenient according






to the ideas of their day, but that, if used of very old law, it






is apt to lead to an historical misconception. It would not be






untrue to assert that, in one stage of human affairs, rights and






duties are rather the adjective of procedure than procedure a






mere appendage to rights and duties. There have been times when






the real difficulty lay, not in conceiving what a man was






entitled to, but in obtaining it; so that the method, violent or






legal, by which an end was obtained was of more consequence than






the nature of the end itself. As a fact, it is only in the most






recent times or in the most highly developed legal systems that






remedies have lost importance in comparison with rights and have






ceased to affect them deeply and variously.






    The first and in many respects the most interesting of these






ancient modes of proceeding is the Legis Actio Sacramenti, the






undoubted parent of all the Roman Actions, and consequently of






most of the civil remedies now in use in the world. Several years






ago I pointed out (Ancient Law, pp. 376, 377) that the technical






formalities appeared plainly, upon inspection, to be a






dramatisation of the Origin of Justice. 'Two armed men,' I said,






'are wrangling about some disputed property. The Praetor, vir






pietate gravis, happens to be going by and interposes to stop the






contest. The disputants state their case to him, and agree that






he shall arbitrate between them, it being arranged that the






loser, besides resigning the subject of the quarrel, shall pay a






sum of money to the umpire as remuneration for his trouble and






loss of time.' 'This interpretation,' I then added, 'would be






less plausible than it is, were it not that, by a surprising






coincidence, the ceremony described by Gaius as the imperative






course of proceeding in a Legis Actio is substantially the same






with one of the two subjects which the God Hephaestus is






Described by Homer as moulding into the First Compartment of the






Shield of Achilles.' Singe these passages were written, the






labours of more recent enquirers enable us to class this judicial






picture of the origin of one great institution, Civil Justice,






with other pictorial or dramatic representations of forgotten






practices which, in various parts of the world, survive in the






forms attending institutions of at least equal importance. It may






be seen, for example, from Mr McLennan's work on 'Primitive






Marriage,' that a large part of mankind still simulate in their






marriage ceremonies the carrying off the bride by violence, and






thus preserve the memory of the reign of force which, at all






events as between tribe and tribe, preceded everywhere the reign






of law. It is not at the same time to be supposed that these






long-descended dramas imply or ever implied any disrespect for






the institutions with which they are associated. In all






probability they intentionally commemorate not the evil but the






remedy for the evil: and, until they degenerate into meaningless






usages, they are enacted, not in honour of brute force, but in






honour of the institutions which superseded it, Marriage and






Civil Justice.






    Almost every gesture and almost every set of formal words in






the Legis Actio Sacramenti symbolise something which, in some






part of the world or another, in some Aryan society or another,






has developed into an important institution. The claimant places






his hand on the slave or other subject of dispute, and this grasp






of the thing claimed, which is reproduced in the corresponding






procedure of the ancient Germans and which, from them, was






continued in various modified forms far down into the Middle






Ages, is an early example of that demand before action on which






all civilised systems of law insist. The wand, which the claimant






held in his hand, is stated by Gaius to have represented a spear,






and the spear, the emblem of the strong man armed, served as the






symbol of property held absolutely and against the world, not






only in the Roman but in several other Western societies. The






proceedings included a series of assertions and reassertions of






right by the parties, and this formal dialogue was the parent of






the Art of Pleading. The quarrel between plaintiff and defendant,






which was a mere pretence among the Romans, long remained a






reality in other societies, and, though its theory was altered,






it survived in the Wager of Battle which, as an English






institution, was only finally abolished in our fathers' day. The






interposition of the Praetor and the acceptance of his mediation






expanded into the Administration of Justice in the Roman State,






one of the most powerful of instrumentalities in the historical






transformation of the civilised world. The disputants staked a






sum of money -- the Sacramentum, from which the proceedings took






their name -- on the merits of their quarrel, and the stake went






into the public exchequer. The money thus wagered, which appears






in a singularly large number of archaic legal systems, is the






earliest representative of those Court-fees which have been a






more considerable power in legal history than historians of law






are altogether inclined to admit. The very spirit in which a






Legis Actio was conducted was that which, in the eyes of laymen,






has been most characteristic of lawyers in all historical times.






If, Says Gaius. you sued by Legis Actio for injury to your vines,






and called them vines, you would fail; you must call them trees,






because the text of the Twelve Tables spoke only of trees. The






ancient collection of Teutonic legal formulas, known as the






Malberg Gloss, contains provisions of precisely the same






character. If you sue for a bull, you will miscarry if you






describe him as a bull; you must give him his ancient juridical






designation of 'leader of the herd.' You must call the forefinger






the 'arrow'-finger, the goat the 'browser upon leeks.' There are






lawyers alive who can recollect when the English system of






Special Pleading, now just expiring, was applied upon principles






not remotely akin to these and historically descended from them.






    The description given by Gaius of the Legis Actio Sacramenti






is followed by a lacuna in the manuscript. It was once occupied






with an account of the Judicis Postulatio, which was evidently a






modification of the older Sacramental Action by which this






ancient remedy was adapted to a particular class of cases. The






text of the treatise begins again with a description of the






Condictio, which is said by Gaius to have been created, but which






is believed to have been only regulated, by two Roman statutes of






the sixth century of Rome -- the Lex Silia and the Lex Calpurnia.






The Condictio, which afterwards developed into one of the most






useful of the Roman actions, originally derived its name from a






notice which the plaintiff gave the defendant to appear before






the Praetor in thirty days, in order that a Judex or referee






might be nominated; and immediately (as I myself think) on this






notice being given, the parties entered into a 'sponsio' and






'restipulatio,' that is, they laid a formal wager (distinct from






the stake called Sacramentum) on the justice of their respective






contentions. The sum thus staked, which was always equal to a






third of the amount in dispute, went in the end to the successful






litigant, and not, like the Sacramentum, to the State. Lawyers






wondered, Gaius tells us, that such an action should be needed






when property could have been recovered by the older and






unmodified procedure. Many technical answers to this question






have been given by modern commentators on Roman law, but we will






see whether a better explanation of it cannot be obtained by






approaching it from another side.






    Gaius, leaving the Condictio, proceeds to discuss two of the






Legis Actiones, the Manus Injectio and the Pignoris Capio, which






cannot be made to square in any way with our modern conception of






an action. The Manus Injectio is expressly stated to have been






originally the Roman mode of execution against the person of a






judgment debtor. It has considerable historical interest, for it






was undoubtedly the instrument of the cruelties practised by the






Roman aristocracy on their defaulting plebeian debtors, and thus






it gave the first impetus to a series of popular movements which






affected the whole history of the Roman Commonwealth. The






Pignoris Capio also, possibly under a slightly altered name, was






a mode of execution in later times against property after decree;






but this was not its original purpose as a Legis Actio. It was at






first a wholly extra-judicial proceeding. The person who






proceeded by it seized in certain cases the goods of a






fellow-citizen, against whom he had a claim, but against whom he






had not instituted a suit. The power of seizure could be






exercised by soldiers against public officers bound to supply






them with pay, horse, or forage; and it could also be resorted to






by the seller of a beast for sacrifice against a defaulting






purchaser.. It was thus confined to claims of great urgency or of






highly sacred obligation; but it was afterwards extended to






demands for overdue arrears of public revenue. I am indebted to






Mr Poste for the observation that the ideal institutions of






Plato's Laws include something strongly resembling the Roman






Pignoris Capio; and here again it is a remedy for breach of






public duties connected with military service or religious






observance.






    I take the Pignoris Capio as the immediate starting-point of






all which I am about to say on the subject of Ancient Civil






Procedure. First of all let us ask whether Gaius himself gives us






any hint of its meaning and significance in the primitive Roman






system. The clue is slender, but it seems to me sufficiently






traceable in the statement that the Pignoris Capio could be






resorted to in the absence of the Praetor and generally in that






of the person under liability, and also that it might be carried






out even when the Courts were not sitting.






    Let us go back for a moment to the parent Legis Actio -- the






L. A. Sacramenti. Its venerable forms presuppose a quarrel and






celebrate the mode of settling it. It is a passing arbitrator






whose interposition is simulated by the Praetor. But suppose






there is no arbitrator at hand. What expedient for averting.






bloodshed remains, and is any such expedient reflected in that






ancient procedure which, by the fact of its existence, implies






that the shedding of blood has somehow been prevented?






    I dare say I shall at the outset appear to be making a






trivial remark when I say that one method of gaining the object






is to lay a wager. Even now this is one of the commonest ways of






postponing a dispute as to a matter of fact, and the truth is






that the tendency to bet upon results lies extremely deep in






human nature, and has grown up with it from its remote infancy.






It is not everybody who, when his blood is hot, will submit to






have a quarrel referred to a third person present, much less to a






third person absent; but he will constantly do so, if he lays a






wager on it, and if, besides being found in the right, he has a






chance of receiving the amount staked. And this I suppose --






differing, I own, from several high authorities -- to be the true






significance of the Sponsio and Restipulatio, which we know to






have been of the essence of the ancient Roman Condictio, and of






the agreement to appear before the Praetor in thirty days. The






Legis Actio Sacramenti assumes that the quarrel is at once






referred to a present arbitrator; the Condictio that the






reference is to the decision of an arbitrator after thirty days'






interval, but meantime the parties have entered into a separate






wager on the merits of their dispute. We know that the liability






to an independent penalty attached to the suitor by Condictio






even when it had become one of the most important Roman actions,






and that it was still exacted in the age of Cicero.






    There is yet another primitive contrivance by which, in the






absence of a present arbitrator, a quarrel may be prevented from






issuing in bloodshed. The claimant willing to go to arbitration






may, in the absence of his adversary, or if he be the stronger,






in his presence, take forcible possession of his moveable






property and detain it till he too submits. I believe this to






have been the true primitive office of the Pignoris Capio, though






the full evidence of my opinion will not be before you till I






have tracked the same institution through the twilight of other






legal systems. Among the Romans, even at the date of the Twelve






Tables, it had become (to employ Mr Tylor's phrase) a mere






survival, confined to cases when the denial of justice was






condemned by superstition or by a sense of the sternest public






emergency; and this was a consequence of the exceptionally rapid






development of Roman law and procedure, and of the exceptionally






early date at which the Roman tribunals became the organs of the






national sovereignty. You will see hereafter how much reason






there is for thinking that the progress of most societies towards






a complete administration of justice was slow and gradual, and






that the Commonwealth at first interfered through its various






organs rather to keep order and see fair play in quarrels than






took them, as it now does always and everywhere, into its own






hands. To this period, long forgotten among the Romans, those






peculiar rules pointed back which survived along with the






Pignoris Capio, and which provided for its exercise out of court






and during the judicial vacation.






    I turn to the Teutonic societies for vestiges of a practice






similar to that which the Romans called Pignoris Capio. They seem






to be quite unmistakeable in that portion of our own English law






which is concerned with the power of Distraint or Distress and






with the connected legal remedy known as Replevin. The examples






of the right to distrain another man's property which are most






familiar to you are, I dare say, the landlord's right to seize






the goods of his tenant for unpaid rent, and the right of the






lawful possessor of land to take and impound stray beasts which






are damaging his crops or soil. The process by which the latter






right is made effectual retains far more of the ancient






institution than does distress for rent. For the peculiar power






of the landlord to distrain for rent, while it remains an






extrajudicial remedy, has been converted into a complete remedy






of its kind by a series of statutes comparatively modern. It has






always, however, been the theory of the most learned English






lawyers that distress is in principle an incomplete remedy; its






primary object is to compel the person against whom it is






properly employed to make satisfaction. But goods distrained for






rent are nowadays not merely held as a security for the






landlord's claim; they are ultimately put up for sale with






certain prescribed formalities, the landlord is paid out of the






proceeds, and the overplus is returned to the tenant. Thus the






proceeding has become merely a special method by which payment of






rent, and certain other payments which are placed on the same






footing, are enforced without the help of a Court of Justice. But






the distraint of cattle for damage still retains a variety of






archaic features. It is not a complete remedy. The taker merely






keeps the cattle until satisfaction is made to him for the






injury, or till they are returned by him on an engagement to






contest the right to distrain in an action of Replevin.






    The practice of Distress -- of taking nams, a word preserved






in the once famous law-term withernam -- is attested by records






considerably older than the Conquest. There is reason to believe






that anciently it was resorted to in many more cases than our






oldest common-law authorities recognise; but about the reign of






Henry the Third, when it was confined to certain specific claims






and wrongs, the course of the proceeding was as follows: The






person assuming himself to be aggrieved seized the goods (which






anciently were almost always the cattle) of the person whom he






believed to have injured him or failed in duty towards him. He






drove the beasts to a pound, an enclosed piece of land reserved






for the purpose, and generally open to the sky. Let me observe in






passing that there is no more ancient institution in the country






than the Village-Pound. It is far older than the King's Bench,






and probably older than the Kingdom. While the cattle were on






their way to the pound the owner had a limited right of rescue






which the law recognised, but which he ran great risk in






exercising. Once lodged within the enclosure, the impounded






beasts, when the pound was uncovered, had to be fed by the owner






and not by the distrainor; nor was the rule altered till the






present reign. The distrainor's part in the proceedings ended in






fact with the impounding; and we have to consider what courses






were thereupon open to the person whose cattle had been seized.






Of course he might submit and discharge the demand. Or he might






tender security for its acquittal. Or again he might remain






obstinate and leave his beasts in the pound. It might happen,






however, that he altogether denied the distrainor's right to






distrain, or that the latter, on security being tendered to him






for the adjustment of his claim, refused to release the cattle.






In either of these casts the cattle-owner (at least at the time






of which we are speaking) might either apply to the King's






Chancery for a writ commanding the Sheriff to 'make replevin,' or






he might verbally complain himself to the Sheriff, who would then






proceed at once to 'replevy.' The process denoted by this ancient






phrase consisted of several stages. The Sheriff first of all






demanded a view of the impounded cattle; if this were refused, he






treated the distrainor as having committed a violent breach of






the King's peace, and raised the hue and cry after him. If the






cattle (as doubtless constantly was the case) had been driven to






a distance and out of his jurisdiction, the Sheriff sought for






cattle of the distrainor and seized them to double the value of






the beasts which were not forthcoming -- the 'taking in






withernam' of old English law. In more peaceable times, however,






and among law-abiding people, the deputy of the Crown was allowed






to see the cattle, which he immediately returned to their






original owner on a pledge to abide by the decision of a Court of






Justice. A day was then appointed for the trial, which took place






with the proceeding well known to lawyers as the Action of






Replevin. A great deal of technical learning has clustered round






it, but for our purposes it is enough to say that the plaintiff






in the action was the owner of the distrained cattle and the






defendant was the distrainor.






    The comparative antiquity of the various steps in the






procedure are not, I think, difficult to detect. Nothing can be






more archaic than the picture presented by its more venerable






details. The seizure of the cattle, the rescue and the






counter-seizure, belong to the oldest practices of mankind. We






were carried back, by the Legis Actio Sacramenti of the Romans,






to a sudden fight over disputed property barely stopped by a






casual passer-by. Here, not in a city-community, but among the






ancient legal forms of a half-pastoral, half-agricultural people,






we come upon plain traces of a foray. But the foray which






survives in the old Law of Distress is not, like the combat of






the ancient Roman Action,a mere dramatic representation. Up to a






certain point it is a reality, and the most probable account of






its origin is that it is a genuinely disorderly proceeding which






the law steps in to regulate. You will see presently that there






are other independent reasons for thinking that some of the






earliest interferences of the power which we call the Law, the






State, or the King, with high-handed violence consisted, neither






in wholly forbidding it nor in assuming active jurisdiction over






the quarrel which provoked it, but in limiting it, prescribing






forms for it, or turning it to new purposes. Thus the next series






of incidents in the practice of distraint -- the impounding, the






stress laid upon pledge or security, and the acknowledgment of






continuing ownership which is implied in the liability of the






person distrained upon to feed the cattle, and in the rule that






the distrainor shall not work them -- belong to a newer range of






ideas which dictate the first attempts to moderate reprisals and






regulate revenge for wrong. Distress now becomes a semi-orderly






contrivance for extorting satisfaction. Many vestiges of this






ancient function remain. It has been observed by Blackstone and






others that the modified exemption of certain classes of goods






from distraint -- plough-oxen, for example, and tools of trade --






was not in its origin the least intended as a kindness to the






owner. It was entailed by the very nature of the whole






proceeding, since without the instruments of tillage or






handicraft the debtor could never pay his debt. A passage in the






'Dialogus de Scaccario' (ii. 14), prescribing the order in which






the goods of the King's debtors are to be sold, strongly bears






out this view.






    Latest in the order of proceeding, and latest probably in






date, came the direct interposition of the State. The King steps






in, first. in what we should now call his administrative






capacity. His administrative deputy, the Sheriff, on complaint






made by their owner, Follows up the cattle, demands a sight of






them, raises the hue and cry if it be refused, and seizes twice






their number if the beasts have been driven away. Even when he






obtains his view, he can do nothing unless the cattle-owner,






denying the right of his adversary to distrain, is prepared with






security that he will try the question between them in a Court of






Justice. Thus tardily does that power make its appearance which






according to our notions should long since have appeared on the






scene, the judicial power of the Commonwealth. Its jurisdiction






is obviously acquired through the act of the Sheriff in restoring






the cattle upon pledge given. The distrainor has lost his






material security, the cattle. The owner of the cattle has become






personally, bound. And thus both are placed under a compulsion






which drives them in the end to a judicial arbitration.






    Nearly six hundred years ago, the contrast between the






ancient proceedings in Replevin and suits conducted on what were






then modern principles was already striking. The second chapter






of the Statute of Westminster the Second is aimed at certain






contrivances by which tenants contrived to defeat the lord's






remedy by distress; and, in giving the King's Justices






jurisdiction in such cases, it goes on to say that such a






provision does not militate against the principle of the Common






Law which forbids the removal of suits to the Justices on the






petition of a defendant. 'For,' it adds, 'although at first sight






the tenant may seem to be plaintiff and the lord defendant, yet






in reality, regard being had to the fact that the lord distrains






and sues for services and dues behind, he is rather plaintiff or






complainant than defendant.' The action of Replevin is in fact an






excellent illustration of the difference between ancient and






modern juridical principles. According to ideas now confirmed in






us, the person who sets a Court of Justice in motion is the






person who complains of a wrong. In the case supposed, this is






not the man distrained upon but the man who distrains. He it is






who has suffered an injury for which he made reprisals on his






adversary's property. Yet it is his adversary who has to start






the legal procedure and to constitute himself plaintiff in the






Action of Replevin. The reason why a modern Court of Justice






would insist on taking the whole dispute into its own hands, and






dealing with it in its own way from the very beginning, is that,






having always the full command of the public force, it is sure of






being able to compel the submission of the defendant to its






jurisdiction and of coercing him in the end till he does justice,






however long the coercion may be delayed. But at the era to which






the procedure in distress originally belonged, the Court had no






such assurance of power; and hence the person assumed to have a






grievance is allowed to proceed according to the primitive






method, which has the advantage of giving the other side the






strongest inducements to call in the judicial authority of the






State and submit to its decision.






    The information furnished to us respecting this primitive






procedure by the various bodies of Continental Teutonic law known






collectively as the Leges Barbarorum is of a very interesting






kind. Almost all of them contain references to Pignoratio or






distraint of goods. The Visigothic law expressly prohibits it;






and, at the other end of the scale, the Lombardic law has a trace






of that licence of distress which has survived in the English






Common-law and permits it after simple demand of payment. But the






Salic law, which the most learned Germans now believe to have






been drawn up at some period between the time at which Tacitus






wrote and the time at which the Franks broke into the Empire,






contains a series of very peculiar and instructive provisions on






the subject, which have been for the first time fully interpreted






by Sohm. Under this system, Distress is not yet a judicial






remedy; it is still an extrajudicial mode of redress, but it has






been incorporated with a regular and highly complex procedure. A






succession of notices have to be given in solemn form by the






complainant to the person of whom he complains, and whose






property he proposes to seize. Nor can he proceed to seizure






until he has summoned this person before the Popular Court, and






until the Popular Officer of the Court, the Thunginus, has






pronounced a formula licensing distraint. Then,and not till then,






he can make what we should call a distress upon his adversary. It






seems quite clear that, before the Conquest, attempts were made






in England to narrow the liberty of distraint by the same class






of restrictions which we find in the Salic Law and the allied






Teutonic bodies of usage. These provisions have their close






counterpart in the ordinance of Canute that no man is to take






nams unless he has demanded right three times in the Hundred; if






he obtain no justice the third time, he is to go to the






Shire-gemot; the shire is to appoint him a fourth time, and, if






that fails, he may take the distress.






    It is to be remarked that the process of the Salic Law which






answers to our distress is especially a remedy in certain cases






of breach of contract. Distraint, the seizing of nams, was






certainly employed to enforce a similar class of demands under






old English law before the Conquest; and the practice seems to






have been known in Bracton's day, though the brevity of his






notice does not permit us to understand fully its course and






character. In this respect the Pignoration of the Continental






Teutonic law is more archaic than the distress with which we are






familiar in England, since the fragment of the system which has






survived in our Common law (and it is to this that it probably






owes its survival) was from the first pre-eminently a remedy by






which the lord compelled his tenants to render him their






services. But on the other hand it is interesting to observe that






our English distress is in some particulars of a more archaic






character than the corresponding compulsory process of the Leges






Barbarorum. Thus notice of the intention to distrain was never in






England essential to the legality of distress (Trent v. Hunt, 9






Exch. Rep. 20), although statute-law renders it necessary to make






a sale of the distrained property legal; and again, in the oldest






ascertainable state of our Common-law, though distraint sometimes






followed a proceeding in the lord's Court, yet it did not






necessarily presuppose or require it.






    It should be understood that the Frankish procedure was






completely at the disposal of the complainant. It is not a






strictly judicial procedure, but rather a procedure regulating






extrajudicial redress. If the complainant observes the proper






forms, the part of the Court in licensing seizure is purely






passive. Even after the exhaustive examination which this part of






the Salic Law has undergone from Professor Sohm, it is very






difficult to say whether at any point of the procedure the






defendant had the opportunity of putting in a substantial






defence; but it seems certain that, whenever he could do this, he






appeared virtually as a plaintiff like the distrainee in our






Action of Replevin, and there is no doubt that, if he submitted






or was unsuccessful in attacking the proceedings of the other






side, he paid not only the original debt but various additional






penalties entailed by neglect to comply with previous notices to






discharge it. Such a procedure seems to us founded on the now






monstrous assumption that plaintiffs are always in the right and






defendants always in the wrong. Yet the assumption would not






perhaps have struck the earliest authors of legal improvement as






altogether monstrous, nor could they have quite comprehended the






modern principle which compels the complainant to establish at






all events a prim* facie case. With them, the man most likely to






be in the right would appear to be the man who faced the manifold






risks attending the effort to obtain redress, the man who






complained to the Popular Assembly, the man who cried for justice






to the King sitting in the gate. It is only when violent wrong






has ceased to be rife, when the dangers of contesting the






oppressions of powerful men have become insignificant, when the






law has been long and regularly administered according to






technical procedure, that unjust claims are seen to be hardly






less common than unjust refusals to satisfy them. In one






particular case, the complaint of the King, the old assumption






that complainants are presumably in the right was kept long alive






among us, and had much to do with the obstinate dislike of






lawyers to allowing prisoners to be defended by Counsel.






    Gaius speaking of the Legis Actiones generally, observes that






'they fell into discredit, because through the excessive subtlety






of the ancient lawyers, things came to such a pass that he who






committed the smallest error failed altogether.'






    Blackstone, many centuries afterwards, has the following






remark on the English Law of Distress: 'The many particulars






which attend the taking of a distress used formerly to make it a






hazardous kind of proceeding; for, if any one irregularity was






committed, it vitiated the whole.'






    I quote these passages, not only on account of the curious






similarity of language between two writers of whom the later






could not possibly have read the earlier, but because the






excessive technicality of ancient law which they both notice goes






some way to explain the severity and one-sidedness of the old






Teutonic procedure. The power of seizing a man's property






extra-judicially in satisfaction of your demand was, as Professor






Sohm justly remarks, a sort of two-edged sword. You might bring






your adversary to the ground by it, but you were extremely likely






to injure yourself. For, unless the complainant who sought to






distrain went through all the acts and words required by the law






with the most rigorous accuracy, he in his turn, besides failing






in his object, incurred a variety of penalties, which could be






just as harshly exacted as his own original demand. The






difficulty of putting the procedure into operation thus at once






made disputants cautious in resorting to it, and seemed to men in






general to compensate for its inherent inequitableness. This






consideration, however, though it explains in part how the harsh






ancient law reconciled itself to the sense of right, is not by






itself sufficient to account for the form which it assumed in the






Teutonic Codes, or for the vitality of a portion of it amid our






own institutions.






    I cannot doubt that the practice which I have called by the






general name of Distress kept its place in ancient Teutonic law






partly as a mere 'survival.' I have already insisted that one






great characteristic of the primitive ages was the fewness of






human ideas. Societies, just emerging from the savage state, had






been used to associate redress of wrong with the seizure of a






wrong-doer's goods, and they were unable mentally quite to






disconnect the two even when they began to regulate the practice.






They did not, therefore, supersede distress by a wholly new






system, but engrafted it on a later procedure, which occasionally






took the form so curiously preserved in its main features to our






own day by the English Common law, but which at a relatively






later date and more generally may be believed to have shaped






itself on the model of the rules observed by the Salian Franks.






    It is not possible to explain all survivals by some






convenience which they incidentally serve. Some have undoubtedly






been continued by superstition, some by mere habit. But those






relics of ancient thought and conduct which have been kept alive






longest have generally had an usefulness of their own. Here the






private redress of wrong, taken into the legal procedure, served






to compel the appearance of the defendant and his submission to






jurisdiction at a time when judicial authority was yet in its






infancy, and when Courts of Justice could not as yet completely






and regularly command the aid of sovereign power. Gradually, as






the public force, the arm of the State, was more and more placed






at the disposal of tribunals, they were able more and more to






dispense with extrajudicial assistance. In the state of Teutonic






law represented by the Frankish Code, we find a specific class of






cases tried throughout judicially (in our modern sense of the






word) from the initial stage to the judgment; but the judgment is






not by its own force operative. If the defendant has expressly






promised to obey it, the Count or royal deputy, on being properly






summoned, will execute it; but if no such promise has been made,






the plaintiff has no remedy except an application to the King in






person. No long time, however, after the Franks have been settled






within the Empire, we find that mother step has been taken






towards the administration of justice on modern principles, and






now the royal deputy will execute the judgment even though there






has been no promise to submit to it. At this point Distress is






wholly taken out of the hands of private litigants and






extrajudicial seizure becomes judicial seizure. The change is






obviously a result of the growing vigour of Courts, greatly due






in our own country to the development of royal justice at the






expense of popular justice. Still English judicial proceedings






long savoured of the old practices. Every student of our ancient






English forms of proceeding will recollect on what small apparent






provocation the King constantly took the lands of the defendant






into his hands or seized his goods, simply to compel or perfect






his submission to the royal jurisdiction. It seems probable that






Distress was gradually lost in and absorbed by Attachment and






Distringas. The theory of Attachment now is that it is the taking






of property into the actual or constructive possession of the






judicial power, and the later course of change under which it has






faded into an occasional and exceptional proceeding, requiring to






be justified by special reasons, corresponds with the growing






confidence of Courts of Justice in their possession of






irresistible power confided to them by the sovereign. As regards






that fragment of the primitive institution which remains in our






law, I imagine that Distress would at most have become a mere






survival, confined perhaps to the impounding of stray cattle, if






several statutory innovations had not turned it into a convenient






extra-judicial remedy for landlords, by giving the distrainor a






power of sale which in old English law was limited to a few very






special demands. The modern theory of Distress is that a landlord






is allowed to distrain because by the nature of the case he is






always compelled to give his tenant credit, and that he can






distrain without notice because every man is supposed to know






when his rent is due. But this theory, though it explains the






continuance of Distress to our day, does not at all fit in with






the most ancient ideas on the subject, and could not indeed be






easily made to square with the practice of distraint even at a






date so comparatively late as that at which Bracton wrote. How






accidental is the association of Distress with the powers of






landlords may be seen from the fact that, though there are






plentiful traces of the institution in the ancient Scottish law,






the same practical results which the English system produces by






allowing landlords to distrain for rent are chiefly attained in






Scotland by applying to landlord and tenant the Romanised Law of






Hypothek.






    The comparison of the various Teutonic bodies of law suggests






then to my mind as regards those systems, the following






conclusions respecting the historical development of the remedies






which grew out of the savage practice of violently seizing






property in redress for supposed wrong. Two alternative






expedients were adopted by nascent law. One of these consisted in






tolerating distraint up to a certain point; it was connived at so






far as it served to compel the submission of defendants to the






jurisdiction of Courts, but in all other cases it was treated as






wilful breach of the peace. The other was the incorporation of






distraint with a regular procedure. The complainant must observe






a great number of forms at his peril; but if he observes them he






can distrain in the end. In a still more advanced condition of






legal ideas, the tribunals take the seizure of land or goods into






their own hands, using it freely to coerce defendants into






submission. Finally, Courts of Justice resort to coercion before






judgment only on the rarest occasions, sure as they at last are






of the effectiveness of their process, and of the power which






they hold in deposit from the Sovereign Commonwealth.
























<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <TITLE> Lectures on the Early History of Institutions</TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<CENTER>

<H2>

<B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>Lectures on the Early History of Institutions</FONT></I></B></H2></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>by Henry Summer Maine</FONT></B></CENTER>



<HR>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><A HREF="lect01.txt">1. New Materials for the Early History of Institutions</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect02.txt">2. The Ancient Irish Law</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect03.txt">3. Kinship as a Base of Society</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect04.txt">4. The Tribe and the Land</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect05.txt">5. The Chief and his Order</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect06.txt">6. The Chief and his Land</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect07.txt">7. Ancient Divisions of the Family</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect08.txt">8. The Growth and Diffusion of Primitive Ideas</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect09.txt">9. The Primitive Forms of Legal Remedies - I</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect10.txt">10. The Primitive Forms of Legal Remedies - II</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect11.txt">11. The Early History of the Settled Property

of Married Women</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect12.txt">12. Sovereignty</A>

<BR><A HREF="lect13.txt">13. Sovereignty and Empire</A></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>





<P>

<HR WIDTH="100%">

</BODY>

</HTML>

