<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <TITLE>Wieser  (Natural Value) </TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>&nbsp;</FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>Natural Value</FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER>

<H2>

by Friedrich Wieser</H2></CENTER>



<HR>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><A HREF="book01.txt">Book One: The Elementary Theory of Value</A>



<P><A HREF="book02.txt">Book Two: Exchange and Natural Value</A>



<P><A HREF="book03.txt">Book Three: Natural Imputation of the Return from

Production</A>



<P><A HREF="book04.txt">Book Four: Natural Value of Land, Capital and Labour</A>



<P><A HREF="book05.txt">Book Five: Natural Cost Value of Products</A>



<P><A HREF="book06.txt">Book Six: Value in the Economy of the State</A></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>



<HR>

</BODY>

</HTML>









Natural Value



	by Friedrich Wieser



	translated by Christian A. Malloch



English Edition, 1893. German Edition, 1889.









Author's Preface





    It has been said that one finds in Adam Smith nearly all the

explanations of value which have ever been attempted. What is

certain is that, in his explanation, Adam Smith has put together

two views that contradict each other. To put it shortly: he gives

two theories, one philosophical, the other empirical. In the

first he tries to make clear what should be thought of as the

characteristic attribute of value; what it is we ascribe to some

things and deny to others that, to all appearance, are entirely

the same; what it is of which we ascribe a great deal to certain

things and very little to other things which, measured by outside

standards, seem infinitely superior. In this view value is an

attribute per se, coinciding with no other that we know, and,

least of all, with the usefulness of things. In carrying out this

attempt Adam Smith first of all abstracts from the complicated

circumstances of ordinary economic life, and confines himself to

the simple, primitive, natural state. In this state he finds that

it is labour in which value originates. Goods are worth to us

what they cost in labour, and what, therefore, their possession

saves us in labour. The idea of value thus arrived at Adam Smith

goes on to apply to the empirical instances of the phenomenon of

value. Thereafter when he comes across value he sees nothing

mysterious in it; he has a means of distinguishing it from the

other attributes of things; he knows how to get to the heart of

it; indeed, through its relation to the labour from which it

receives its content, he can even measure it. 

    But, independently of this, Adam Smith describes -- and here

we come to his empirical theory -- the causes of value and of the

more or less of value, as he finds them in actual life. He sees

clearly that labour which he has recognised as, philosophically,

the sole cause of value, is not also, practically, its sole

cause. As a rule three factors together, he thinks, make up the

exchange value of products; besides the labour of production

there is also interest on the capital required and rent of the

land required. This is not to say that the "value" of observed

experience is of another nature from the "value" of philosophy.

That value which is created by land and capital is of the same

nature as that created by labour. As regards it also, it is

labour to which we must refer, if we are to grasp its content and

measure it. The only sign of his being aware that there is any

contradiction between his philosophical and his empirical

explanation is where he passes from describing the primitive

natural condition of economic life to describing a society based

on private property in land and capital. Here he cannot resist a

gibe at those who "love to reap where they never sowed,"

although, once within the kingdom of reality, he takes interest

and rent into his system as self-intelligible facts. 

    Nearly half a century passed, and then Ricardo tried to clear

his master's doctrines of their imperfections. Ricardo deeply

felt the contradiction which Adam Smith had scarcely noticed. How

did he seek to remove it? In a way that, more than Adam Smith's

mistake, betrayed how young a science political economy was.

To-day when, in virtue of the labours of these great pioneers of

the science, we stand face to face with the problems which are to

be solved, it is scarcely possible to put ourselves back into

those conceptions in which they first gave shape to their

observations and thoughts. In their effort to escape from

absolute perplexity they took frank delight in explanations

which, to us now, are more of a riddle than the phenomenon they

were meant to explain. What, then, did Ricardo attempt? His whole

endeavour exhausted itself in tying to show that the

philosophical and the empirical theory of Adam Smith, -- both of

which, indeed, in taking up this position he had to clear and

carry further, -- did not contradict each other so much as at

first sight would appear. If we limit ourselves to the general

rule and the average, value as it is and value as we get it from

labour, agree in their amounts -- not altogether, indeed, but

almost so -- with one exception, which is so trifling that it may

be quite properly neglected. Of the two empirical factors in the

formation of value which Adam Smith named besides labour, the

rent of land -- and this was the ultimate gain of Ricardo's

famous theory -- is entirely eliminated. Rent does not determine

the value of products but is determined by that value. Interest,

of course, remains, but Ricardo thinks he has shown that it

increases with the value of products in, approximately, the same

ratio as the quantities of labour required for production, so

that the quantities of labour do, in the long run, give a fairly

true measure of the value relations of all products. Interest, as

treated in this way, forms no hindrance to his system, and

Ricardo consequently does not really try to explain it. He takes

it as he finds it -- a fact that needs no explanation. This

treatment, which has excited the astonishment of so many later

writers, is perfectly intelligible if we remember the impulse

which set Ricardo's mind to work. He had no intention of

explaining the whole of economics. He wished to show only that

the value which is, is very much the same as the value which can

-- although only from a certain point of view -- be understood.

Ricardo was the last man in the world to think of reforming

economic life. He never opposed, to the value which is, the value

which ought to be. It never came into his mind to condemn

interest, and his system, understood in the sense of its author,

does not in the least involve the condemnation of interest. In

this there is nothing illogical, and when the socialists base

their crusade against interest on his system, they do not

complete it, as they imagine they are doing, but destroy it. Only

if interest is undoubtedly a good thing can over pass over it as

Ricardo does. 

    Since Ricardo's book appeared another half-century has fled,

and, since the Wealth of Nations, more than a century. In that

time the demands on the social sciences have grown apace. In Adam

Smith's day people explained the existing condition of things by

the "original" nature of man and the "original" state of things,

and were content. We, on the other hand, like to explain reality

by reality. Philosophy itself has become empirical. It allows no

argument which is not drawn from well-founded experience. The

historical state, positive law, the economy of every-day life,

are the objects of research, and, at the same time, the ultimate

sources of the instruments of research. If Adam Smith and Ricardo

were writing to-day, they would be full of the spirit of to-day,

and even if they had not command of the abundance of observation

and knowledge which the genius of the one and the acuteness of

the other have put at our service, their books would be ever so

much more perfect than they could have been in their time.

Certainly they would avoid the mistakes which the human spirit

since their day has outgrown. 

    Their school, however, still pursues the path they trod,

hesitating between uncomprehended empiricism and the purest

speculation. And it is a great school. It is strange indeed to

find that while, as regards questions of politics and of method,

whole sides have renounced the English parent school, -- from the

socialists to the adherents of the historical school in Germany,

-- as regards the old economic problem of value many of the newer

economists have remained true to its dogmas. As a man's judgment

about value, so, in the last resort, must be his judgment about

economics. Value is the essence of things in economics. Its laws

are to political economy what the law of gravity is to mechanics.

Every great system of political economy up till now has

formulated its own peculiar view on value as the ultimate

foundation in theory of its applications to practical life, and

no new effort at reform can have laid an adequate foundation for

these applications if it cannot support them on a new and more

perfect theory of value. 

    Of course the ruling theories of value have, in many

respects, put themselves in antagonism to the theory of Adam

Smith and Ricardo, particularly in Germany -- although, indeed,

in that country there as of late years been a widening acceptance

of the labour theory. The advances which theory has made

therefrom can scarcely be overestimated. More particularly may it

be noted that Use Value has now been put by the side of Exchange

Value, and that, besides the economic life of the individual, we

now take cognisance of national and other more general economies.

Here, again, the connection between the theory of value and

practical politics is strikingly shown. Hostility to the

individualist reading of the conception of value took sides with

the struggle against the individualist tendency in economics. It

seems, however, as if this branch of the ruling doctrine also has

exhausted its force, and that this movement also hangs on the

"dead centres." As economic research stands to-day, people, on

the whole, are investigating, not the phenomenon of value, but

the popular conception or conceptions of value. I have said in

another place that, for the sciences which deal with human action

in any of its departments, the peculiar danger is that of missing

their mark. Passing by the act and its motive, they are too ready

to investigate the meanings which men take out of their own

actions. Thus we get "popular theories," particularly those which

can be read out of the ordinary meaning of the terms in which

phenomena they deal with are expressed. This remark seems to me

peculiarly applicable to the value theories just spoken of. 

    That the theory of value needs reforming from the very

foundation no one will, I think, deny. The imperfection of the

prevailing views is confessed even by their own adherents. But

while the great majority of economists are still at a loss where

to turn, a new theory has come to the front. At first unnoticed,

and then for long but little thought of, worked out by men who,

for the most part, did not know of each other but yet agreed

where so many had doubted and disagreed, came a new theory based

on a new foundation -- an empirical theory on an empirical

foundation. 

    The new theory starts from the old proposition, that the

value of goods comes from the Utility of goods, or -- what is the

same thing -- from the satisfactions of want which goods assure.

To find the laws of value, then, one must first know the laws of

want. Now, in this pursuit, we come upon the fact that the want

for the same things -- even in the same person, and in given

economic conditions -- is of quite different strengths, varying

according to the degree in which the want has already been

satisfied through the employment of goods. But since the

employment of goods depends upon the amount of goods which one

possesses, the quantity of goods obtains a decisive influence on

the valuation of wants and so on the source of value itself. This

observation is the starting-point of the wider investigation. In

itself it is of great importance because it ultimately gives the

solution of the paradoxical phenomenon that value falls as goods

increase. But it is as important through its effects on economic

method, because it guides the economist, from the false objects

to which speculative methods and ordinary language point, to the

empirical heart of the phenomenon of value. 

    As forerunners of the theory we may name generally all those

who have derived value from utility; specially those who were

persistent in basing even exchange value altogether on utility,

particularly when they did not shrink from their principle in

spite of the obvious influence of costs of production. Usually on

this point the statement of the theory is either inconsequent or

obscure, or retains its logic and its clearness, at the expense

of renouncing completeness, by leaving out the question of costs.

As forerunners of the new theory in the stricter sense of the

term we may name those who take up the question of quantities of

goods as well as their utility. Usually, of course, this goes

only to the extent of showing the changes in the amount of value

which follow from changes in supply and demand. But, in the case

of a few writers, it has taken a much more exact form, where

"scarcity," "limitation of supply" is recognised as condition

under which utility creates value -- and that not only, as

Ricardo says, as regards certain rare goods, but as regards goods

generally. Among writers answering to this description, who may

be held the immediate precursors of our theory, are Auguste

Walras (De la Nature de la Richesse et de l'Origine de la Valeur,

Evreux, 1831), and also Condillac, Genovesi, and Senior.(1*)

    Passing by those numerous pioneer works, we meet with no less

than four authors who had worked out the same theory

independently of each other, Gossen,(2*) Jevons,(3*) Menger,(4*)

and Leon Walras.(5*) Gossen's statement, in spite of many quite

classical points of superiority, is, on the whole, the most

imperfect. That of Walras, though admirable of its kind, suffers,

to my mind, from the preponderance of the mathematical element.

The laws which govern amounts of value undoubtedly allow of a

mathematical expression; nay, the more complicated of these can

be expressed exactly only by means of mathematics; and here

certainly mathematics has a great task to fulfil. But in the

value theory we have to do with something more than the

expression of the laws of amounts. The obscure conception of

value is to be made clear; all its manifold forms are to be

described; the service of value in economic life is to be

analysed; the connection of value with so many other economic

phenomena is to be shown; in short, we have to give a philosophy

of value which needs words, not numbers. And, besides all this,

the empirical existence of the alleged facts is to be

established. 

    Finally, Jevons's statement, in spite of its amazing wealth

of observation and reflection, in spite of its finished

expression, in spite of the catholic spirit which speaks from it,

must be placed second to that of Menger. Menger goes more deeply

into the subject, inasmuch as he starts from a more general

conception of value. For this Menger is indebted to the German

school of national economists with its patient untiring labour in

formulating the general economic conceptions, and pressing

forward from concrete phenomena to that height of abstraction

from which the phenomena are to be logically arranged. It may be

said that, in great part, the German school long ago formulated

the conceptions, leaving for us only the task of filling them out

by adequate observation. In this it has laid up a treasure from

which all succeeding economic effort may draw indefinitely. 

    Of Jevons's system one part, the "theory of utility," as he

calls it, has passed into English literature. Among the works of

Continental economists who adopted the new theory, may be

mentioned the fine statements of Pierson,(6*) and Charles

Gide;(7*) and in Germany a work of Launhardt(8*) on the lines of

Jevons and Walras. But it is in Austria, in the lineal succession

to Menger, that the development of the new value theory is to be

sought. I may be allowed to refer to my own Ursrpung und

Hauptgesetze des wirthschaftlichen Werthes, Vienna, 1884, in

which I applied Menger's theory to the phenomena of costs. On

this followed a work by Bohm-Bawerk,(9*) which, independently of

its extremely clear presentation and its careful and fruitful

revision of many matters of detail, is particularly valuable from

its treatment of the theory of objective value. Finally came a

comprehensive work of E. Sax,(10*) extending the theory of value

over entirely new material to which no previous writer had

applied it -- to public imposts, and thus giving the theory one

of its richest applications. 

    The ground-plan of the new theory is drawn, but much remains

to be done; not only to widen its reach generally, but to

complete it in itself. The following pages are an attempt to

supplement what has already been done. In distinction from my

earlier work I have not paused to discuss the assumptions of the

value theory, but limited myself severely to the subject of value

and its direct content. On the other hand I have attempted to

exhaust the entire sphere of the phenomena of value without any

exception, and, besides that, so far as my ability goes, to think

out more exactly the subjects I had already treated of. The

present work is on that account in no way a repetition of my

former one, but an entirely new book, treating for the most part

of entirely new matter, and having nothing more in common with it

than the general fundamental propositions. I hope this time to

have met the objection urged against the Ursprung des Werthes

that I had omitted the connections -- the "bridges," as one

critic called them -- between the principles laid down and the

concrete phenomena of value with which we are familiar. Whatever

may be thought of its truth or correctness, I think I may venture

to say that no value theory has ever yet been put forward more

complete and exhaustive in external form and treatment. 

    The very multitude of single matters which I had to touch on

has compelled me to pass over almost every critical analysis that

differed from mine, and indeed to leave out almost every appeal

to economic authorities outside of those authors who belong to

the same school, and from whom I directly took the propositions I

had put forward. Similarly I have refrained from discussing any

of the economic conceptions I had to employ outside of that of

value. I shall very willingly put up with the reproach of being

incomplete by reason of this if it should succeed in making any

clearer the inner connection of the book. At the same time I

should not like to be suspected of having done so from any

undervaluing of the theoretical work of other economists -- least

of all, of those of Germany. 

    I have just said how deeply indebted, in my opinion, every

theoretical attempt of to-day is to the labours of German theory.

And to it the new value theory stands most nearly related -- it

is in truth the fulfilment of what German theory had long

demanded. 



NOTES:



1. Rau, too, with his "concrete Gebrauchswerth" may be included.

There is a notable treatise of the mathematician Daniel

Bernoulli: Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis (Commentarii

Academiae Scientiarum imperialis Petropolitanae, tomus V. Ad

annos 1730 et 1731. Petropoli, 1738). Bernoulli maintains that it

is valde probabile, lucrulum quodvis semper emolumentum afferre

summae bonorum reciproce proportionale. He is fully acquainted

with the subjective character of value, as well as with the most

important law of the change of value. His work is referred to by

Jevons in an extract from another of his books. By the kindness

of Professor Menger I have seen the original. Dupuit's De

l'influence des Peages, 1849, mentioned by Jevons, I have not

been able to consult. 



2. Entwicklung der Gesetze des menschlichen Verkehrs und der

daraus fliessenden Regein fur das menschliche Handeln.

Braunschweig, 1854. 



3. First in a paper before the British Association, 1862, then

fully in the Theory of Political Economy, London, 1871; 2nd edit.

1879. 



4. Grundsatze der Voikswirthschaftslehre, Vienna, 1871.



5. Elements d'economie politique pure ou Theorie de la richesse

sociale. Lausanne, 1874-77. -- Theorie mathematique de la

richesse sociale. Lausanne, 1883. -- Theorie de la Monnaie.

Lausanne, 1886. 



6. Leerboek der staathuishoudkunde. Haarlem, 1884.



7. Principes d'economie poiitique. Paris, 1884. 



8. Mathematische Begrundung der Volkswirthschaftsiehre. Leipzig,

1885.



9. Grundzuge der Theorie des wirthschaftlichen Gulerwerths.

Conrad's Jahrbucher, N.F. vol. xiii. Jena, 1886. 



10. Grundlegung der theoretischen Staatswirthschaft. Vienna,

1887. 





Book I: The Elementary Theory of Value



Chapter 1

The Origin of Value



    Whence do things get their value? If we put the question to

any intelligent and trained man of business, who had no knowledge

of the various attempts of theorists towards an explanation of

value, whose mind was unbiassed by the forms of speech which echo

learned theories and have passed into ordinary business use, and

who was, therefore, capable of judging only through the medium of

his own personal experience, he would undoubtedly answer, as the

first theorists did, -- "from their Utility." He would be very

much surprised to learn that several considerations made the

truth of this answer improbable, and that many facts -- some of

them to a certain extent generally known, and familiar even to

himself -- seemed to prove, with almost absolute certainty, that

utility could not be the source of value. These facts we may

state as follows. 

    First: goods which are to be had in superfluity, and which

any one may appropriate at will, no one will pay anything for, be

they ever so useful. In many places water, although indispensable

to man, is entirely without value. Of course this observation

refers immediately only to value in money, the so-called

"exchange value," and it might be thought that it was not true of

value in the using of goods, the so-called "value-in-use." Closer

examination shows, however, that it is true also of value-in-use.

In the household, as in the market, the superfluous is regarded

as the valueless, and is clearly separated from those things of

which there is no superfluity. However frugally we may act with

regard to other things, we should never think of economising in

things which we are always sure of having in over-abundance. No

one will ever try to secure possession of them: there is no

property in them; no interest is taken in them. They are used,

but we think no more about them. 

    Second: things which have a great deal of use have often a

smaller value than those which have little use. Iron, for

instance, has less value than gold. This is true equally of its

money value, and of its value-in-use, in the market and in the

household. Even in the socialist state -- supposing its citizens

still to possess the aesthetic sense -- it will be considered of

less moment to lose an ounce of iron than an ounce of gold. 

    Third: a large quantity has, under certain circumstances,

less value than a smaller quantity of the same thing. It is well

known that the Dutch East India Company destroyed a considerable

part of their produce and of their plantations, in order to

create a more lively demand, and so secure for the remainder a

greater value than the whole property had originally possessed.

The same thing is observed as regards the returns derived from

good and from bad harvests, -- the bad harvests showing better

than the good. This also, as I hope to show later, applies to

value-in-use as well as to exchange value. 

    Fourth: while the measure of use is in such frequent and

striking contradiction with that of value, it happens, as often

and as strikingly, that value is in agreement with the exact

antithesis of use -- namely, with costs. I say "antithesis"

because, if goods, by their use, prove themselves the friends of

man, they prove his enemy by the costs which they necessarily

involve. 

    A great many of the writers who have occupied themselves in

the investigation of value -- and, we may add, for a long time

many of the best of them -- have for this reason refused to

consider at all the idea that value may arise from utility; they

assert that the value of goods comes from the difficulty of their

attainment, and is proportionate to it. Those again who have

based their theory upon utility, have, for the most part, done so

in a manifestly unsatisfactory fashion. They have either placed

themselves in contradiction to the facts already mentioned

without explaining away the contradiction, or laid so much stress

on these facts that, in the end, they can scarcely be

distinguished from those writers who have rejected the principle

of utility, except by their express avowal of that principle.

Only a few authors, the more important of whom are mentioned in

the preface, have struck the right road. These have conceived the

idea of Use Value in such a way that it is neither confuted nor

disturbed by the foregoing considerations, but on the contrary is

entirely confirmed by them. 

    It is as these last-mentioned writers understand it that I

mean to state the theory of value. Before beginning, I may be

allowed to make a single introductory remark as to the manner in

which I intend to carry out my task, and, particularly, as to the

nature of the proofs which will be used.

     The economist who undertakes to explain value has to explain

the procedure of those who value. He describes in plain language

the meaning of transactions carried on, times without number, by

all of us. He does, on a large scale and with a difficult

subject, the same thing as one who accurately describes some

trade or some mechanical operation, which every one can do, but

which it is not easy, without the assistance of concrete

instances, to present and follow up in all its complexity of

conditions. As the poet gives expression to the thought which

every one feels but cannot express, or the actor's genius shows

the passion which perhaps he may not even feel, so does the man

of science describe in words, and apart from their concrete

realisation, the actions which every one is accustomed to

perform. He does not require to have any actual case before him,

or to accompany his description with any practical working out. 

    Any layman in economics knows the whole substance of the

theory of value from his own experience, and is a layman only in

so far as he does not grasp the matter theoretically, i.e.

independently, and for and by itself, -- but only practically, --

that is to say, in some given situation, and in connection with

its working out in that situation. If this be true, how else

shall we better prove our scientific statements than by appealing

to the recollection which every one must have of his own economic

actions and behaviour? For this reason, every expression which

may be taken as confirming this recollection, is welcome as an

aid to our investigation. For instance, when we find that the

unbiassed answer of the layman indicates that he considers

usefulness to be the source of value, this judgment is a

finger-post which we dare not neglect, unless the most searching

and careful examination has proved that it points in a wrong

direction. And who else is the final judge of the theory but the

public? The only true theory of the estimate we call "value,"

will be that to which practical life gives its entire assent.

Only, of course, the judge must first himself be educated. He has

to judge whether he recognises himself in a description which

informs him about his own life and being, and which he himself is

incapable of giving. 

    I trust that what follows may meet the approval of those who

not only act economically, but reflect on their actions. I have

no other wish than to gain this approval, but I cannot allow the

right of judgment to those who protest without having reflected.

It costs much trouble to give a clear description of even the

simplest and most familiar trade or business, and certainly, in

the theoretical study of a matter so many-sided and complicated

as that of value -- even though it is so familiar to all, perhaps

because it is so familiar to all -- we cannot do without the most

earnest and ample reflection. 





Chapter 2



The Value of Satisfaction of Want



    In its ordinary use among economic writers the word Want

signifies every human desire, whether great or small, justifiable

or unjustifiable, necessary or unnecessary, material or

immaterial. Bodily well-being, idle delights, artistic pleasure,

moral satisfaction may all be classed together as objects of

human want. 

    In this sense all the "use of goods" -- all the utility which

goods afford -- amounts in the last resort to satisfaction of

wants, and the opinion that the value of goods arises from their

use may be more exactly stated by saying that it rests upon the

satisfaction of wants which they furnish. It is the satisfaction

of wants which, in the first instance, has value, or "worth" or

"importance to" us. Satisfaction is that which is really desired,

and is worthy of desire: and, as we do not desire goods for

themselves, but for the satisfaction they give, so do we value

them only for that satisfaction. The value of goods is derived

from the value of wants. 

    The theory of value, then, has first of all to do with the

value of wants, this being the form in which value first appears.



    What it is that gives value to the satisfaction itself we

shall not here attempt to explain. It will be enough if we give

the symptom by which the degrees of value or importance are

recognised. It is the intensity with which the satisfaction is

desired. Were we to place the different satisfactions on a

graduated scale, it would probably be remarked that those which

stand highest are not those which provide the purest pleasure, or

which will most serve to beautify our lives. Our most urgent

concern is rather with the warding off of extreme want, and with

the prevention of care and suffering; the necessaries of life

must first be assured "before we can reach the good things of

this world." There is a difference between what men might like to

have, and what they must first decide to secure; and it is

according to the latter, not the former, that interests are

actually ranged above and below one another. The actual ranking

of the valuable -- no matter how moral judgment or fancy would

dictate -- is simply that which men recognise by their actions

when they are called on to choose between having one thing and

another. 

    In this sense the amount of the value of want depends on the

class of want, but, within this class, it depends upon the degree

of satisfaction already attained. 

    This latter point in detail we must now discuss. Here, first,

we shall have occasion to remark the influence of quantity upon

value. And it is not the value of goods alone that is affected by

quantity, but the value of wants. 



Chapter 3



Gossen's Law of the Satiation of Want



    Every one knows that the desire for food decreases as the

want is gradually satisfied, until, finally, when what we may

call the "satiation point" is reached, the desire is for a

certain time entirely allayed, and possibly changed into its

opposite, surfeit and disgust. Every one knows that the same

happens in the case of numerous other desires; satisfaction

diminishes the craving, and in the end fully destroys and

transforms it. 

    There are several authors who have the merit of having,

independently of each other, extended this observation

scientifically speaking, and made it the starting-point of their

theory of value. These have been mentioned in the preface. Among

them Gossen is worthy of particular notice, owing to the fate of

the book in which he gave expression to his discovery and to his

ideas on economics generally. His Entwicklung der Gesetze des

menschlichen Verkehrs und der daraus fliessenden Regeln fur das

menschliche Handeln, was published in Brunswick in 1854, but it

almost entirely disappeared from sight in Germany, although its

author had hoped to win for it a Copernican fame. Any one who

reads the book will understand why, as well on account of the

peculiarities of its excellences as of its faults, both of which

are great. Jevons, in the introduction to the second edition of

his Theory of Political Economy, and also Walras, in an essay

which appeared in the Journal des Economistes in 1885, have given

somewhat detailed accounts of both book and author. Economics

owes a great debt to Gossen, and it is with this feeling that I

call the law of the satiation of want Gossen's Law, although my

statement of it is not entirely in accordance with his. 

    It scarcely requires illustration. Gossen himself added to

its clearness by the following addition. Alongside of the

weakening effect which continued satisfaction has upon desire, we

find also, in certain circumstances, the opposite tendency; that

the desire grows by repetition and exercise, inasmuch as it is

thus developed, gets to know itself, its own end and its own

means, becomes purified and elevated. Thus, during the period of

development, the law of diminishing desire meets with an opposite

tendency, and the law applies unlimitedly only to wants which are

entirely developed. Granting this, however, it applies to every

want without exception. 

    There can be no doubt that it applies to those coarser

material wants, which recur periodically, as, for instance, the

desire for food. Here, however, we must distinguish between the

want as a whole and the several feelings of want which are

included in it. 

    The want as a whole of course retains its strength so long as

man retains his health; satisfaction does not weaken but rather

stimulates it, by constantly contributing to its development,

and, particularly, by giving rise to a desire for variety. It is

otherwise with the separate sensations of the want. These are

narrowly limited both in point of time and in point of matter.

Any one who has just taken a certain quantity of food of a

certain kind will not immediately have the same strength of

desire for another similar quantity. Within any single period of

want every additional act of satisfaction will be estimated less

highly than a preceding one obtained from a quantity of goods

equal in kind and amount. 

    Many material wants are not intermittent, but require a

continuous satisfaction. Such for instance is the need of warmth,

the human body requiring to be kept at a certain temperature.

Here also Gossen's law applies. That action which is needed to

secure the required minimum temperature, -- that is, the

expenditure for clothing, fuel, and so on, indispensable for

keeping the body in sufficient warmth, -- will be most intensely

desired, while the multiplication of this necessary expenditure

does not affect our well-being in the same degree, and will be

much less eagerly desired. In the long run the prospect of any

further increase will be met with aversion. 

    With regard to the higher wants, -- those which come into

existence whenever the necessaries of life are secured, -- the

same law obtains. It is not, however, so noticeable to ordinary

observation, and, indeed, appearances are rather against it. The

wants of wealth appear to be the very opposite to those of

poverty. The latter are urgent but narrowly limited; the former

can be done without, but, when awakened, show themselves

many-sided and extensive. Many-sided, because they are from the

first rich in varieties, and become always more so, as one gives

rise to another; and extensive, because they frequently include

objects of great compass, increasing with the degree of culture

attained. On this account it might well be thought that such

wants were infinite and subject to no diminution. But on looking

more closely at the matter we shall find that, when the same act

of enjoyment is repeated without variation, -- the very same, and

neither extended nor changed,the result is in this case also

weariness and disgust. The thirst of a collector seems to be

insatiable, and his object certainly is one of extraordinary

compass, even though it be confined to one article. The man who

collects books or pictures requires a great fortune, and may not

even then be able to fully satisfy his wish. Every new book he

acquires serves to stimulate instead of to weaken his desire, and

this is not due to morbid extravagance: it is entirely

justifiable, as it brings him nearer to his object, the

possession of a perfect library or a perfect picture gallery. 

    But how would it be, if he were offered a duplicate of some

work he already had? This and this alone, as Gossen remarked,

would be a case of exact repetition, -- of the repeated

satisfaction of the same impulse; and here, without doubt, the

desire would be much lessened, probably entirely destroyed. And

thus we shall ever find it to be if we direct our attention

strictly to the proper object. Even desires such as that of power

or of wisdom, even ambition, greed of honour, thirst for

knowledge are not exempt from the same rule. The sum of what

these crave, when at their height, is infinite; no man's life or

strength is sufficient to satisfy them wholly even once, not to

speak of repeating it. But the single acts which make up this

whole sum, the individual effects, exercises of power,

acquisitions of knowledge can be repeated and tired of. The charm

of the whole lies in the power to vary the items. Nothing on

earth is of such a nature that man can go on enjoying it over and

over again, and lose himself in its contemplation. This holds of

all emotions, from hunger to love. 



Chapter 4



The Scales of Satiation



    If we were to follow out the course of satisfaction of a

want, and mark every separate act of satisfaction with the value

that accompanied it, we should obtain a diminishing scale, the

zero of which would be reached with full satisfaction or

"satiation," while its higher point would correspond with the

first act of satisfaction. If we had a common and exact measure

for desire and non-desire, we might be able to put into figures

the "satiation scale" of every want, and so compare the scales

with each other. We are far from having that. But we are able to

say quite positively that there are great disparities between the

individual scales. It is not only that the higher points of such

scales differ, and differ to an extraordinary degree, as the

experience of every one sufficiently shows, but that, in the

scales, the degrees between one act and the next are very

different. There are many wants which almost leap from the point

of highest desire to that of full satisfaction -- such, for

instance, as the coarser needs of daily life. There are others

which, although little felt to begin with, continue for long

periods without any very perceptible diminution of their

strength, -- as, for instance, many of the finer wants. Even as

regards the individual want the decrease of desire is frequently

quite irregular -- decreasing more slowly now at the beginning,

now at the end of the scale. It must not in the least be expected

that every scale will present all the different degrees of desire

between which it is possible to distinguish. Assuming the

possibility of distinguishing between one hundred different

degrees of intensity of desire on the whole, we should certainly

find no single scale that would show exactly all the hundred

degrees; each would miss one, or another, or even many of the

degrees; we should not perhaps find any scale which would

regularly move, say, ten degrees at a time. Individual scales

are, indeed, likely to be formed with considerable irregularity,

and we shall find such a series as 100, 90, 80, 10, 0; or 20, 14,

5, 3, 2, 1, 0, and so on. 

    This statement, rude and imperfect as it is, will be found of

great use in what follows. We shall have to turn back to it at

several important points. Even here, it gives us a first

suggestion of how one of the fundamental difficulties of the

problem of value may be overcome; that, namely, arising from

observation of the contradiction between value and usefulness. A

few words will make this clearer. A sensation of want which

belongs to a very important class of wants may nevertheless not

possess any great importance. The importance of the entire class

is measured by the entire scale of satiation, especially by its

highest degree. But the importance of every separate sensation of

desire is measured by some particular and possibly low point upon

the scale, according to the condition of satisfaction which has

already been reached. The want for food, measured by its class,

is more important than that for adornment or finery, but none the

less may the individual sensations of vanity, in the first stages

of their satisfaction, be far stronger than the desire for food,

supposing the latter desire to be satisfied for the time being. 

    Classes of goods correspond to classes of wants, and

judgments concerning the importance of classes of wants will

correspond with judgments on the usefulness of classes of goods.

But the single commodity need no more realise the usefulness of

its class than the separate sensation of desire need realise the

importance of its class. The last course eaten by one who has

almost dined has a comparatively small utility, although it

contains in itself the property of saving from the pangs of

hunger. Suppose that one has a sufficiently large number of goods

of the highest usefulness, some of them can be put only to a very

trifling use, and, indeed, if there is a superfluity of them, he

will have no use whatever for that part of the supply which is in

excess of the demand. 

    In economic life we have to do not only with classes of wants

and classes of goods, but also with the state of subjective

satisfaction already reached, or the supply. We cannot,

therefore, judge of goods simply by their usefulness; we must

judge by the amount of use attainable in the individual case;

and, consequently, the value of goods must be kept at least as

distinct from their usefulness as the use to which we put them

is.





Chapter 5



Marginal Utility



    Even where nature is most lavish with her gifts, there are

but few kinds of goods with which she provides man in such

superfluity that he can satisfy every, even the most

insignificant, sensation of want. As a rule the supply of goods

of which he can avail himself is so scanty that he must break off

his satisfaction at a point on the scale short of complete

satiation. This point -- the smallest utility obtainable in the

circumstances, assuming the most thorough possible utilisation of

the goods -- is of peculiar importance, both for the act of

valuation and for economic life. To it refer the expressions,

"Werth des letzten Atoms," of Gossen, "Final degree of utility,"

or "Terminal utility" of Jevons; and "Intensite du dernier besoin

satisfait (rarete)" of Walras. Menger uses no particular

designation. The name "Marginal Utility" was suggested by me

(Ursprung des Werthes, p. 128), and has since been generally

accepted. 

    Where the supply of goods is too scanty to satisfy every

sensation of desire, the necessary break must be so made that it

will be felt as little as possible. This will be the case when we

begin by satisfying the most intense sensations of want, and go

on to extend to its utmost the compass of enjoyment; or, in other

words, when we reach, in unbroken satisfaction, the lowest

possible marginal point of enjoyment. Economic conduct requires

that the marginal utility in this sense be placed as low as

possible. The means by which to reach this end are, on the one

hand, the utmost possible quantitative exploitation of goods,

and, on the other hand, the utmost care in choosing how the goods

are to be employed where there are several competing ways of

employing them. Such a competition of employments may arise from

two circumstances -- first, where goods are capable of manifold

and various uses, and, second, where supplies are accumulated and

their consumption should be spread over periods of time. In the

first case our concern must be to choose between the separate

forms of employment, and to keep the economic balance even; in

the second, to distribute the goods so as best to meet the wants

of the whole period. 

    The difference between the various satiation scales of wants

comes into play in the case of goods of many-sided usefulness.

Every different kind of employment has its own particular scale

of satiation, with a culminating point peculiar to itself and a

course of satisfaction peculiar to itself. On account of this the

determination of the marginal utility in the given case becomes a

very complicated matter. Its principle will be best explained by

an example, and we need be at no loss for examples, as goods of

manifold utility are numerous enough. The most important are

found among the means of production. Who could count up the

services which iron, wood, or coal is capable of rendering? Or

those for which human labour is fitted? The most many-sided of

all goods is, however, money; through exchange it can be turned

into almost any other commodity, and thus made serviceable for

the satisfaction of almost any want. From no other commodity can

we obtain so clear a presentation of the idea of "marginal

utility." I therefore take it as example, although money is

really useful only as a medium, and presupposes the existence of

exchange, a phenomenon of which we shall not treat till the

following book. 

    The money income of the richest man is usually not sufficient

to cover every outlay that he might desire. Acting economically

therefore, so as to secure what Gossen calls the Grosste an

Genuss, the greatest possible enjoyment, we shall distribute our

expenditure so as to "make it go as far as possible," from the

satisfaction of the most urgent wants down to the most

insignificant. The larger the income is, the farther it will go,

and the longer will it be before we need to break off our

satisfaction. But the Grosste an Genuss could not be reached if

the separate branches of expenditure were not adequately weighed

against each other. Nowhere must the boundary-line be

overstepped, which is fixed by the general circumstances of our

wealth. Every overstepping in one branch will have to be paid for

in another, which other, as represented by a higher degree on the

scale of wants, will impose a sacrifice greater than the

enjoyment got from it. To this extent it is quite possible to

speak of a "level of household expenditure," of a general

condition of life prescribed for every household by the peculiar

amount of its demand and the peculiar amount of its means, and

necessitating strict adherence to it in all its branches. It

would, however, be a mistake to believe -- as almost every writer

who has occupied himself with this question has done, Jevons more

than any other -- that it is necessary to keep strictly in every

branch of expenditure to the same degree of satisfaction, the

same level, the same marginal utility. That is quite against the

nature of wants, for wants have not each an equal but each a

peculiar satiation scale. Were the "level of household

expenditure" to be understood in this way, every addition to

income would require to be laid out equally in corresponding

enlargement of every branch of expenditure. As a matter of fact

it is usually spent on a few individual branches, while the

others remain as they were; or, if the additional income be so

great as to allow of an improved condition of things all round,

the extra expenditure is distributed in the most irregular

manner. The satiation scales of wants are very diverse; the

receptive power of one want is great, that of another

comparatively small; that is to say, one is susceptible of a

degree of intensity which another does not teach, or which it

oversteps. The principle for the economic employment of goods of

manifold usefulness is not, then, that we must, in every

employment, obtain the same lowest possible marginal utility, but

that in all employment as low a marginal utility be reached as is

possible without necessitating the loss, in some other

employment, of a higher utility. 

    What has just been said applies as well to the economic

management of supplies of goods destined to cover periods of

time. Premature and extravagant indulgence should not impose

unnecessary burdens on the future. It would be best to divide the

enjoyment equally over the whole period, but this is frequently

made impossible by the nature of goods, which does not allow of

their being kept, as also by the uncertainty of providing for

changes of value in the economy in question. The limit of

employment should always be of such a sort as promises the

greatest amount of utilisation on the whole.(1*) 

    A special question is here suggested: -- Are present and

future satisfactions to be estimated entirely alike? Is not

precedence in time also precedence in degree of importance? Is it

not right that enjoyments should be considered of less value the

further they are in the darkness of the future? Jevons has

answered this question in the affirmative, and since him many

others, some with great positiveness, though, as I think,

wrongly. We cannot avoid going into this matter more closely,

even though it detains us a little from the attainment of our

present object, the deduction of the elementary law of value. 



NOTES:



1. See Ursprung des Werthes, p. 146, and Sax, p. 371.





Chapter 6



The Value of Future Satisfactions of Want





    If we did not possess the power of providing for future

wants, our lives would be but poorly provided for. No new

products would be prepared; those we already possessed would be

thoughtlessly dissipated; only chance and the goodwill of nature

would provide for the morrow. And as it is of importance that we

should be sensible in advance of the wants of the future, so is

it of importance that the degree of that sensibility should be

sufficient. Anxiety about future necessaries should be as

powerful as the passion with which we give ourselves away before

the urgent feelings of the moment. If future satisfactions of

want were represented in present valuation, not at their full

future value but at only a small fraction of the same, all

economic life must in the end fall to pieces, just as though they

were not represented at all; only that the course of economic

decay would be less rapid and its end farther off.

    It is evident that man possesses the capacity of acting in

consideration of future feelings of want, but observation of

human nature makes it very obvious that he will act with less

energy than when he is under the influence of present feelings.

The future want, wherever it comes into the domain of the

present, is preceded by a psychical reflection, and this

reflection is of a totally different nature from the want itself.

It is far finer, more innerlich, and, even in the case of purely

bodily wants, is always mental. The hunger of a future day, e.g.,

does not act as hunger, but as anxiety for sustenance; the object

of desire is the same, but the desiring is different. Instead of

a want of we have an interest in. Is not, then, some energy lost

in this change from the coarser to the finer? Must not the

anxiety about a future want always have less weight than the

actual appetite that comes after it? 

    If men in civilised societies do possess the degree of

foresight required for a prosperous economic condition, one thing

is certain; -- they have not always possessed it. It has been

gained through the labour of civilisation, just as, in moral

conflicts, strength to meet the fires of passion has been gained

through the feeling of duty. At bottom the economic conflict

between the needs of to-day and those of to-morrow is really of a

moral nature; it is a special case of the struggle between

impulse and reason. Uncivilised races are only to a small extent

capable of considering in advance the wants of the future; -- to

so small an extent, in fact, that the miserable condition in

which they are found can be fully explained by this alone. It is

not only the foreknowledge that is wanting, but, quite as much,

the previous mental excitation, the uneasiness which the

civilised man experiences in the consciousness that wants are

coming for which there is no provision. A heavy numb apathy

deadens the sense of the savage. He awaits with indifference, or

at most with a feeling of helplessness, the misery from which he

does not suppose it possible to escape, but which he certainly

could escape had he only the energy to will it. 

    Whether civilised races have reached the high-water mark of

development that is desirable, may easily be ascertained by

consideration of their economic actions. How do they behave in

the majority of cases? Do most people sacrifice their means for

the pleasure of the moment, or do they lay by for future needs?

-- There can be no doubt that, on the whole, the wise

householders outnumber the spendthrifts. Certainly there is no

one entirely without economical sin; no one who has never

consumed too soon some thing which he afterwards bitterly desired

and had not. But, on the whole, it is an economic principle which

is as well obeyed as any of the fundamental economic principles,

that wealth and income should be economised with a view to the

future and to old age. Every supply of goods should, so far as

possible, be distributed over the wants of the period of time

which it is intended to cover, in such a way that, whether the

time at which they occur be earlier or later, all the more

important sensations may be satisfied, and only the less

important -- those which it is impossible for the supply to cover

-- be left out. The exceptions to this rule are so few in number,

that a theoretical inquiry which regards the principle as

invariable, and asks as to its further effects will help to

explain our economy, not only as it ought to be, but also as it

actually is. 

    To avoid misunderstanding I shall try to explain my meaning

more exactly. I have no wish to deny that, in general, the

futurity of an event has the effect of weakening its impression.

As a rule this is also true in economics. It seems to me,

however, that, in a civilised state, every good householder, and,

in the main, every average one, has learnt to master this

weakness of human nature in one respect; -- so far, namely, as to

distribute a regularly-acquired income among regularly-expected

wants, and, in connection with this again, so far as to try to

acquire a regular income, and secure the conditions thereof by

exercise of labour power, and maintenance of the parent stock of

wealth. The call for forethought in this latter connection is

peculiarly strong, and it should not excite wonder that it is

more active here than in any other direction. 

    Moreover a well-regulated and prosperous economic condition

does not in the least demand that every future sensation be fully

realised in the present. Only those require to be considered

which have to be provided for, and those again only in so far as

they require to be provided for. First in importance are all

those wants which must be covered by the present supply of

consumption goods, and by the income available at the moment, and

which consequently, in economic management, come into conflict

with present desires. Alongside of these we may put the far more

numerous wants which have to be covered by suitable employment of

the present parent wealth. Our conception of both groups of

wants, but particularly of the latter, takes a peculiarly

simplified form, which easily gives the impression that they are

entirely shoved into the background. They are conceived of in the

mass, and grouped together in periods of time; and we are

generally conscious of them only in so far as they are

represented by the goods which are devoted to their satisfaction.

Foresight for the wants of a remote future and of later

generations, for instance, is seen in the precept which forbids

diminishing of the parent stock of wealth, even although this

precept only refers to the goods which form the wealth, while the

wants themselves appear to retreat more and more into a darkness

which the imagination does not seek and need not seek to

illuminate.(1*)



NOTES:



1. Many economists would explain interest, particularly the

interest on productive capital, by the difference in value

between present and future feelings. This seems to me an error.

Interest derived from productive capital is a phenomenon of the

very best ordered economic transactions, of those managed with

the highest possible degree of foresight. It is not in the least

a sign of a defective economy. See, however, Book IV. 





Chapter 7



The Value of Goods



    Originally only the human has importance for man. Thought for

one's self, interest in one's self, comes by nature. Towards

things, on the other hand, man is originally indifferent, and his

interest in them only awakens in so far as he finds them

connected with human interests and destinies. This takes various

forms; such as pity, when the lower animals are seen to suffer

just as man does, or religious or poetic emotion, when

observation of the living in nature awakens suspicion of the

connection of all life, or, finally, economic valuation, when

things are conceived of as instruments to and conditions of human

well-being. This is the coldest form that our interest takes, as

it regards things simply as means to human ends; it is, however,

at the same time, the most far-reaching, as it embraces most

things, and claims not only existence, but property. 

    Our natural indifference towards things is nevertheless so

great that it requires a special compulsion, a peremptory

challenge, to make us look upon them as objects of importance,

objects possessing value. Nor does the mere observation that

things are "of use" to us, and that the use has for us importance

or value exert this compulsion. Where we employ goods for our own

uses, but where at the same time these goods are at our disposal

in absolutely assured superfluity, we use them, but concern

ourselves no more about them than about the sands of the sea.

Whether they increase or decrease -- always supposing that the

superfluity remains -- we merely think, "What does it matter? we

have always enough and more than enough of them!" In Paradise

nothing would have value but satisfactions -- neither things nor

goods. Because there one could have everything, one would not be

dependent on anything. 

    On the other hand, where there is not an assured superfluity,

interest awakens in the train of self-seeking calculation, and

communicates itself to such goods as we notice ourselves using

and not caring to lose. Men in general thus lay their account

with things, as the egoist with persons. And here we are not

speaking only of cases of real need, of extremest want, where the

little that one has is guarded with an Argus eye; nor of objects

of great scarceness or rarity, such as a work of art which is

quite unique, and whose loss it would be impossible to replace.

We refer also to cases where people are fairly prosperous, but

nevertheless require to economise; and even to cases of extreme

wealth -- always supposing it is not assured natural superfluity

-- where, in many respects, a man has everything, but where, all

the same, the "everything" requires continual guarding,

administration, and renewal. In these circumstances there is not

a single change in a man's possessions which is entirely

indifferent. Every addition brings some addition of enjoyment;

every loss, even the slightest, disturbs, makes some gap, and

breaks the expected line of enjoyments. Happiness and sorrow are

dependent on our possessions; the destinies of goods mean the

destinies of men. There is an intimate association of ideas

between human interests and goods. Goods, indifferent in

themselves, receive value from that value which their employments

have. 

    Goods which are to be had in an assured and natural

superfluity are called Free goods; all others are Economic goods.

Thus only economic goods can possess value. The value of goods,

according to Menger's definition, is "the importance which

concrete goods, or quantities of goods, receive for us from the

fact that we are conscious of being dependent on our disposal

over them for the satisfaction of our wants."

    It should be noticed that no part of free goods receives

value; neither that part which is superfluous, and cannot

therefore be used, nor yet that part which is used. Of the water

which flows abundantly from some spring, neither that portion

which fills the jar, nor that which overflows has value. The

value of goods, although it has its origin in use, does not all

the same reflect the utility: there are cases in which great use

is obtained, where nevertheless no value -- i.e. no value of

goods -- is created. The theorist, therefore, who would explain

value must not content himself with explaining the change in

amounts of utility; he must go further and examine those laws by

which amounts of utility are changed into amounts of value. It

may be suspected -- and we shall find this suspicion confirmed in

what follows -- that value, owing in many cases so little of its

origin to utility, is, even where it has so originated, equally

far from always containing the full amount of utility. 

    If the use of a good in the individual case be so far removed

from its general usefulness, its value, if our suspicion is

indeed confirmed, must be even further removed from that general

usefulness -- and here is opened up to us a second point of view

from which we may explain and make intelligible the

contradictions which experience points out between value and

usefulness. 





Chapter 8



The Valuation of a Single Commodity



    Goods are valued either individually and by themselves, or in

connection with other goods. The latter form of valuation takes

place chiefly in one of three ways. A good may be valued in

connection with other similar goods belonging to one and the same

stock or supply; or in connection with goods from which it can be

produced; or in connection with goods which can be added to it by

purchase. Of these three cases the first is the elementary one,

to which both of the others may be traced back. It is with this

first alone, therefore, that we shall deal in the elementary

theory of value. 

    It is extremely seldom that goods are valued singly. It may

be some chance or other which has isolated them, or it may be a

consequence of some peculiar character which allows of them being

obtained only individually. In the first case, they are

irreplaceable during the period of their isolation; in the

second, they are altogether so; and, in both cases, they must, on

any reasonable valuation, have ascribed to them the full value of

the utility which is expected from them. The means without which

an end cannot be reached must be valued as highly as the end

itself. If the good is by nature fitted for several purposes

which, however, mutually exclude each other, so that it can

actually serve only one of them, that employment to which the

greatest importance belongs decides its value. Only a barbarian

could value the Venus de Milo by the utility of the material of

which it is made. A starving man will value his last bite at its

full life-saving value, -- supposing the saving of his life to be

of consequence to him. 

    Now and then, too, considerable supplies of goods are valued

as one indivisible whole, and, consequently, as one good. A

vendor may, for instance, lay down as a condition of selling some

large supply of goods, that it be bought entire or not at all. If

circumstances force the buyer to consent to this condition, he on

his part must estimate the value of the supply as a whole. He has

to reckon up the whole sum of useful services which he may

expect, from the highest utility which the goods composing the

stock are capable of rendering, down to the marginal utility

fixed by the amount of the stock and of the demand for it; and

the sum of all those services gives him the value. Value here

reflects the whole utility aimed at in employing the goods. 

    Suppose a community were forced to buy the grain it requires

from some foreign country and in one lot, if the conditions just

described were laid down, the government would have to make a

valuation which would be almost infinite. It would require to

consider that, without the purchase, a great part of the

community might die of hunger, and to calculate all that would be

gained by the prevention of this most extreme misfortune, and by

securing the health and vigour of the people. 

    Besides that would have to be reckoned all the less important

useful results, which really are obtained although their marginal

effects are inappreciable. It is obvious that the valuation of

the harvest which is actually made stands far behind any such

valuation as this. And what is the reason of it, seeing that the

actual effects of the harvest are no less important, -- that it

does in truth keep away hunger and misery, and maintain the

strength of the citizens? Why does its full use not enter into

the valuation? The reason is, obviously, that we are not forced

to obtain and value the harvest in one lot. It comes through

thousands of busy hands, by a thousand different means of

transport, from thousands of storehouses; and it passes through

thousands of purchases to those who need it, and is by them

consumed in thousands of different acts. The question as to the

effect on the whole is never put; the only thing we have ever to

do with is the effect of individual parts, which, compared with

the whole, are vanishingly small. And this brings us to a law of

valuation by which an amount of value is ascribed to the single

part, and, therefore, finally, to the sum of all the parts, which

is as far removed from the amount of value that would otherwise

pertain to the united whole, as the resisting power of all the

single rods in a bundle is from that of the whole bundle. 

    This law we have now to trace. It might be described as the

General Law of Value, since it holds in almost every case. Almost

all supplies which we possess and employ, which are bought and

sold, which are used up and produced, are acquired and used in

parts. Seldom only is a supply of goods the object of economic

use and valuation as a whole -- a whole of which nothing can be

lost without everything being lost. As a rule every supply or

stock of goods comes to us as a sum of parts, each of which has

its separate destiny, and can be individually disposed of. 





Chapter 9



The Valuation of Goods in Stocks. The Law of Marginal Utility the

General Law of Value



    Suppose a poor man receives every day two pieces of bread,

while one is enough to allay the pangs of positive hunger, what

value will one of the two pieces of bread have for him? If for

instance a still poorer man, who has nothing whatever, begged of

him one piece, what sacrifice would the first make in complying

with the request? Or -- what comes to the same thing -- what use

or utility would he retain if he refused to comply with it? The

answer is easy enough. If he gives away the piece of bread he

will lose, and if he keeps it he will secure, provision for that

degree of want which makes itself felt whenever positive hunger

is allayed. We may call this the 2nd degree. 

    One of two entirely similar goods is, therefore, equal in

value to the 2nd degree in the scale of utility of that

particular class of goods. One of three goods, under the same

conditions, will have the value of the 3rd degree; one of four,

of the 4th; in short, any one good, in a stock of goods of the

same kind, will have in general the value of the final or

marginal utility. The larger the supply -- the need remaining

unaltered -- the smaller will be the marginal utility and the

value, and vice versa; while, on the other hand, the greater the

need the higher will be both marginal utility and value, and vice

versa.(1*)

    This, however, is not enough. Not only has one of two goods

the value of the second degree of utility, but either of them has

it, whichever one may choose. In our example, neither of the two

pieces of bread -- so long as the possessor has both -- will have

that value which belongs to the allaying of positive hunger,

because, so long as they are both in his possession, he will

never be exposed to this extremity. He may give away one of them

-- whichever he likes, so long as he keeps the other -- without

losing his provision against starvation. But, if either of the

two pieces is equal in value to the second degree of utility,

both together have twice this value. And three pieces have

together three times the value of the third degree of utility,

and four pieces have four times the value of the fourth degree.

In a word, the value of a supply of similar goods is equal to the

sum of the items multiplied by the marginal utility. 

    Say that a harvest, consisting of 1,000,000 quarters, is

short, and that the community has to be so sparing in its use of

it that grain dare not be consumed unless the act of consumption

yield a satisfaction equal to the figure 10: the value of the

harvest will be calculated as 1,000,000 x 10. The value of a

harvest of 2,000,000 quarters, where the act of consumption need

only yield, say, 4, is equal to 2,000,000 x 4. The value of

1,000,000 tons of iron, where the marginal utility is 1, is

1,000,000, and the value of 100,000 oz. of gold, with a marginal

utility of 50, is 5,000,000. 

    As the use obtained from free goods represents no value

whatever, so is the use obtained from supplies of economic goods

not fully represented in their value, and for the same reason In

the case of free goods we need not concern ourselves at all about

their use, that being always assured so long as the goods remain

in superfluity; and in the case of economic goods, our only

concern is with the marginal utility, all the higher utilities

being assured so long as the amount of the supply remains

unaltered. In the former case we need have no anxiety as regards

the provision for our wants generally; in the latter we need have

no anxiety as regards the provision for the principal part of our

wants -- and the larger the supply the less the anxiety -- and

need only concern ourselves to see that the proper margin of

employment is maintained. 

    The law of value just described owes its existence, on the

one side, to the peculiar formation of the scales of want, but,

on the other, to the peculiar conditions under which goods are

possessed. If goods did not come forward in stocks or supplies

consisting of similar items, but only individually and each with

a separate form, the law would not hold. Where such stocks do

appear, however, it must hold. How could things entirely similar

be differently valued, -- supposing, of course, that they belong

to the same person, and are used to satisfy the same demand? Even

if any one in an anxious mood were to set apart certain items, as

a reserve for extreme exigency, and, as such, might think of

putting a special value on them, he would surely find, on

reflection, that the reserved goods were in no way different from

all the rest, and that there would be no danger of this extreme

case arising, even if some accident destroyed the reserve, so

long as the other stock held out. 

    This law of value unites the conceptions of value and of

utility in a way that is fully confirmed by facts. When

experience shows that iron is worth less than gold, and that an

abundant harvest may be of less value than a poor one, our law

can give the explanation. In the main, it clears up all the

contradictions which appear to separate the conceptions of value

and utility from each other; and it only remains for us now to

combine the fact of costs with the law of marginal utility, -- a

task we shall undertake later. Meanwhile we have not yet

completely exhausted the elementary theory of value. In the first

place we have only externally resolved the contradictions between

value and utility. Under certain conditions iron must be of less

value than gold, and the rich harvest of less value than the poor

one -- but what hidden import is contained in this? However

unconditionally one adopts our law and is convinced by our logic,

he will nevertheless scarcely be able to deny that its inmost

content is veiled in darkness. In one connection it appears

paradoxical; in another it even seems to comprehend within itself

a complete antinomy. The final task of the elementary theory of

value will be to clear up this paradox and explain away this

antinomy. Only when this is done, shall we obtain a clear idea of

the essential nature of the phenomenon of value.(2*)



NOTES:



1. The amount of supply depends chiefly on the result of

production, and thus the elements of production come into

relation with value. The nature of this relation we shall first

discuss, however, in Book V, under the head of "Costs." Meantime

we shall assume that supplies exist without production. 



2. We have here reached a decisive point in our examination.

Experience shows us daily that similar goods obtain similar

prices; and the majority of theorists (although they may use

different names for the same thing) are agreed that these prices

are fixed by a marginal law. In this is involved that exchange

value, which rests on prices, is the same for all similar goods,

and obeys a marginal law. We, however, have gone still further,

and say that Value generally and in every form, even in that of

use, and even where there is no exchange -- as e.g. in a

community organised on a socialist basis -- must be the same for

all similar goods, and must obey a marginal law. Jevons, Gossen,

and Walras have not gone so far as to assert this. To these

writers the utility of the separate portions or items of one

supply is different, according to the amount of use which each

actually gives. I can scarcely hope to have brought home to the

reader, and still less to have converted him all at once to such

an unfamiliar aspect of the question. But I trust that the

following presentation of the theory of value, which is founded

on the foregoing, and which examines, and -- so far as my

judgment goes -- explains all the different relations of value,

will be found convincing. 

    There is just one more point to which I should like now to

draw special attention. Price not only regulates the amount paid

by buyers, but also the amount of production by sellers: it gives

to the latter its level. All goods produced for the market are

produced under a valuation which considers similar goods as equal

to one another, and which subjects them to a marginal law, and it

is with reference to this valuation that the costs permissible

are calculated, that all stocks are inventoried, that all

undertakings make up their balance-sheets, and that all profit

and loss is reckoned. If a socialist community were to give up

exchange -- the payment of buyer to seller -- it would not on

that amount require to give up this measuring scale for the

valuation of goods. It could continue to value similar goods at

the same figure, and to bring them all under a marginal law. And

might we not gave some right to ask, what reasons it would have

to discontinue this? Certainly it would require weighty ones to

justify a change in a method of valuation which has been followed

ever since, if not before, human economics began to be enlarged

through trade. And, finally, we have still to ask whether it

would ever be possible to cease valuing goods in this way. Is it

possible to value equal things unequally? Can we ever regard the

useful but unimportant as important? 

    Menger's theory of value differs essentially from its rivals

on this point. He asserts that the law of equality and the

marginal law refer not only to price but to value. In my opinion

this places his theory in advance of all the others, and wins for

him the fame of being the first to lay a perfect foundation for

the theory of value. The other authors we have named examine only

the laws of want and the laws of price. Menger alone includes the

laws of value. His view of the question is the most

wide-reaching, inasmuch as it not only aids us to the clearest

comprehension of the present economy, but also enables us to

think out possible future forms of economy. 





Chapter 10



The Paradox of Value



    Assume that a man owns one good, and that the employment of

it gives a utility equal to 10; and suppose that his holding

gradually increases up to 11 goods, in the course of which the

marginal utility decreases proportionally down to 0. The value of

the stock at each point will be as follows: -- 



When he has        The value is         =  

    1                 1 x 10           10

    2                 2 x 9            18

    3                 3 x 8            24

    4                 4 x 7            28

    5                 5 x 6            30

    6                 6 x 5            30

    7                 7 x 4            28

    8                 8 x 3            24

    9                 9 x 2            18

   10                10 x 1            10

   11                11 x 0             0

 goods              units of value



Here a regular decrease of the marginal utility, and, therefore,

of the value of the single good, is seen to take place along with

an increase of the supply, and further explanation is

unnecessary. Each additional good brings with it a diminished

increment of utility and must, therefore, bring only a diminished

increment of value. It is otherwise when we consider the value of

the whole stock, and follow its development from 10 up to 30, and

back again from 30 down to 10 and 0. Judged from the standpoint

of that aspect of value with which daily economical life

impresses us, this scale seems completely paradoxical. Value is

commonly regarded by us as a simple and absolutely desirable

characteristic of goods, mathematically expressible as a positive

amount. It corresponds with this view when the series shows an

increase of value along with the first additions to the stock,

but it entirely contradicts it when, towards the end of the

series, every further addition to the stock is accompanied by a

corresponding decrease in value, until, finally, when the point

of superfluity is reached, value completely disappears. Whence

comes this contradiction? How is it to be explained? The first

half of the series appears to confirm the view that value is

something desirable, something positive, while the second shows

it as a negative quantity, something burdensome or evil. Which

then is true? And how can both ever be brought to agree? 

    Very easily, so soon as one gives up the preconceived notion

that value is a simple positive amount. Value (as marginal value)

arises from a combination of two elements, the one positive, the

other negative. It is a complex amount; or, more exactly, a

residual amount. So soon as one distinguishes between these two

elements in the formation of value, the series we have just drawn

above explains itself in the simplest manner possible; and the

semblance of irregularity, which must have proved insuperable for

those who expected and sought a simple progression, disappears. 

    Both elements in the formation of value have been explained

by what has already been said. 

    The positive element is the enjoyment in the use of goods.

Every additional use which is furnished by a newly-acquired good

is welcome. The good which is first acquired brings the largest

increment of utility because it satisfies the most urgent stage

of desire; every one that follows has a lesser utility because it

meets a desire which has been already comparatively satisfied.

And should the accretion of goods cross the margin of want, there

will be no addition to the positive element in the formation of

value. There will now be no employment for additional goods; they

will not bring enjoyment to any one. 

    Taking the former figures, the increment of the positive

element in value will be as follows: -- 



    With        there will be

    1               10

    2                9

    3                8

    4                7

    5                6

    6                5

    7                4

    8                3

    9                2

   10                1

   11                0

 goods              units of goods





    And the total amount of this positive element, calculated for

the whole stock, will be as under: -- 





    With            The total enjoyment is

    1                   10 

    2                   19   (10 + 9)

    3                   27   (19 + 8)

    4                   34   (27 + 7)

    5                   40   (34 + 6)

    6                   45   (40 + 5)

    7                   49   (45 + 4)

    8                   52   (49 + 3)

    9                   54   (52 + 2)

   10                   55   (54 + 1)

   11                   55   (55 + 0)

 goods              units of value





The negative element arises from the indifference with which men

naturally regard goods. Only when forced to it, do we transfer

our interest from the uses of goods to the goods themselves; and,

in the process of transferring, we have to overcome a natural

opposition which varies in strength according to the

circumstances. The greater the need, the more eager will we be to

get possession and keep possession of goods: the smaller in this

case will be the opposition. The opposition will be completely

broken down where our need rises to extremity, for here we

identify our destiny with that of the goods, and in their loss we

see our own calamity. On the other hand, the opposition will be

complete where everything is present in superfluity; here we can

enjoy without any feeling of gratitude for, or interest in, the

objects which procure for us the enjoyment. Between extremest

need and superfluity the opposition is a graduated one: we bestow

upon goods an amount of interest derived from the interest we

have in the services they render us. But we do not give them the

whole of this interest; we make a certain reservation. That is to

say, all the single items of a stock are considered only at the

value of their marginal utility. The surplus value, that which

goes beyond their marginal utility, is withheld from the goods.

Here, then, is the numerical expression for the strength of this

opposition: the negative element in the formation of value is

equal to the subtracted surplus value. Making use once again of

the foregoing figures, we find that, so long as we own only one

good, there is no deduction in the formation of its value; the

entire value of the use is transferred, undiminished, to the

good. With two goods, on the other hand, there will be a

deduction of 1 from the value, as each of these is valued only

according to its marginal utility 9, while the utilities of both

added together amount to 10 + 9. Three goods have each a value

only of 8, and their utility is equal to 10 + 9 + 8, the surplus

value deducted being therefore 3. Reckoning further in the same

way, we shall find the minus amount in the formation of value as

follows: --



With a stock of         the minus is

    1                       0

    2                       1

    3                       3

    4                       6

    5                      10

    6                      15

    7                      21

    8                      28

    9                      36

   10                      45

   11                      55

 goods                  units of value.



If we put together the plus and minus amounts we shall obtain the

following as result: --



    Positive (+)       Negative (-)        Residual (+)

 1       10                  0                10

 2       19                  1                18

 3       27                  3                24

 4       34                  6                28

 5       40                 10                30

 6       45                 15                30

 7       49                 21                28

 8       52                 28                24

 9       54                 36                18

10       55                 45                10

11       55                 55                 0

goods  units of value   units of value      units of value



Thus we obtain the same scale as that which resulted from the

multiplication of amount by marginal utility. 

    It is now seen that the apparent irregularity of the scale is

really a consequence of the strict regularity of its conditions. 

    The value of a supply must increase with the increase of its

items so long as the positive element preponderates; in other

words, so long as the increment of value, furnished by the

utility of the newly-acquired good, is greater than the value

which is lost through the decrement of value which its addition

causes to every good already in the stock. This is the ascending

branch of the movement of value, or, as we might call it, the "up

grade" of value. 

    On the other hand, the value of a supply must decrease with

its augmentation, whenever the negative element gains the

ascendency. This is the descending branch of the movement of

value, or the "down grade" of value. 

    Strange though it seems, the value must touch zero twice in

the course of its development: in the one case, where we have

nothing; in the other, where we have everything. If we possess

nothing, there are no objects to value; if we possess everything,

there is -- just on account of the superfluity -- no subjective

inducement to an act of valuation. Only if we possess something

-- be it much or little -- does the phenomenon of value appear;

and between the two zero points, so different in their

importance, it has its existence. It presents itself with the

first goods that come into our possession, and increases up to a

certain culminating point, from which it decreases, until, when

superfluity is reached, interest is again completely withdrawn

from the goods. 

    As a matter of fact, human economies move almost entirely in

the ascending branch. In most things we are so far from having a

superfluity that almost every multiplication of goods shows a

corresponding increase in the total value. The single good

certainly falls in value as the stock increases, but as a rule we

find that the loss in the items is outweighed by the gain on the

whole. On this account we are accustomed to measure wealth and

riches by the sum of value of their constituent parts, and regard

it as a misfortune if the value of property and revenue goes

down. And therefore it appears to us paradoxical when, at times,

we are forced to notice that, although the amount of goods and of

enjoyments, of wealth and well-being, has been augmented, their

value has decreased. It may be that exceptionally favourable

weather has resulted in an over-abundant harvest; or it may be

the discovery of some new productive stratum of unsuspected

fertility; or some sudden and enormous increase of returns

through advance in technical processes: or it may be caused by

some error on the part of the producer, who has been misled by

greed of gain, or a mistaken and exaggerated estimate of demand,

into too greatly enlarging his production. But it is always some

unusual accident when individual branches of economy are

transferred to the descending branch in the movement of value. It

is improbable that our whole economic system will ever

permanently come under such favourable conditions, and production

be brought so near to superfluity, that the ascending movement of

value will cease to be the dominant one. The example, however, of

those few free goods which nature offers leaves us no room for

doubt that value disappears whenever superfluity is reached; and

this is really the best proof for our contention that value must

begin to decrease whenever superfluity approaches. Even though

experience shows the scale of value to have many gaps, yet it

gives us sufficient facts to let us trace its ideal course from

end to end. 





Chapter 11



The Antinomy of Value and the Service of Value





    As consequence of the observation that, in the overwhelming

majority of cases, the value of possessions increases with

economic prosperity, the exceptions have been either entirely

forgotten, or put on one side as unessential and unimportant

disturbances. The idea has gone abroad that value is the highest

principle in economic life, and that all our economic action must

be regulated with reference to it. It has been said that people

should so act as to obtain on the whole the greatest amount of

value. 

    If this idea were correct, our economic life would be

directed by a power which would, in some measure, work against

the aims of economic conduct; to the extent, namely, of

preventing the realisation of economic ends beyond a certain

point; that is, beyond the up grade of value. And one would be

justified in speaking of an antinomy in the law of value, which

would refer not only to exchange value, as Proudhon has asserted,

but to every form of value. It would be expedient for every one,

not only from a money-making and selling point of view, but in

his own private economy -- even for a Robinson Crusoe who could

not sell at all -- to convert superfluity into want, and want

into greater want, in order to create and increase value. No one,

however, would wish to act in this way, and it is therefore

untrue that value has the guidance of our economies. The highest

principle of all economy is utility. Where value and utility come

into conflict utility must conquer; there is nothing in the

nature of value which could give it the ascendency. Utility is

imperfectly contained in value, with the accompanying peculiarity

that the amount of utility which is contained is intimately

associated with the very idea of goods. But this latter

phenomenon cannot have the effect of preventing any one from

entering into transactions which a complete addition of the

utilities to be got from the goods acquired would show to be

profitable. If I were able, by any method whatever, to secure for

myself a constant superfluity of all the services of goods, the

idea that my interest need not thereafter be cared over from the

services to the goods themselves, would not cause me a moment's

hesitation in securing the superfluity. Or suppose that I

expected a great amount of utility from some transaction. and the

transaction at the same time caused me a certain loss of interest

in the goods, this latter circumstance would not deter me in the

faintest degree from carrying through the transaction. 

    Under these conditions, then, what service remains for value

to render in economic life? A highly important one. The cases

where there is a conflict between value and utility -- where

increase of the one is decrease of the other -- occur but seldom.

Experience shows that economic life moves almost always on the

"up grade," and here the tendencies of increase or decrease are

similar for value and utility. Whenever the utility of a stock

increases with the augmentation of the stock, the value also

increases, and whenever the utility of a stock decreases with a

diminution of the stock, the value also decreases. A greater

value almost always corresponds with the greater utility, and a

lesser value with the lesser utility, and on this account

transactions which commend themselves in consideration of their

utility, commend themselves also in consideration of their value.

The service of value consists, then, in representing utility

wherever both show the same tendency. We do not calculate

utilities; we calculate values. Value is the form in which

utility is calculated, and this renders calculation infinitely

more easy. It is difficult indeed to estimate the utility of a

stock; easy to estimate its value. That is to say, the value of a

stock can be expressed as the single product of stock and

marginal utility; it is a multiple of the marginal utility:

whereas utility can be expressed only by a sum which contains as

numerous and as various amounts as the stock contains items. The

utility, for instance, of a harvest of a million quarters can be

represented only by an almost inexhaustible description of all

the benefits accruing from it, from its greatest effects down to

those of the least important employments economically permissible

in the circumstances of the case. The value of this same harvest

is easily and shortly ascertained by multiplying the utility of

the marginal employments by the whole amount. mathematically

expressed, the formula for expressing the utility of a stock of

50 items, the most intense use of which -- that of the first item

-- reaches the figure of 100, if we assume a regular decrease in

intensity for every successive item, will run: 100 + 99 + 98 +

... 51. But the value formula will be simply: -- 50 x 51.(1*)

    The simplification of economic calculation by the use of a

value instead of a utility measurement is noticeable in

proportion to the economic state of development. While the

utility formula becomes continually more wearisome and less

clear, the value formula becomes more comprehensive and uniform,

particularly through the entrance of costs, -- which we shall

discuss later. Where money is the medium of exchange everything

is measured equally, for purposes of trade, according to its

money value; all utility in its illimitable variety is reckoned

by the value of coin, the separate items of which are all equal

to each other, and the amounts of which appear in the

calculations as multiples of one and the same unit. 

    It is the possibility of calculating utility in terms of

value which first puts us in a position to draw out exact

economic plans and foresee their necessary limitation. Thus value

comes to be the controlling power in economic life. 





NOTES:





1. The value formula is an abridged utility formula. Only that

part is left out which, on the one hand, renders calculation more

difficult, and, on the other hand, is really unnecessary as an

adequate motive to economic actions; viz. that surplus utility

which is above the marginal utility. Economic actions which have

value (in the up grade) for their motive, are not only

approximately, but completely and exactly weighed and limited.

The greater utility is always reached when the greater value is

aimed at. 

    It may be interesting to go more into detail regarding this.

There are two occasions on which economic goods become objects of

valuation; first, when we wish to acquire goods, and to measure

the amount of the acquisition; and, second, when we wish to part

with goods in order to devote them to some given end, and to

measure the amount of the service which they thus will render. On

the one side, then, we have to measure results in goods, and, on

the other, outlays in goods. It may be remarked in passing that,

without some such end in view, goods are never valued: they are

never valued for valuing's sake. At most, goods are valued in

advance to be ready for any contingency; but value never plays

the role so readily ascribed to it by, theory; -- it never acts

simply as the means of valuing wealth. Wealth may be valued in

all sorts of ways, according to the purpose which it is intended

to serve. The rules of valuation which are actually followed have

their origin in the fact that they serve towards the ends of

economic life, whatever these may be. Value is adapted to its

economic environment, and can only be understood through it. 

    First, as to the measurement of results in goods. All

acquisitions of goods which increase value are profitable. Of two

acquisitions, between which one may choose, that one will be

chosen which gives the greater amount of value, because it also

gives the greater utility. Augmentations of value arising from

intentional destruction of goods are unprofitable, and, in

consideration of utility -- which is the stronger consideration

wherever there is a collision between it and value -- are

forbidden. Acquisitions of goods which, inasmuch as they follow

the "down grade" of value, diminish the amount of value, are

nevertheless profitable. 

    An increase of value occasioned by increased necessity, and

unaccompanied by any change in the amount of goods, must not be

described as an economical result. It is not created by any

economical act. Once created, however, it naturally influences

economic action, etc., through the fact that it changes the value

of goods used as outlay. 

    Second, as to the measurement of "outlay" in goods -- whether

in purchase of other goods, or in production, or in mere

satisfaction of personal want. In every appropriation of goods to

a particular purpose the value of the sacrifice involved must be

estimated an compared with the expected result. The greater the

sacrifice of value, -- if we disregard the circumstances of the

"down grade," -- the greater the sacrifice of utility, and it

must be justified and made good by the obtaining of a higher

result. It is different to show this as regards consumption. The

employment of goods towards the satisfaction of personal wants

must also be guided by the value of goods. But how can marginal

value serve this end? Would not that require that only marginal

wants be satisfied? The difficulty solves itself whenever we give

up the old and deep-rooted but erroneous belief that consumption

as such is an economical act. Consumption as such does not arise

from any economical considerations. It is only economising in

consumption that is economical (see Ursprung des Werthes, p.

133). The demands of economising are, however, exactly met when

we keep to the marginal utility. In other words, value does not

control consumption: it only forbids uneconomical consumption;

that, namely, which would not assure uninterrupted satisfaction

down to the lowest attainable utility. This prohibition and

nothing else is expressed in marginal value; no employment of

goods which goes below the margin drawn can be allowed. Through

the fact that want on its side is active and demands

satisfaction, economic satisfaction is reached by a combination

of claims and refusals. Whoever possesses 1000 items of the value

of 10, may permit himself every enjoyment which has an intensity

of 10 or more. Whoever possesses 2000 items of the value of 8 may

go further, and allow himself all enjoyments which have at least

an intensity of 8, two thousand times. This is the true meaning

of that estimate of the value of supplies of consumption goods,

to which we generally give the more material formulation, that

the first possesses 1000 x 10 = 10,000, and the second possesses

2000 x 8 = 16,000 units of value.

    See, upon the calculation of value my Ursprung des Werthes,

p. 180, and Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, p. 46; further, on the service

of value, Book II, chaps. iv and v and Book V, chap. xiii below.













Natural Value



	by Friedrich Wieser







Book III: The Natural Imputation of the Return from Production



PART I: The General Principles of Imputation



Chapter 1



Return Value



    Production goods, as well as consumption goods, afford

utility. Land, capital, and labour afford utility inasmuch as

they produce useful objects of consumption. As the latter serve

directly, so do the former indirectly, toward the satisfaction of

wants. The seed, the tree, the soil, the yarn, the coal, the

machine: -- these are not indeed ripe or finished goods, like the

fruit and the garment, but they are just as really goods. They

contain prospective or potential utility.

    And the production goods, land, labour, and capital, must

receive value on account of their utility, so far as they are not

available in superfluity. The atom of air, which floats above the

field in company with the countless others that throng space, is

useful but valueless, because its place is at any time taken and

fined by another. On the other hand, in the judgment of economic

men, all those elements of production must receive value on

account of their useful effect, which, however numerous they be,

are yet not numerous enough to prevent even a small loss in them

being perceptible and bringing harm in its train. Production does

not despise free goods; it does not disdain the fruitful land

although it should stretch away in excess of all requirements, or

the wood in the primeval forest, or free water power: on the

contrary, it seeks them out and prefers to use them wherever it

can, because their services are the most perfect possible, and

present no break in the rendering. None the less it must be said

that production pays little attention to free goods, -- indeed

less than little. It does not consider them at all. It merely

uses them; it ascribes to them no value. It does not even reckon

to them the services they render. Utility alone gives no value;

there must be limitation of supply as well, before value emerges

from utility. Utility is and remains the source of value, but in

order to set the source flowing there must be a peculiar motive

power, which will direct the attention of man to the necessity of

watching and attending to it. 

    It is, however, not usual to follow the value of production

goods to its source in utility. To estimate the value of a field

I do not consider what satisfactions of want can be had from its

crop. I content myself with calculating what and how much crop it

will probably yield; this crop then I estimate according to the

value which attaches to it in virtue of its utility; and this

value is to me the basis from which I ascertain the value of the

field. The act of valuation of production goods, which ought to

reach right back to wants, is, therefore, usually carried only to

that point at which the relation of these goods to the value of

their products is clearly established, for in the value of

products the calculation of the wants is already represented. To

this extent it is possible to say that the value of production

goods is determined by the value of their products or by the

value of the return. Productive value is return-value. The

consideration that, from production goods, one can obtain a

return in goods which possess not only utility but value, gives

production goods their value. 

    According to the manner in which production is planned and

carried out, it is possible to obtain from the same goods widely

diverse kinds and amounts of return. Economic principles demand

the obtaining of the greatest possible return; that is, the

return possessing the greatest value which it is possible to

obtain under the circumstances. It is this "greatest possible

return" whose value should serve as basis for the valuation of

production goods.(1*) Probably it never is possible to decide

this beforehand with absolute accuracy, but some anticipatory

estimate there must be. It is not therefore actually the value of

the return which forms the ground of production value, -- but the

expectation which is formed of it. It is the anticipated value of

the anticipated return.

    The greater the return reckoned on, the greater will be the

productive value. The greater the dividend expected from a stock,

the higher will be the value put upon the stock. This frustration

of stocks and dividends is, on the whole, the best that could be

given to explain productive value. Every means of production,

every tool, every piece of land or raw material, every service of

labour, represents, if one may say so, a share in an undertaking.

This share contributes to the result of the undertaking, and

consequently gets ascribed to it a quota of the result, and upon

the amount of this result its value must depend.(2*) 



NOTES:



1. The value of the productive unit again is decided according to

the marginal law -- i.e. by the least among these returns. See

below, Book III. chap. viii. 



2. The classical political economy really examines only the value

of products, or, more exactly, of produced consumption goods. So

far as the factors of production are concerned, it looks upon

them, on the one side, as sources of income (rent, interest,

wage, and, perhaps, also undertaker's income); on the other side,

as the elements which go to form the costs of production, and are

considered to decide, principally, the value of the products. 

    But when one compares with this the endeavours which,

explicitly or implicitly, guide the new writers on the theory of

value, we find the circle of the phenomena to which the idea of

value is applied extraordinarily widened. Factors of production

-- better expressed by the later writers as "production goods" --

are conceived of all through as objects of value; costs are

directly phenomena of value; and even income must be so

conceived. Further than this, the relations between the value of

utilities and the value of production goods is turned just the

other way about -- the former being considered as determining,

the latter as determined. On the present occasion we have first

to do with the proposition which may serve as starting-point for

the whole theory, -- that production goods receive their value

from the value of the products which they serve to create.

Gossen, Jevons, Menger, and Walras are all agreed on this point

In my opinion it is again Menger who gives the most clear and

comprehensive statement of the matter. He divides (as does also

Gossen, though much less perfectly) the entire goods which stand

in the productive nexus into Ranks, and value is conducted from

rank to rank. The first and lowest rank is formed by those

utilities which receive their value direct from wants. The value

thus received passes over first to goods of the second rank,

those, namely, which serve directly towards the producing of

goods of the first rank; as e.g. the meal and the labour of the

baker in the preparation of bread. From these value passes on to

goods of the third rank (e.g. wheat and the labour of the

miller); and so on, step by step, till it reaches the highest,

or, as Bohm-Bawerk calls them, the most remote ranks. 



Chapter 2



The Problem of Imputation



    No productive instrument, be it ever so efficient, yields a

return by its unaided agency; it always requires the assistance

of others. And the more the art of production is developed, the

more numerous will be the productive instruments which

co-operate. The very simplest products often require the most

complicated methods of production, because they, more than any

others, allow of the application of machinery and, therefore, of

power in the mass. The proposition that production goods obtain

their value from the value of their returns, suffices only for

the valuation of the co-operating productive factors as a whole;

not for their valuation individually. To obtain this also, we

need a rule which will make it possible to divide up the whole

return into single parts. 

    When land, capital, and labour work together, we must be able

to separate out the quota of land, the quota of capital, and the

quota of labour from the joint product. More than that, we must

be able to measure the services of each separate piece of land,

of each separate quantity of capital, and of each separate

labourer. Of what use is it to know the return which falls to

machinery, coal, and raw material together? It is necessary to

distinguish what each has contributed to the total result, just

as the contribution of the stone-cutter who hews the block must

be distinguished from that of the artist who chisels it into the

statue. 

    If we may form a judgment from economic practice, we should

say there is such a rule of division. No one, practically, is

limited to saying that return is due to all the producing factors

together; every one understands and practises, more or less

perfectly, the art of division of return. A good business man

must know, and does know, what a day labourer and what a skilled

worker would yield him; what profit a machine will bring in; how

much has to be ascribed to the raw material; what return this and

what return that piece of land will produce. If he did not know

this; if he could only compare his outlay and his results as a

whole and in the lump, he would not know what to do in case the

return proved less than the outlay. Must he give up the

production altogether? Must he alter the management? Must he be

more saving with labour or capital, with machinery or raw

material; or, on the contrary, must he employ more of these? Only

if there is some adequate means of following out individually the

working of each productive element, can he judge clearly upon

these points That there is such a means is testified by the fact

that economic decisions of the nature we have just mentioned are

made, and made with as much confidence and as favourable results

as are any other decisions in matters of value generally. The

existence of this means of calculation is still more certainly

proved by the fact that decisions of this nature are so often

made in the same way by many people, -- in fact, by all persons

who find themselves in the same circumstances. Why at a certain

point of time does the entire body of undertakers, in some

particular branch of manufacture, suddenly replace hand labour by

machinery, when previously they had not found machinery

profitable? Why is agriculture in one country so much more

"intensive" than in another? Chance and caprice are here out of

the question. It is calculations of production that effect these

alterations. They give arithmetical proof that it is advantageous

to eliminate the one element of production, with its accompanying

share in the return, and substitute for it the other. The more

perfect the production, the more exact will be its calculations,

and the more highly will the art of distributing the return be

developed. A "model economy" calculates everything. But the

rudest peasant, and the wildest savage, make calculations,

inexact and hasty though they be. They, too, make use of their

experience, though very imperfectly of course, in regard to

matters where the impulse and the confidence are given by nature.

The peasant, dwelling in some cleft of the mountain, says to

himself that this field is more valuable than that; and this he

could not do unless he understood the art of separating the

return of the field from the return of the co-operating

labourers, tools, and materials. These are rules which arise

naturally, from the very nature of man, when he finds himself

confronted with the problems of economic life. In applying them,

the attempt would undoubtedly be made even by a communistic

state, to calculate the result of each individual productive

element. And in a highly cultivated state these calculations

would be made with great exactitude, in order to lay down that

plan of production which, for the time being, was most effective.



    It is singular how few of those writers who have attempted to

grasp economic procedures into the unity of theory have tried to

discover this rule, -- which is certainly one of the most

important followed in practical economic dealings. Of the many

difficulties which have to be overcome if we are to get, apart

from actual transactions, a purely theoretical and scientific

account of what people actually do when impelled by

circumstances, probably the first and most difficult of all is to

put before ourselves what are the problems really put in business

transactions. Every theory begins with the least important of the

things it has to do, and only in the end arrives at its true

vocation. 

    The second difficulty is to state the problem correctly. The

few writers who have managed to get over the first obstacle

mentioned have almost all come to grief at the second. For the

most part they pitch the question too high, and thus change, what

to the simple man is a simple and natural thing, into a subtle

and sophistical riddle, of which they then say, rightly enough,

that no solution is possible. They try. to discover which portion

of the joint product, physically considered, each factor has

produced, or of which part of the result each factor is the

physical cause. This, however, is not to be discovered. At the

most it could be possible only in cases where the product is a

complex of materials externally bound together; and even that

only so far as regards the materials, and not as regards the

power which makes them a complex -- a power whose effects inhere

in all the constituent parts of the mass, without being

incorporated in any one of them. Looked at in this way, we cannot

get beyond the proposition that the result is the joint product

of all its factors and causes; that those factors must work in

combination or they cannot work at all, -- like the four brothers

in the tale who saved the princess only by their united

endeavours. If we wish to find the principle for division of

return which is applied in practical life, the question must be

put quite differently; it must be put as practical life puts it,

and it must be put simply. 

    The causes of any phenomenon, whatever it may be, can be

interpreted in very various ways. The philosopher looks at them

in one light, the peasant in quite another; and yet both may

judge rightly, and, so far as their judgment is correct, may

apply rightly their conception. The difference in their opinions

rests on the fact that they judge from different points of view.

The former searches after the final causes that may be grasped by

human reason; the latter limits his attention to the proximate

and immediate causes, taking for granted the agency of all those

which are further removed. Each would fail were he to make use of

the other's knowledge; the peasant's maxim does not answer the

purpose of philosophy, and the philosophic conception has no

place in the economy of the peasant; yet each is serviceable

enough in its own place. In whatever industrial situation men

come to a judgment as to the causes of the phenomena which they

encounter, the horizon of the judgment is always strictly limited

by the point of view they take. Whatever lies beyond that cannot

properly be taken into consideration, or the judgment would never

come to anything. It would only end in needless critical

reflection, which would be of no help as regards the objects

aimed at. If we wish to obtain a practical judgment the object

must be kept in view, and the matter looked at from the point of

view of those concerned. A theory which proposes to explain the

idea in business life, must, of all things, not be above its

business; it must limit itself, so as not to give too deep a

meaning to, and thereby really distort, the limited subject.

    A science nearly related to our own as regards its subject,

that of jurisprudence, may give us admirable instruction on this

point. For an act of murder there must necessarily be a

perpetrator, a victim, an instrument, and an opportunity. Besides

these, the act is influenced by innumerable circumstances, which

can often be shown to reach back to a far distant past in the

previous history of the murderer, and even in the history of the

community among which he came into existence and grew into

manhood. The sociologist, the historian, the philanthropist, and

the lawgiver will have much to consider that has but an indirect

connection with the committing of the murder. But, however far

back they may carry their consideration, some idle brain can

always go still further, and follow ad infinitum the series of

causes which led to the deed, -- as, for instance, the history of

the tool with which it was done, as well as the history of the

doer. The judge, on the other hand, who, in his narrowly-defined

task, is only concerned about the legal imputation, confines

himself to the discovery of the legally responsible factor, --

that person, in fact, who is threatened with the legal

punishment. On him will rightly be laid the whole burden of the

consequences, although he could never by himself alone -- without

instruments and all the other conditions -- have committed the

crime. The imputation takes for granted physical causality. It

cannot fall upon any one who stands outside the series of causes

which led to the result, and any proof that the accused does

stand outside exempts him from condemnation. But if the causal

nexus is once established, far more is laid to the account of the

doer than was or could be physically done by him. Only a foolish

interpretation of the judgment could take exception to this. The

expression "this man has done it" does not mean "this man alone

has done it," but "this man alone, among all the active causes

and factors, is legally responsible for the deed."

    In the division of the return from production, we have to

deal similarly not with a complete causal explanation, but with

an adequately limiting imputation, -- save that it is from the

economic, not the judicial point of view. Observation of the

fruits of the earth suggests to a religious mind the Creator of

all things. A scientific investigator is directed by the same

observation towards the pursuit of the cognisable causes of their

creation. A Faust pines after knowledge regarding the hidden

forces of their life. The farmer, as farmer, thinks differently

from all of these. He ascribes his crops, soberly and

unsentimentally, to a very limited and small circle of all the

causes which have actually produced them. He asks -- "Towards

what things must I direct my economic attention in order to

receive this return?" -- and reckons the result accordingly. He

therefore sets apart from the total active causes all those which

lie behind in the past. From the present causes he then sets

apart all those which can be of no use, or are not recognised as

having any use. From the recognised and useful, again, he divides

off all those which are not under economic command. From these

last he, finally, separates out all those causes which need not

be cared for, because they are present in superfluity. As we can

readily understand, he does not in the least believe that the

remainder is the sole originating cause of his return. At the

same time he rightly attributes or imputes the return to it

alone, taking the working of all the other elements as assured.

His judgment, though limited, is neither false nor even inexact.

It embraces all the causes which have to be considered by him if

his labour is to be attended by good results. 

    If, in the economic working out, parts of the total result

should be traced back to individual instruments of production, it

is that we continue the reasoning with which we started: we trace

back the total result not to its numerous wider causes, but

simply to the economic instruments of its production. In regard

to the part we limit ourselves still more than we did in regard

to the whole; we seek out that one among the economic elements to

which the part is practically to be imputed, although, certainly,

it could have produced it only in combination with the other

elements. Here, again, there is neither fallacy, nor even

inaccuracy. On the contrary, so far as this method succeeds in

founding, upon the imputation of the return, a valuation of goods

and a plan of production which insures the most successful

employment of each single element, it is the height of practical

wisdom. 

    To show that imputation in this sense is both allowable and

practicable take one single case. Suppose that two fields, the

one fertile, the other poor, but both worked with similar amounts

of capital and labour, give different returns. To which account

is the surplus return of the better field to be attributed -- to

that of the seed, or the manure, or the plough, or the labour?

But these were the same in both fields. Is it not rather to be

attributed to the land itself and its greater fertility? No one

can be in doubt as to that, nor can one raise the objection that,

without seed, manure, plough, and labour, there could have been

no surplus return. Taking things as they are, more depends upon

the possession of the better soil -- just as much more, in fact,

as the surplus return amounts to. 

    It is of great importance that we should try to formulate

theoretically the rules for the imputation of productive return,

not only as regards land but as regards all productive

instruments. If we do not succeed in doing so, the valuation of

production goods will remain an enigma; and the existing order of

things, under which the actual imputation of returns forms the

basis for the distribution of national income among the citizens,

will lie under the accusation of arbitrariness, if not the worse

accusation of force and injustice. It would not even be possible

to justify the difference in wages paid to some labourers as

compared with others. If there is no rule by which to adjust the

quarrel between owners and workers, neither is there any by which

to measure the rank of the inventor against that of the

day-labourer who carries out the invention. It would be purely

arbitrary if one tried, even approximately and by way of

valuation, to show respect to genius, devotion, art, power, skill

-- in short all the virtues and excellences which, from time

immemorial, have been held in respect in economic matters as well

as in others, and which society has to thank for the most

beneficent and useful services of its members. 



Chapter 3



The Socialist Reading of the Problem. The Claim of the Labourer

to the Entire Return





    The socialist theory so greatly limits the circle of those

things which may be counted as means of production that the

problem of imputation is also sensibly narrowed. 

    Socialists do not recognise three productive factors, land,

capital, and labour: they acknowledge only a single productive

power, Labour. Only human labour, they say, is creative; it alone

can really produce. Of course, to be effective, it requires land

and capital, but these hold a subordinate position to labour, and

act merely as auxiliary means of production. But in the existing

order of things, landowners and capitalists -- as having

exclusive possession of the material auxiliary means of

production -- are placed in a position to force the labourer to

give up to them a great part of the product of labour, as it is

only on this condition that they will lend their property and

allow labour to use it. By reason of this, land and capital have

become sources of personal income for the idle classes, but

unjustly so; and it would be a great error to infer the fact of

productive power from that of income. When the owners refuse to

grant to labour the use of these auxiliaries, they place

obstacles in the way of labour, as Rodbertus says; when they do

grant this use, they do nothing more than merely remove the

obstruction they have themselves created; they simply withdraw

their own arbitrary fiat. It is always the labourer who must

produce. Land and capital are only conditions, not causes of

production. All return is exclusively labour-return. 

    As a matter of fact Rodbertus is perfectly right when he says

that no conclusion can be drawn from personal income to material

return. The problem of distribution of return must be entirely

separated from that of distribution of income, if it is to be

judged of correctly. But if the problem is to be entirely

separated, it must also be so in its application. Let us then

leave the personal quarrel entirely out of consideration. Let us

completely disregard the question as to what persons should have

the products; and, without regard to consequences, simply apply

ourselves to find out which factors are to thank for their

production, and to which factors they should be imputed. Let us

imagine to ourselves the communistic state as seeking for the

natural laws of imputation. Here the entire product falls to the

enjoyment of the labouring commonwealth. The question then is: --

Does it therefore consider the whole product as a result of its

labour, or does it also impute the product to its possession of

land and capital? 

    Clearly this will depend on the standpoint from which the

imputation is calculated. If it is the moral imputation that is

in question, then certainly no one but the labourer could be

named. Land and capital have no merit that they bring forth

fruit; they are dead tools in the hand of man; and the man is

responsible for the use he makes of them. Evidently all those

who, in any sort of way, have assisted in bringing about the

result, are counted among the labourers, -- those who direct as

well as those who carry out. Indeed, there is no possible doubt

that the greatest thanks are not due to mechanical exertions, if

we are speaking of imputation in the highest sense of the word.

Above these must stand the services of those who direct the

executant labourer; who not only supply him with ideas,

organisation, and energy, but also procure for him the materials

for labour, contrive the machinery, and bring together the

labourers who are to work with him. Compared with potencies such

as these, the executant labourer himself takes the same position

as the material means of production do as compared with himself.

Morally considered, things are auxiliaries to him, but he himself

is the auxiliary of his leader. 

    This moral imputation may be important for the personal

disposition of income; for the material division of return, of

which alone we are now speaking, it is of no consequence. The

question here is: On what factors are we practically dependent if

the return is to be obtained? Every one who knows economic life

as it is, will answer quite plainly. Upon labour and productive

wealth. Increase of possession raises the return just as surely

as does additional industry. No one feels that the return is

dependent upon those production goods of nature which are as

abundant as the atom of air floating above the field, or the

trees in a primeval forest. But every one feels that the return

is dependent upon all goods which, however abundant they may be,

are yet scarce; those goods which one economises and tries to

multiply. Where would not such possessions have value? And if

they have value why is it, if not on account of the return, and

according to the amount of the return, which they secure? So long

as men consider themselves rich in possessing land and capital,

so long do they prove that they impute to them a portion of the

fruits which they assist in bringing forth, and so long do they

attribute to labour only the remainder of the total return. The

socialist who wishes to see his state as rich in property as

possible, confutes thereby as completely as possible his own

theory, that labour alone makes rich.(1*)

    All means of production in which value is recognised, are

recognized thereby as practically influential causes of

production. To these means of production land and capital will

belong, so long as they are not available in ever-assured

superfluity. No one can seriously doubt this. The only thing that

can be doubted is whether it be just and advantageous for society

to permit the existence of private and individual property in

land and capital, whereby the return from land and capital is

transferred exclusively to single individuals. On this question

it is not so easy to come to a decision, and so far as we have

gone we have not made any, nor even tried to do so. We have only

explained the material relation between products and means of

production, without in any way anticipating the ranking of

personal claims. 



NOTES:



1. We shall find further on (Book V. chap. x), in the socialist

theory itself, a much clearer confession that labour is not the

only factor in the formation of value. See also Book III, chap.

xvii.



Chapter 4



Previous Attempts at Solution



    The only writer who has made any attempt at an exhaustive

treatment of the problem now occupying our attention is Menger.

In this Menger starts from the fundamental idea of his theory of

value. Supposing that I possess a stock of consumption goods, the

clearest way of finding the value of one single item of the stock

is by assuming that I lose it. In this way I find what enjoyment

depends upon this item -- the marginal enjoyment already

described, -- and find at once the source and amount of its

value. This method of determining value Menger now applies to the

more complicated case in which one has to decide the value of a

single item, among several co-operating production goods. Here

also he asks what would be the consequence of losing a single

item, or a definite portion of any such item, from among the

entire group of available goods (land, seed, agricultural

implements, labour, cattle, manure, and so on) -- e.g. a

cart-horse or quantity of manure. The decrease in the total

return which would take place, gives him the amount of return

which the owner feels to be dependent upon the possession of the

item in question, and gives him at the same time the foundation

of its value. 

    In applying this Menger has arrived at some very remarkable

and important results. No production good can work by itself: to

accomplish anything every good requires the co-operation of

others; and, in so far as production goods mutually demand and

supplement each other, they are, to use Menger's expression,

"complementary goods." At the same time the combinations which

they enter into are less strict than might be expected. If a

single good falls out of a productive group of goods, the

efficiency of the remaining goods is not, as a rule, completely

destroyed thereby. It happens frequently that the group may still

remain a group, and still be effectively employed, although with

somewhat diminished return, without the lost good being replaced

at all. Land, e.g., yields some return even without manure, or

without the whole amount of manure demanded by good farming. Or

the loss may be made up, if not with quite the same effect, by

the substitution of a good taken from some other group, in which

latter group, naturally, the return must equally sink a little.

Or it may happen that the goods left over become ineffective, or

too little effective, when grouped as was originally intended,

but allow of being annexed to other groups, whose return is

thereby raised, although, perhaps, not by the entire amount of

what was lost originally. Take, as example, agricultural capital

and labour, which have lost their original employment through

laying waste of the ground for which they were intended, and are

turned to industrial purposes. 

    It will be seen that the complementary nature of goods does

not reach so far as at first sight might be supposed. Every

single good requires the co-operation of others in order to be

really of use, but the connection of the goods is not a very

strict one. Only a portion of the return from the combination

ever depends upon any one single element of production; never

(except in a few cases which scarcely require to be considered)

the entire return. 

    What Menger has done is distinguished, as well by the logical

sequence of his argument as by his skill in observation, and the

lifelike interpretation of that observation. It brings light into

the darkness of a subject which no other theorist could have

faced, much less illumined. At the same time even Menger has not

given the entire solution quite perfectly. An example will make

this clear.

    Suppose three productive elements, employed in the most

rational plan of production possible, promise in combination a

product whose value amounts to 10 units of value. If the three

elements were to be employed otherwise, in combination with other

groups, they would certainly raise the return of these groups,

but it is against our hypothesis -- which is that of the most

rational plan of production, -- that the return can be raised by

10 units; otherwise the first combination chosen would not after

all have been the best. There is always an infinite number of

ways in which the elements in question can be grouped, but there

is always one plan, and that the best, which should be carried

out: if this be given up in favour of another, the result must be

smaller, even if only to a trifling extent. 

    Suppose, again, that the three elements are employed in some

plan other than the best -- which, be it remembered, demanded

their being combined with one another in a distinct group. Say

that, by being each separately employed in some other group, the

return of each of these three groups is raised by 3 units, and

the three elements accordingly now produce a return amounting to

9 units of value. 

    How in this case will the value of each single item be

reckoned according to Menger's principle? By the decrease in

return which ensues in the case of loss. In this case the

decrease amounts to 10 units -- the full return of the best

combination now broken up -- of which, however, 6 can be

recovered by the new employment of the two remaining elements.

The loss, therefore, amounts finally to 4, and this is true

indifferently of any of the three goods. 12, then, is the value

of the three taken together. But this is impossible, since, when

most profitably employed, they can give only a return of 10. 

    This mistake in the result proceeds from a mistake in the

method. The normal and determining assumption on which one

calculates the value of a good, is not that of its loss, but that

of its undisturbed possession, and of the use it gives in

fulfilling its end. The assumption of loss serves, in certain

circumstances, to show more clearly the advantage of possession.

I see more clearly what I have by possessing a thing when I

imagine what would be the consequence if I ceased to have it. But

this holds only under certain circumstances, namely, as regards a

stock of goods of the same kind, where if, in imagination, I take

away one good from the others, it is this one good alone and

nothing else that is taken away. It does not hold in the case of

a stock of heterogeneous and co-operating production goods, where

if, in imagination, I remove one, I deprive the others also of a

portion of their effect. 

    The full effect of all the elements in any productive

combination can only be realised when these elements remain

together undisturbed; it is therefore impossible to discover what

value I receive and enjoy from this undisturbed possession, if I

begin by assuming the dissolution of the combination, and then

ask what still remains. The question must be put positively: What

do I actually obtain from the goods as they stand at my disposal?

Those productive employments which stand first, -- the

employments which are most desirable and would be first chosen --

decide the value; not those which stand second, and would be

taken up only in the exceptional case of some disturbance of the

original combination. Two persons who are both in exactly the

same circumstances, and whose judgment agrees as to the best

arrangements for production, must obviously ascribe precisely the

same value to their productive possessions, although one of them

should have something better to fall back upon in case the first

plan falls through. According to Menger, however, the values, in

this latter case, would require to be assessed differently, and

indeed the higher valuation would be that of the person who had

the least to fall back upon, because to him it would be much more

important that the first plan should not fall through. 

    The assumption of loss is sufficient if what is required is

the dividing up of the return which the elements of one

combination guarantee when put into other combinations; but it is

of no use when what is wanted is to calculate as well the surplus

by which the first-chosen combination excels all others. This

surplus is left an undivided remainder of the return, and as

regards it the problem of imputation is not solved, but comes up

again for solution.(1*)

    It needs only a very slight turn to correct the error in

Menger's theory. Every well-thought-out train of reasoning

teaches by its very faults, as these faults also possess the

first requisite of scientific insight, that is, clearness; and

Menger's theory contains in itself the indication as to how the

error may be corrected. The deciding element is not that portion

of the return which is lost through the loss of a good, but that

which is secured by its possession.(2*) 



NOTES:



1. Menger reckons this undivided residue to each separate factor

instead of charging it to the entire amount, and thus the value

comes out too high. In our example the surplus equals 1 (10-9).

Menger calculates it three times instead of only once; thus

calculating two units too many, and showing a value of 12 where

there is only a return of 10. 



2. The other attempts at solution of the problem do not go beyond

suggestions. In Bohm-Bawerk alone (Werth, p. 56) is there a more

detailed statement, -- and it professes only to point out the

direction in which probably the solution of the problem might be

sought -- "To measure the share which each one of several

co-operating factors takes in producing the common product."

Bohm-Bawerk, speaking first of some less important cases of

"complementariness," establishes firmly the fundamental maxim

that no element in a group which admits, firstly, of a separate

employment outside the group, and which, secondly, may be

replaced at the same time in the group by other goods of the same

nature -- obtained from some outside source -- can receive a

value higher than its "substitution value." By substitution value

he means "that which is derived from the decrease of utility in

those branches of production from which the substituted goods are

procured." Of such a nature are, e.g., the bricks destined for

housebuilding. If some cartloads of these are destroyed, it will

not hinder the building, as they are simply replaced by others.

This proposition Bohm-Bawerk applies to the cases of productive

complementariness, dividing the total amount of complementary

production goods into two categories. Of these, one -- which

includes the overwhelming majority -- contains those goods which,

as marketable wares, are "replaceable at will"; e.g., "the

services of hired labourers, raw materials, fuel, tools, and so

on." The other category -- which contains the minority --

includes those productive elements which "cannot be replaced, or

are difficult to replace; e.g. the piece of land which the

peasant cultivates, mines, railway plant, factories, the activity

of the undertaker himself with his high personal qualities." The

value of those goods which belong to the first group is decided,

in every case, through the other employments possible to them; it

is, so far, fixed. This value is first deducted from the total

return, and the residue then falls "to the member or members

which cannot be replaced"; thus the "peasant ascribes it to his

land, the mine-owner to his mine, the manufacturer to his

factory, the merchant to his capacity.

    "Similar ideas may be found more or less clearly stated by

various writers; in the Ursprung des Werthes I have myself

pointed to a similar solution. Probably we should not be far

wrong were we to assume that the reason why so many writers have

neglected to take up this problem of distribution, is that they

supposed distribution in this sense to be as easily solved in

theory as it is in practice. How is it, however, when several

"unreplaceable" goods come together? Do not the mine and the

activity of its owner, as employer, go together? And are not many

-- indeed very many-replaceable goods often combined? The value

of these, which, practically, can always be ascertained by

referring to their secondary employment and valuation, must,

theoretically, be first separated from the combination, as again

the secondary employment itself always requires combination with

complementary goods, -- but how can this be done unless the rules

of distribution are known? 

    If these observations of Bohm-Bawerk can give no solution of

the problem of imputation, they none the less contain an

important and notable contribution towards its theory, for that

could never be complete without recognising the distinction to

which he has drawn attention. On this point see, in Book III,

chap. xii, the examination of "cost goods and monopoly goods." 



Chapter 5



The Principle of Solution. The Productive Contribution



    Suppose that a hunter's life depends on his last cartridge

killing the tiger about to spring on him. If he misses, all is

lost. Rifle and cartridge together have here an exact calculable

value. Taken together, the value equals that of the success of

the shot, neither more nor less. Taken singly, on the other hand,

there is no means of calculating the value of each. They are two

unknown quantities for which there is only one equation. Let us

call them x and y, and put the successful result at 100; all that

can be said as to their value lies in the equation x + y = 100. 

    Again, suppose an artist were to fashion a pewter vessel

which commanded great admiration on account of its perfect form.

Suppose, further, that this were the only artist who could do

really artistic work, and that his was the only artistic work

known. And suppose that, besides the piece of pewter which he had

employed, no other material of similar suitability were to be

had, neither gold, silver, wood, clay, nor even another piece of

pewter. It would be absolutely impossible to distinguish in the

value of the vessel between the value of the labour and that of

the material. The skill of the artist who conceived and executed,

and the suitability of the material which yielded to his hand and

retained the form he gave, would be regarded as equally

irreplaceable conditions of success. If we, under existing

economic conditions, do understand how to value the artist, and

how to value the material, we have to thank the circumstance

which distinguishes every act done under the influence of

exchange from the adventure of the lonely hunter; -- the

circumstance, namely, that these acts are not isolated, but take

place along with many others of the same kind, and can be

compared with them. This very pewter, out of which the artist

creates a vessel of great artistic value, serves at the same time

to furnish articles for ordinary use of very trifling value. We

conclude from this that the pewter itself can have but a trifling

value, and that only a small portion of the high value of the

artistic product falls to it, while by far the greater share must

be the property of the artist. We should be confirmed in this

opinion were we to observe that every work of the artist was

highly valued. But if, at the same time, we observe that he also

works with such materials as gold and precious stones, and that

these, on their side, equally lend a high value to all products

of which they form part, we are forced to the conclusion that, in

spite of his talent, the greater part of the value of his

products does not always belong to the artist, and that, when he

employs these materials, a highly important, if not very much the

more important, part of the value must be ascribed to them.

Certainly we can never succeed in considering either the artistic

power or the material by itself alone, and thus we cannot succeed

in measuring the effects of which they are independently capable.

Every productive factor, if it is to be effective, must be

combined with others and join its action with theirs; but the

elements that are bound up with it may alter, and this fact makes

it possible for us to distinguish the specific effect of each

single element, just as though it alone were active. 

    It is possible not only to separate these effects

approximately, but to put them into exact figures, so soon as we

collect and measure all the important circumstances of the

matter; such as the amount of the products, their value, and the

amount of the means of production employed at the time. If we

take these circumstances accurately into account, we obtain a

number of equations and we are in a position to make a reliable

calculation of what each single instrument of production does. To

put in the shortest typical formula the full range of expressions

which offer themselves, we have, for instance, instead of the one

equation x + y = 100, the following: -- 



            x +  y = 100.

           2x + 3z = 290.

           4y + 5z = 590.



    Here x= 40, y= 60, and z= 70.

    According to the number of individual productive combinations

carried out within the entire field of production, will be the

individual equations. In these equations the combined factors of

production on the one side, and the value of the jointly acquired

(or anticipated) returns on the other, are set against each other

as equivalent amounts. If we add together all the equations, the

total amount of productive wealth will stand as equivalent

against the total value of the return. This sum must be ascribed,

entirely and without remainder, to the individual productive

elements, according to the standard of the equation value. To

every element there thus falls a definite share in the total

performance, and this share could not be figured out either

higher or lower, without overthrowing the equivalence between

productive wealth and return. 

    It is the share in the return, thus credited to the

individual productive factor, which is usually called shortly the

"return" of the factor in question; -- the return of labour,

return of land, return of capital. I shall describe it as the

"Productive Contribution" (see Ursprung des Werthes, p. 177), in

order that it may always be clear whether we are speaking of the

return as a whole, or of the share of the single factor in the

return. The productive contribution, then, is that portion of

return in which is confined the work of the individual productive

element in the total return of production. The sum of all the

productive contributions exactly exhausts the value of the total

return. 

    It need scarcely be said that, as a matter of fact,

calculation can rarely be made so exactly, and never so

comprehensively. The equations indeed are all set down, and in

every case the productive outlay is estimated according to the

standard of the greatest attainable return. But the stating of

the equations is frequently made with only a trifling degree of

exactitude; and the sum of all the equations is never fully

taken, and thus cannot be divided out among the individual

elements. None the less we are constantly trying to ascertain the

result of the addition and division; only that, instead of

calculating directly, we try to attain our end, in a somewhat

circumstantial way, by a method of testing. The values obtained

in the individual case are applied, so far as they appear

suitable, to other cases, and corrected, the one by the other,

till in the end the right division is attained. And this is

rendered immeasurably easier by the fact that we already possess,

in the familiar and authenticated productive values, a key to the

division which only requires to be adapted to the changes which

emerge from time to time, At no time has the whole mass of

production goods to be calculated all at once; it is only the

contributions of individual members among these which require to

be calculated anew, and even for them a good basis is found in

the old values. New calculations require to be made only in those

branches of production where the attainable returns and their

values either rise or fall. This gives rise to new equations for

the factors in question, either with more favourable or less

favourable total values. According as it is one or the other,

will production be extended or limited, and productive elements

attracted from other branches of production, or attracted to

them, until the most favourable plan of production is again

discovered. The experience obtained while transferring now one,

now another productive element, and watching the effect of each

combination upon the value of the return, gives us sufficient

information as to the amount with which the individual elements

are bound up in the total return.(1*) 



NOTES:



1. If we are to succeed in our calculation of the productive

contributions there must be a sufficiently large number of

equations. There must be at least as many equations as there are

unknown quantities. Now this condition is certainly fulfilled.

How many unknown quantities are there? Just as many as there are

classes of production goods distinguishable in exchange. Without

doubt these are very numerous. When theorists speak simply of

land, capital, and labour, they include within each of these

groups an enormous number of classes of goods which in exchange

are as far as possible from being homogeneous. The value of

labour is not to be calculated as one thing; there must be

separate calculations for every kind and quality of labour

between which one can distinguish. In calculating the value of

agricultural land there will be, in one and the same district, as

many different and distinguishable types of land, as would be

distinguished in the register of a perfectly exact land tax

imposed both on the cultivating and propertied agricultural

classes. As to capital and its incalculable variety of forms we

need not speak. But however far exchange may be specialised, the

classes of productive combinations are undoubtedly even more

numerous than the classes of production goods. The classes of

combinations into which a good like iron or coal (even of one

distinct origin or quality) may be introduced, are incalculable,

and the same may be said of unskilled or day's labour. One and

the same field is planted in rotation with the most various

crops. And thus it comes that a mere change in the quantity of

the same kind of goods in a group is sufficient to produce a new

equation. Among all the many kinds of goods employed in

production, it would be difficult to find one which, either as

regards quantity or kind, would always be combined with others

according to the same unalterably fixed formula. Different

degrees of wealth, of knowledge, of skill, of local conditions,

involve that even those kinds of goods which only admit of one

single kind of employment, -- that is to say, which are only

suited to produce one single kind of product -- must, at the same

time and for the same purpose, go into a manifold variety of

combinations. If there are exceptions to this rule they are only

isolated ones. The contribution of such goods can, however, still

be calculated -- always supposing that there are not two such

elements in one and the same group. In this case, indeed, the

principle we have established would not work, because we should

have two unknown quantities and only one equation. 



Chapter 6



The Principle of Solution (continued). Contribution and

Co-operation



    The difference between our solution and that of Menger is as

follows. 

    Menger assumes an economic course of events different from

that which actually regulates economic life. To discover what

return is obtained from the production goods which we possess, he

tries to show what would happen should we cease to possess them.

According to Menger, for example, the value to a farmer of a

cart-horse is calculated by the diminution of return which would

ensue were the farmer to lose the horse, and be forced to go on

without it. That portion of return calculated by Menger to the

single production good we may designate "the share dependent upon

its co-operation." We, on the other hand, start by assuming an

economic course of events such as owners of production goods

would expect. We trace the effects that will ensue if all the

production goods which we possess are actually employed as we

wish and plan. In this way we calculate what we have called the

"productive contribution" of each factor. 

    The sum of all the "productive contributions" is exactly the

same as the sum of value of all the products; the sum of all the

"shares dependent upon co-operation" is, on the other hand, as we

have already shown, greater. In other words, the "productive

contribution" is essentially smaller than the "share dependent

upon co-operation," We reckon for instance the return which the

cart-horse gives to the farm lower than Menger does, as we only

estimate it at a portion of the decrease that would ensue were

the owner obliged to farm without it. According to Menger,

consequently, the farmer who loses his cart-horse loses only the

value of the animal, whereas, according to our conception --

which calculates differently the same numerical loss -- not only

does he lose the value of the animal, but he suffers, beyond

this, some disturbance in the value of his remaining productive

wealth. 

    Menger's is undoubtedly the simpler and clearer method. The

distinction which we find it necessary to make between the

"contribution" and the "co-operation" of a factor, appears

contradictory and artificial. As a matter of fact, we introduce

into the question no more difficulties than are actually

contained in it. "Contribution" and "Co-operation," under

whatever names they may be known, are everywhere distinguished,

and must be distinguished, from each other in practical economic

life. It is a generally-accepted fact that every productive

factor furnishes the basis, not only for its own value, but also

for that of all the other factors in the production. If any

essential element is removed from any undertaking whatever, the

whole undertaking must sensibly suffer. If there be a scarcity of

raw material, human labour and machinery will lose some of their

capacity of service, and vice versa; experience can show

thousands of such cases. In innumerable ways experience shows

that means of production mutually demand and mutually hamper each

other. Increased activity on the part of labour raises the return

to productive wealth, and extended exploitation of productive

wealth raises the return to labour. What does this prove but that

the share of return which furnishes the basis of value for its

factor -- the "return" imputed to it which we have called its

"contribution" -- does not exhaust the entire share contributed

by it to the success of the production? Thus we find that the

distinctions mentioned really exist, and are not introduced by us

into economic life for the purpose of aiding our solution; we

find that, by means of this solution, we explain an otherwise

inexplicable economic contradiction, and our theory receives

thereby no small degree of support and credibility. Or does it

appear no contradiction to say that labour, besides affecting

"its own" return, makes the "return to capital" rise or fall, or

that capital, besides "its own," also affects the "return to

labour"? 





Chapter 7



The Principle of Solution (continued), The Economic Service of

Imputation



    Thanks to the imputation of the "productive contribution,"

every production good, without exception, has ascribed to it a

greater effect than it could obtain through its own powers, No

production good, not even the most powerful of all, labour, could

by itself produce anything; every such good requires the

co-operation of others, and is nothing by itself. On the other

hand, again, every production good without exception, has, thanks

to this imputation, a lesser effect ascribed to it than might be

expected from the degree of dependence in which the complementary

goods stand to it. If we take from a group any element, however

unimportant, so long as it is a necessary and economic element,

not only is its own return lost, but the other elements also are

robbed of a portion of their effect. This holds of labour in its

relation to capital, as well as of capital in its relation to

labour. The well-worn argument, then, that without labour nothing

would bring forth fruit, and that to labour consequently must be

imputed the entire return, is false. Only those who misunderstand

the rules of imputation in everyday use, could employ it. Nothing

is easier than to reduce it to an absurdity by supposing labour

obliged to work without land or capital. 

    The imputation of the productive contribution assigns in this

way to every production good a medium share.(1*) To calculate the

productive contribution, and therefore also the value, at this

medium amount, is sound common sense. It is the only practical

and useful kind of calculation; it justifies its logic by its

utility, The value of production goods should be the controlling

power of production. Now it will be so, most perfectly, if it is

based, according to our standard, on the productive contribution

of these goods. On the other hand, it will be so only imperfectly

or not at all, if we depart from the principle. The sum of all

the contributions is, as we have seen, equal to the value of the

greatest possible total return, and this return will be actually

reached if we demand from each factor a service equal to the

contribution imputed to it. If we do not impute anything to the

means of production, we deprive ourselves of all possibility of

controlling their employment by reference to their value. If we

impute to them either more or less than their actual

"contribution," our control will be at fault, as it will induce

us either to a too limited or a too extensive employment. 

    Perhaps I may be allowed to pursue these ideas still further

into detail. 

    If we did not ascribe any share in the return to labour, nor

yet to land and capital, we should have to use all these without

being in any way guided by their value. If again the whole return

were imputed to labour and none of it to the material

instruments, production would be misled by productive value. Land

and capital would be declared valueless; there would be no need

to consider them at all; whereas labour would be overestimated,

and would, consequently, be far too greatly withheld. The most

overestimated would be that labour which got the most intensive

material assistance, and so gave the absolutely largest returns.

Labour which, in cooperation with a large amount of capital, gave

a total return of 100, would be estimated more highly than labour

of equal amount, but different quality, which, with a tenth part

of the capital, gave a return of 99. Artistic labour, working

without much outside assistance, would have a low valuation,

while plentifully assisted labour, even although unskilled and

mechanical, would have a high valuation. With the former

extravagance might be allowable, while with the latter we should

have to economise. The whole sphere of production would be

dominated at every point by confusion and perversity. 

    The imputation of return to land, capital, and labour,

according to the measure of their respective productive

contributions, is a natural economic dictate; it holds in all

forms of economic life in the communistic state as well as in the

present one. It may -- possibly -- be a just demand that the

whole product be given over to the labourers as personal income;

but in any case, and even should this come to pass, it is an

economic demand that the products be credited to the sources of

the return, according to the contributions which they afford, in

order that we may have a standard for the further employment of

the means of production. 

    It need scarcely be said that there is a limit to the

application of this law. When too large a number of production

goods are grouped together as one unit -- as when theorists talk

of all kinds of labour as "labour," all kinds of capital as

"capital," and all varieties of ground as "land" -- there is no

longer the number of equations necessary for any solution. Of

"land, capital, and labour" there is nothing to be said except

that, together, they bring forth everything; alone, nothing. In

practical life, we have often occasion to look at things in this

wholesale way. But, even if these occasions were more frequent

than they actually are, the individual imputation would not be

any the less necessary. Although production is carried on under

these wholesale modes and conditions required for preparation,

introduction, and security, still, in the conduct of production

it necessarily comes, in the long run, to detailed calculation.

The man who calculates the result most exactly, who measures and

makes a difference as regards even the smallest amounts, will, so

far as it depends on the working out, get the largest total

result; while the poorest will fall to him who estimates things

only in the gross, and in an outward and superficial way. If it

be everywhere a sign and a principle of human advance that we

make more and more minute division and classification of causes,

it must also be so in the great sphere of economic life. If

socialism means to do away with the productive imputation, it

will induce a condition of things worse than that experienced in

the deepest barbarism. The savage knows what he owes to his net,

and what to his bow and arrow, and would be badly off if he did

not know. Happily the same instinct which directs him is

possessed by all men, and no amount of theories will ever make

people neglect to measure the effects of the productive powers in

the way that practical self-interest demands. 

    On the other hand, again, the individual imputation does not

do away with the necessity of considering production as a whole.

The preparation for and introduction of productive labour often

requires, as has been said, very large and wholesale standards,

where it is not sufficient merely to reckon up the productive

contributions. These contributions correspond to the individual

results which emerge where production succeeds. But how if it

does not succeed? How if certain goods are wanting, and the want

retards production, limits it, or even makes it quite impossible?

Then, indeed, we get results from the single good which go far

beyond the amount of its contribution. Then it becomes evident

that the individual good not merely creates "its own return,"

but, besides this, conditions the returns of other goods. The

disturbing power of a want or loss of goods -- the difference

between "contribution" and "co-operation" -- is larger, the

larger the quantity of goods lost. Where, then, there is any

danger of a loss, and especially a loss of wide extent,

individual imputation is not sufficient; it reckons the damage

too low; its only standards have too small a range. In this case

it is necessary to be fully informed concerning the whole circle

of conditions upon which the production depends, and the whole

importance of the co-operation of all the factors. 

    Individual imputation and observation of production as a

whole, although they may lead to different valuations of the same

goods, do not on that account contradict each other, nor cancel

each other. Each valuation can be employed only for its own

purposes. Individual imputation serves, in the carrying out of

production, to measure the economic employment of each portion of

a nation's resources; consideration of production as a whole

serves to guarantee that the production is carried through. The

labour powers of a nation, for instance, must be individually

valued and employed according to the exact amount of their

contributions, while, at the same time, particular care must be

taken to meet the perils which so often all at once threaten the

labour power of individual groups, and indeed of great classes.

Again, the various forms of a nation's capital must be

individually valued and employed according to the measure of

their contributions. At the same time care must be taken that

capital as a whole, and capital in the chief branches of

production, remains and increases in the face of possible danger

and attack. The consideration of production as a whole must thus

aim at securing against all disturbance the essential foundations

of production, and the harmonious relation of its elements. 

    In the economic life of to-day individual imputation devolves

chiefly upon the individual citizen, while consideration of

production as a whole is mainly undertaken by the government. The

former belongs peculiarly to the sphere of private economic

valuation, the latter peculiarly to that of public economic

valuation. Here we only indicate the distinction, leaving more

exact consideration to the last book. 



NOTES:



1. Medium, that is, between the greater and the lesser shares

just mentioned. The share of labour, for instance, is not

determined by the (socialist) consideration that capital without

labour is dead, nor by the (opposite) consideration that labour

without capital is crippled. In becoming organic every element

gains in importance by becoming arbiter of others, but loses as

it puts itself into the same position of dependence upon others.

-- W.S.





Chapter 8



The Principle of Solution (continued). Imputation and the

Marginal Law



    In the case of production goods which are available, not

individually but in stocks, imputation of the productive

contribution follows the marginal law. To each single item or

quantity is imputed the smallest contribution which, under the

circumstances, can be economically aimed at by the employment of

this particular item or quantity -- the "Marginal Contribution"

as I have already called it (Ursprung des Werthes, p. 177), or,

looking at it from a different point of view, the "Marginal

Product." Bohm-Bawerk has drawn attention (Werth, p. 502) to the

fact that this law of exchange value has long been recognised in

the case of certain production goods: -- "Thunen, and all the

body of economic doctrine after him, have taught that the rate of

interest is decided by the productiveness of the last applied

dose of capital, and the rate of wages by the return of the last

labourer employed in the undertaking." Now what is here conceded

to a limited extent holds generally of all production goods, and

for every form of value, as a law of natural valuation. 

    It is self-evident that the marginal law which holds as

regards produced consumption goods, holds also as regards the

goods which produce them. We know that, in every stock of

consumption goods, every unit receives its value from the

marginal utility; thus the value which the products are expected

to have is already adjusted to the marginal level, and the value

of the production goods, as derived from this, is consequently

placed, from the beginning, on the basis of the marginal value.

if the communistic state wish to produce a million new rifles to

one pattern, it will, in the calculations previous to production,

reckon every individual rifle as equal in value; and thus it is,

from the first, impossible that one quantity of metal destined to

make these rifles should obtain a value different from any other

quantity of like amount and quality. If from 1000 productive

units 10,000 units of product are produced, each with a marginal

value of 5 (the total value being exposed by the formula 10,000 x

5 = 50,000), the entire productive stock receives a value of

50,000, and each individual unit will be valued equally at 50.

    While this application of the marginal law to production

goods results indirectly, through the medium of products, we have

to consider a second and direct application. Production goods

which are capable of being employed in many different ways, are

used to create products of various kinds. In each kind, taken by

itself, the value of the product is adjusted to the level of its

particular marginal utility, but we need not expect -- and, in

fact, it would be essentially a mere chance -- that the marginal

amounts of all the different kinds should, when compared with

each other, entirely agree. We have already shown (in Book I.

chap, iv) that only in a limited sense can one speak of a common

level of household economy; and it is only in the same limited

sense that we can speak of a common level of production.

Production stocks must always be employed in such a way as to

bring forward those products which will secure the greatest

possible satisfaction of want. In particular, the destination of

production goods to individual branches of production, -- or,

what is the same thing, the choice of the kind and amount of

goods to be produced, and the investment of labour and capital in

the individual classes and branches of production, -- must always

be weighed and decided with a view to prodding the greatest

possible satisfaction of wants. This does not, however, in the

least imply that products must everywhere have the same marginal

utility. Many products satisfy wants of trifling extent, where

the satiation point is reached very speedily: others again

satisfy wants whose receptive capacity is very great, and where

the scale of satisfaction shows the finest shades of transition

from the stronger intensities of desire downwards. To take as

drastic an example as possible, compare the employment of gold in

the filling of teeth with its employment for purposes of luxury.

The two scales of satisfaction do not in the least correspond

with each other, and it is quite impossible in the two kinds of

employments to keep always exactly to the same marginal amount.

All economic demands are fulfilled when care is taken that goods

of less marginal utility are never produced from production goods

which, if employed in producing other things, might have brought

a higher marginal utility. It may, therefore, very well happen,

and, in the case of all means of production which are capable of

numerous and varied employments, it will always happen, that the

marginal amounts in the different classes of production will

differ from each other. 

    Suppose, for example, that from one stock of iron are

produced three kinds of products, which we may designate as A, B,

and C; that, in kind A, the unit of iron receives a value of 10

-- corresponding with the economically-attainable marginal

utility of 10; -- that in kind B the unit receives a value of 9

-- corresponding with the marginal utility 9; in kind C, a value

of 8 -- corresponding with the marginal utility 8. Here we have a

case where utility, at the stage of the products, is not yet

completely adjusted to the marginal level, and where the

equalisation must first take place directly and at the stage of

the production goods. That the equalisation must ultimately take

place cannot be doubted. It is quite impossible to estimate

one-third of the iron higher than another third; indeed, assuming

it to be all of one quality, there would be no possible way of

deciding which concrete portion of the stock should have the

preference over the rest. So long as any appreciable quantity of

the iron is destined to turn out products with a marginal utility

of 8, no unit of the entire stock can be valued at a higher

return. To every unit in such a case must be imputed the marginal

return of 8, and the value of the entire stock is found by

multiplying the number of units which it contains by the marginal

value 8.(1*)

    The fact that the marginal law applies, partly directly

partly indirectly, to production goods also, first renders it

possible for value actively to fulfil its peculiar economic

service, as the form in which we calculate utility and the means

by which we control it. Compared with stocks of consumption

goods, stocks of production goods are larger, more concentrated,

and more homogeneous. In the household of an individual there are

not many stocks of anything, but the elements which produce

almost all he possesses are accumulated in stocks -- in the hands

of producers sometimes in enormous stocks, -- and thus become

subject to the simplified calculation of value, where the

economic amount of each stock is expressed by a multiple of its

amount and marginal value. And thus, through the law of costs

(see note below), products also are subjected, in great numbers,

to this simplified form of calculation. 

    We constantly see producers making calculations as to their

warehouses, materials, plants, and stocks in this simple way;

namely, by taking the amount and the price of the unit, and

putting down as the total value the amount obtained by

multiplying the one into the other. This observation by itself is

sufficient proof of the wide extent to which the marginal law

obtains in the economy of to-day. Not only are prices decided by

a marginal law, but, by means of prices, the whole sphere of

production, which makes its calculations throughout in terns of

price, is based all through on a marginal valuation. Is it not

worth while to discover what is meant by the application of a

marginal valuation such as this? And is it not satisfactory to

know that the naive form of estimating goods, pursued from time

immemorial in virtue of the original prompting of man's nature,

is a wonder of simplicity and appropriateness? 



NOTES:



1. This is one of the most pregnant applications of the marginal

law; we shall return to it again and again later on, particularly

in the fifth book, where we consider the subject of costs. To

assist our comprehension of the law of costs, we may here

anticipate so much as to say, that the productive marginal value

on its part has a levelling effect upon the value of products. In

the above example the value of the marginal utilities 10 and 9,

in kinds A and B respectively, will be alike pressed down to the

productive marginal amount of 8. 





Chapter 9



The Individual Factors of Imputation. I. -- Supply



    Those things which are always adduced as causing the changes

in the value of production goods, effect this change, in the

first instance, by altering the amount of contribution imputed to

the production goods. We shall now discuss these in turn, and

this may possibly prove the most wearisome part of our task. 

    In the first place we have to notice the available supply.

The larger the available supply of any definite kind of

productive instruments, the less important may and must be the

goods produced -- always supposing that in other respects no

disturbing change of circumstance takes place. If more iron be

raised, iron products of smaller marginal utility may and must be

made. It is inevitable that this result should be attributed to

the material, the iron, and expressed in a lower valuation of its

marginal productive service. It cannot be imputed to any other

factor, such as the labour that cooperates in the production, as

no change has taken place in the circumstances of any other

factor. Of all the equations of return, only those in which iron

occurs have been reduced, those in which labour occurs, expended

on other materials, remaining unaltered; consequently the

calculation is lower for the former, not for the latter. To iron,

therefore, and not to labour, is imputed a smaller share of the

return. If one were to calculate everything as before, or were to

impute to labour the diminished return, the calculation would

defeat its own purpose; one would be calculating as if everything

could be spent as before, or as if labour could be employed with

greater freedom. Neither of these could be allowed. 

    Of all production goods, the smallest contributions must be

imputed to those the supplies of which are most abundant in

comparison with the demand for them. These may be spent most

freely, down to their most insignificant uses. So far as

productive exploitation is concerned, it is desirable that those

goods which are most needed should also be the most abundant, and

should have the smallest contributions imputed to them.(1*)



NOTES:



1. It may be of use to the English reader to note how our

representative English economist expresses similar ideas: --

"Other things being equal, the larger the supply of any agent of

production, the farther will it have to push its way into uses

for which it is not specially fitted, and the lower will be the

demand price with which it will have to be contented in those

uses in which its employment is on the verge or margin of not

being found profitable; and, in so far as competition equalises

the price which it gets in all uses, this price will be its price

for all uses. The extra production resulting from the increase in

that agent of production will go to swell the national dividend,

and other agents of production will benefit thereby; but that

agent itself will have to submit to a lower rate of pay." --

Marshall, Principles of Economics, 2nd edit., p. 565. -- W.S.



Chapter 10



The Individual Factors of Imputation (continued). II. -- Demand

and Complementary Goods



    In the case of goods for immediate consumption, demand and

want coincide: the amount of agricultural produce required for

the full satisfaction of personal want forms the demand for

agricultural produce. It is otherwise with production goods; here

personal want does not always create a demand. If land, of its

own accord and without cultivation, were to bring forth fruits in

superfluity, there would be no demand for agricultural

implements. And likewise, on the other hand, if land refused to

make any return, if all land were waste and barren, there would

be no demand for agricultural implements, there could be no use

for them. A demand for means of production arises only when, on

the one hand, we are obliged to employ them or else go without

what they produce; and when, on the other hand, we can employ

them, inasmuch as we have at our disposal the necessary

complementary goods. So long as the complementary goods are

wanting, we can, at best, speak of a latent demand; the demand is

effective only when we have also acquired the complementary

goods.(1*)

    It follows from this that the effective demand for means of

production must vary, not only when there is a variation in

personal want, but also when there is a variation in the quantity

of complementary goods.(2*) In both directions we must examine

the effect upon the imputation, and thus, in looking at demand in

the case of production goods, we have a far more complicated

causal connection than in the case of consumption goods. We shall

find, however, that the law remains the same for both. The

contribution imputable to production goods always varies with the

demand, just as does the value of consumption goods. If demand

increases, from whatever cause, so does the contribution, and, as

demand sinks, the contribution sinks with it. To prove this in

the shortest manner possible. 

    First: it may be granted that the effective demand rises when

the abundance of complementary goods increases, personal want

remaining the same. Suppose e.g. that the amount of agricultural

capital and available agricultural labour power increase, and

that the effective demand for land also increases thereby,

inasmuch as latent demand becomes active; suppose, that is to

say, that it is now and henceforth possible, -- so far as depends

on complementary goods, -- to cultivate more land and more

completely satisfy want. How will this affect the calculation of

agricultural return? Evidently there are again several cases

which must be distinguished from each other. It may be that the

ground will not permit of any further cultivation, so that, in

spite of increased facilities in capital and labour, production

cannot be extended, -- as might readily happen with vine-growing

land in a specially favourable situation. Or the return may

increase in perfect proportion with the increase of capital and

labour, as we may assume to be possible on the slightly

cultivated land of a new colony. Or, finally -- and this is the

general rule in old countries -- the return may indeed be

increased, but not entirely in proportion to the increase of

complementary goods; here indeed all the new capital and labour

find employment, but with diminished results. 

    Different as these cases are, the final result is the same in

all, although it comes about in a variety of ways. In every case

a larger share of the return will be imputed to the land. 

    (a) If production cannot be extended, the value of the

products remains the same as before, as no reason for change has

emerged. What does change is the distribution of the imputation.

The equation on which, in the above example, is to be calculated

the return of the vine land, of the capital employed upon it, and

of the labour employed upon it, all taken together, remains as it

was. But the added capital and labour must now find employment

elsewhere; must enter into new combinations, either on other

land, or in some trade or industry where they give a smaller

return. Their equations are, therefore, on the whole less

favourable, and the consequence is that the equation, which the

wine production presents, is now solved in a way less favourable

for them. Their marginal productive contribution sinks, and, less

being deducted for capital and labour, the value of the wine

leaves a greater share to the credit of land. Land obtains a

greater share, as it were, by absorption of the effects which can

now no longer be attributed to the complementary goods, inasmuch

as the marginal law requires that these should everywhere be

estimated at the same value, and inasmuch as the common margin of

their possibility of employment has fallen. 

    (b) Where production admits of being extended indefinitely

the total value of the products rises (in the "up grade" of the

movement of value), although the single product may lose in

value. The equations of return are more favourable equally for

all factors concerned, and the greater total return gives,

equally to land, capital and labour, an absolutely greater share.



    (c) Where production can be only partially extended we have a

combination of both results. The contribution credited to land

experiences a double augmentation, one due to increased

utilisation, and the other to the reduced valuation of the

auxiliary means employed. 

    Second: the effective demand rises when personal want

increases, complementary wealth remaining the same. Here the

matter is very simple. The figures of the ratio which decide the

distribution of return remain unaltered, but the value of the

return has risen. The consequence is that the same quota has an

absolutely greater value. 

    Every-day experience makes the changes of relation, which we

have just pointed out between the co-operating factors of

production, sufficiently familiar to every one who knows about

exchange value. Every undertaker knows that it is to his

advantage when the auxiliary means he employs come upon the

market in larger quantities, whether it be because they are being

more largely produced, or because there is less use for them in

other directions. He can now extend his business, or make more

out of it, by spending less upon the auxiliary means of

production he requires, while the return remains unaltered. Every

undertaker, on the other hand, knows that it is to his

disadvantage when the auxiliary means he employs become scarcer

in the market, or, what amounts to the same thing, are drawn off

in larger quantities by other branches of production. In the

communistic state entirely similar calculations will require to

be made, in order to estimate correctly the mutual effects of the

complementary goods on each other. Assuming the circumstances

just mentioned, a vineyard, even in the communistic state, would

inevitably be more highly valued wherever the auxiliaries towards

its cultivation came forward in greater quantity, or were less

freely employed in other directions: and it would certainly be

estimated at a lower figure wherever the auxiliaries towards its

cultivation were more highly valued, either on account of a

diminished amount of them coming forward, or of their increased

employment in other directions. Further, its share in the return

would sink to zero whenever the auxiliary means of its

cultivation were so highly valued that their contributions

equalled the whole return of wine; and its cultivation would have

to be given up entirely whenever it became impossible to meet

these contributions out of the return of wine. 

    Should any one factor of production, be it land, capital, or

labour, come more freely into our disposal, the natural rules of

imputation require that all the others obtain a higher valuation;

as they also require that all the factors be more highly valued

if there should be an all-round increase of personal want. 



NOTES:



1. See on this point Menger, p. 39.



2. Compare with this Marshall's Principles, p. 563: -- "In the

account given of the demand for the several agents of production,

it was indicated that the ultimate demand for each depended on

the co-operation of the others in raising the joint product of

their labour; or, to state the case even more broadly, that the

demand for each is in a great measure governed by the supply of

the others." -- W.S.





Chapter 11



The Individual Factors of Imputation (continued). III. --

Technique





    Technique is the art of making the best use of productive

instruments. Every advance in technique improves either the

quantity or the quality of products. Even a so-called

"labour-saving" machine acts in the long run like an intensified

utilisation. By dispensing with another productive instrument at

a certain point or for the present, it preserves it for other or

later employments. 

    Improvement in the quality of products raises their value.

Multiplication of their quantity certainly diminishes the value

of the individual product, but at the same time (in the "up

grade" of value, which, for the sake of brevity, we shall alone

consider at present) increases the sum of value of all the

products taken together. Technical improvements have, therefore,

this result, that the known quantities, in the equations of

return by which the contributions of the production goods are to

be calculated, are put higher, while the unknown quantities

remain the same. Thus, according to circumstances, the

contributions of all the factors, or simply of individual factors

in the production in question, will be raised; it frequently

happens, however, that the circumstances are such that the

contributions of certain factors must be calculated at less. 

    What happens, for example, when some expedient to reduce cost

is introduced into a kind of production incapable of further

extension -- say, the production of wine in a limited area

already cultivated to the utmost extent? The return of wine

remains the same, and its value remains the same, but to the

vineyard must be imputed a larger share of the return than

formerly, because it has to share it with a smaller number of

productive factors. The elements of production thus saved can and

will find another employment; they increase the supply available

for other purposes while the demand for such purposes remains the

same. The final result is consequently a reduction of their

productive contribution. The same is true of all means of

production which have been driven from their former employments

by reason of technical improvements. The familiar effect of

labour-saving machinery is that it makes wages fall; and this

arises from the fact that, in the first instance, it reduces the

contribution of labour. Even in the communistic state this part

of the effect would emerge. The more labour could be replaced by

machinery, the more labour power would there be left to dispose

of; and the less remunerative the employments to which it would

be devoted. If formerly it had been a mistake to devote it to

such employments, it would now be a mistake not to do so. The

role of labour in production would have altered; it would take

another position; and other effects would have to be imputed to

it, if the imputation is to be based on natural principles, --

that is, principles which promote the most advantageous

employment possible. 

    In all cases where production is limited by certain specific

elements, the chief advantage obtained by improvement of

technique is ascribed to these elements. Means of production

which have a more extensive employment are but little affected by

changes in individual branches of production; only those

technical improvements which affect all, or a greater part of

their employments, are of much importance to them, since it is

only in these cases that the equations of return are noticeably

altered in their favour. The improvement in means of transport,

which brought with it the increased utilisation of an enormous

number of industries, is an example of a comprehensive technical

improvement which actually had the power to raise the returns of

almost all means of production. 

    Every change in technical art naturally calls for a certain

change in the plan of production, a certain rearrangement in the

disposal and destination of our productive resources. Other

results seem now the more attractive; other products are now the

marginal products. The rapid development of industry in the

course of the present century has attracted many labourers from

agricultural to industrial pursuits. This transference, which was

a very serious matter to the landowners since, among other

things, it compelled them to pay the labourers they had left at

the higher rate given by the manufacturers, was entirely

beneficial for production generally. It removed the labourers

from occupations which brought them little, but were, however, in

the absence of anything more remunerative, permissible up till

that time, into others in which they could assess their powers at

a higher contribution. If in the communistic state a similar

phenomenon should ever come in the train of technical

development, it also would require to be met by a similar

transference of capital and labour, the measure for which would

be obtained by observation of the marginal productive

contributions. 



Chapter 12



The Individual Factors of Imputation (continued). IV. -- The

Imputation to Cost Goods and to Monopoly Goods



    What has been said as to the influence of supply, of demand,

and of technique, gives sufficient evidence that, in the

imputation of return, there is a certain category of production

goods particularly favoured, and another peculiarly prejudiced.

The line of division, however, which separates these two

categories cannot be drawn with any great strictness; the

transferences from one group to the other are imperceptible; the

grouping changes with the change of circumstances; and, even

within the separate groups, there is the same division. Goods

which are favoured above many others may nevertheless be quite

the reverse in comparison with just as many more. 

    The first group is composed of those goods to which attaches

a natural monopoly (as opposed to a legal monopoly).

Characteristic of this group is the comparative rarity of such

goods as compared with the demand for them, or, it may be, the

comparatively small quantity that can be produced. As examples of

goods which have pronouncedly the character of monopoly may be

mentioned the following; -- scarce raw materials, land

exceptionally situated, the work of one peculiarly gifted, --

particularly an artist or scientific worker of the highest rank,

-- a secret and at the same time successful process (or, more

exactly, the exclusive knowledge of such a process, whereby the

persons who have it obtain a preference over others), and,

finally, works of human hands, which, on account of their size,

or on account of technical difficulties, cannot be repeated. 

    Goods which belong to the second group may be called "Cost

Goods," inasmuch as they are the elements in the calculations of

cost.(1*) They are goods easily accessible and abundant, or goods

whose production can be indefinitely increased. The following

goods have markedly this character; -- unskilled labour, coal,

wood, the common metals, and also land devoted to industrial

undertakings where there is no question of any particular

advantage in situation. Things which are to be had in superfluity

are not counted among cost goods; indeed they are not reckoned

among economic goods at all. While monopoly goods are specific

elements of individual industries, cost goods are the common

cosmopolitan and indispensable powers and materials of

production. 

    Articles whose making requires no monopoly goods may be

produced, comparatively to others, in the largest quantities; on

the other hand, those will be produced in the smallest quantities

which demand productive factors of a peculiarly marked monopoly

character, even although cost goods, subject to very little

limitation, should be employed along with them. Assuming equal

wants, then, the value of goods produced under monopoly must, by

reason of their small available quantity, stand comparatively

high; and consequently, to monopoly goods, as compared with cost

goods, must generally be imputed a contribution of higher value.

This is the first advantage which monopoly goods enjoy. In the

course of economic development, however, many other advantages

accrue to them, as the development itself accentuates the gulf

which naturally exists between them. 

    In the ordinary course of economic history the available

supply of many monopoly goods increases but slowly, or not at

all, -- in many cases, indeed, it becomes smaller; whereas the

available supply of many cost goods increases rapidly and

uninterruptedly. We have here two causes which widen the

difference between the two imputations, inasmuch as the

contribution imputed varies for every good in inverse ratio to

the change in its supply, and in direct ratio to the change in

complementary wealth. Now in the ordinary course of economic

history, wants are continually increasing, and the numbers of

those who want are continually increasing, while, at the same

time, technique is always becoming more perfect. Both of these

facts create a tendency towards raising the value of production

goods. This tendency affects monopoly goods unreservedly, but, in

the case of cost goods, on the other hand, it is frequently

outweighed, -- either immediately or after a certain lapse of

time, -- by the opposing tendency which comes from their

increase. Generally speaking, cost goods gain only by such rises

in the value of return as are wide-reaching enough to extend

beyond the sphere of one single industry. Rises in value which

are confined to individual branches of production are completely

absorbed, as we have shown (Book III. chapters x, and xi) by the

specific elements in that branch, by the monopoly goods. And even

should there be no such elements -- as sometimes happens -- an

increase of value in one particular industry has comparatively

little effect upon elements which are simultaneously employed in

a great many. 

    Although cost goods are thus prejudiced in the calculation of

the return, they have nevertheless the strongest influence on the

result of production and its regulation, and, consequently also,

on the basis of imputation. They are the goods of universal

diffusion -- the goods which are to be found in every market;

they form the majority of goods, and build up generally the body

economic. Monopoly goods must conform more to circumstances made

for them; the using of them changes constantly with the change in

the general economic conditions, for it rises and falls with

them, just as the level of a stream when it runs below ground

rises and falls with the level above. Thus, practically, it would

seem to come to this; that the imputation of the share due to the

monopoly goods is made only after that due to the cost goods is

finished. The shares due to cost goods are always first deducted

from the total return of production, and the residue then falls

to the monopoly goods. But closer consideration shows the matter

to be somewhat different. It is only in the individual case that

such a calculation can be made. In the totality of cases it is

impossible to overlook the influence of monopoly goods upon the

ordinary formation and imputation of return. This influence is in

part an indirect one, inasmuch as great quantities of cost goods

are employed in monopoly productions, whereby the marginal

productive return of the monopoly goods must be indirectly

affected; and it is in part direct, inasmuch as through the

results of monopoly productions, value equations are furnished,

which are indispensable to the total valuation. 

    Monopoly goods have often received a quite peculiar position

in theory. Ricardo, for example, teaches that they owe their

value altogether to their scarcity, while all other goods receive

their value from the labour of producing them. A sufficiently

wide consideration, however, shows that monopoly goods come

altogether under the ordinary conditions of valuation, and differ

from other economic goods only in that they display much more

strikingly the character common to all.(2*)



NOTES:



1. See below, Book V.



2. In the second note to Book III. chap. iv. reference was made

to the present chapter, stating that it would there be shown

that, without taking into account the distinction to which

Bohm-Bawerk has drawn special attention, and which deals with the

opposition between monopoly goods and cost goods, the subject

could not be finally settled. The importance of the distinction

ought by this time to have become clear. The reader will remember

that, in distribution as Menger would have it, there is an

"undivided residue." Now, in every combination, this "undivided

residue" falls, for the greater part, to that good which

possesses most strongly the character of a monopoly.

Consequently, where a pronounced monopoly good is combined with

pronounced cost goods, the "undivided residue" is imputed to the

monopoly good; where cost goods alone are combined it is imputed

to that good which most nearly resembles the monopoly goods; and,

lastly, where several monopoly goods are combined it is imputed

to that one which most distinctly bears the monopoly character. 

    It must be noted, however, that only the greater part, not

the whole, of the "undivided residue" is to be imputed to the

good in question. Some part of it -- although often a most

trifling and indeed practically indistinguishable part -- must

always be ascribed to the other co-operating goods, as all of

these experience a certain increased utility from the maintenance

of the combination, while the dispersing of it would destroy that

plan of production which is regarded as best. The share to be

ascribed to the other co-operating goods will be the greater, the

more the maintenance of the above-mentioned combination is

dependent upon them -- i.e. the more they themselves possess the

character of monopoly goods, and the less they possess that of

cost goods. A scarce good will, as a rule, be more seriously

affected by a trifling change of productive destination than one

that is less scarce; as was explained in the text, there must be

considerable alterations in demand and supply before the value of

goods which are most distinctively cost goods, shows a

corresponding change. 

    The difference, therefore, between "contribution" and

"co-operation" remains fundamentally clear for all cases,

although practically it does not come to much, and, so long as

only units of goods are concerned, need for the most part

scarcely be taken into account. So much the more important is it

when we are examining the influence that larger quantities of

production goods have upon the amount of productive return. 

    In this sense I had, in the Ursprung des Werthes, although

only by way of suggestion, already disposed of the problem of

"complementarity." There I stated that to production goods must

be imputed their "marginal productive contribution," while, to

the "specific productive factors belonging to individual

productions" falls the residue of return, after deducting the

quotas of all supplementary goods. The only matters omitted were:

what would happen were several monopoly goods combined together,

and an exact formulation of the law for calculating the

contributions. 





Chapter 13



The Individual Factors of Imputations (continued). V -- The

Imputation to Productive Factors of Preferable Quality



    Of two production goods of the same kind, that one possesses

the better quality which shows the greater "rentability" -- to

use a clumsy but convenient German expression. In other words, it

is that good which, when co-operating with the same amount of

complementary goods, gives a return of higher value; -- whether

it be that the higher value of the return arises from more being

produced, or from what is produced being of a better or

preferable quality. In what follows, for brevity's sake, we shall

consider only the former case. 

    If we possessed several production goods which, in this

specially limited sense, were of different qualities, we should

undoubtedly, in the production, employ the goods of poorer

quality only when the supply of better ones was not sufficient

for the demand; and the share of return which fell to the better

goods would, of course, be higher than that which fell to the

poorer ones, by an exactly ascertainable quota. According as the

better means of production, when working along with an equal

addition of complementary goods, produce a greater total return,

the value equation becomes more favourable to them by the whole

amount of the surplus return. Their productive contribution is

equal to that of the poorer quality plus this surplus return.

Should the poorer goods be present in superfluous amount and so

have no contribution imputed to them, the contribution of the

better goods alone will be credited with the surplus return.

Experience confirms these propositions in thousands of ways; they

answer to the economic observation of everybody. 

    Some economists who have paid very little attention to the

laws of complementarity in general, have shown extraordinary

earnestness in discussing this particular case. Ricardo, in his

theory of land rent, deals with the advantage obtained from

greater natural fertility in the case of agricultural lands, or

the greater productiveness of mines. Then he goes on to the

advantage, as regards return, which industrial capital first

expended has, as against the increments of capital which follow.

His theory of land rent was amplified by pointing out that rent

of land is influenced also by its situation, i.e. by its distance

from the market for its product. Finally it has been shown that

the "rentability" of land in towns, and also that of capital and

labour, is graduated in the same way as that of agricultural

land, and that the opportunity of obtaining for the better

quality a greater rent -- a surplus return and a surplus value --

occurs as often in the one case as in the other. 

    These theoretic statements all relate to price, but they hold

equally as regards the theory of value. The more fertile land,

the land which lies nearer to the sphere of demand, the more

skilled labourer, the more capable machine, are not only more

highly paid, but have imputed to them as well, on account of

their better quality, a comparatively greater share in the

return, -- which, indeed, is the cause of their being more highly

paid. In the communistic state, too, calculation will be made in

the same way. The more fertile or more conveniently situated land

will be cultivated before any other land, and, should other and

poorer land require to be cultivated, the better qualities will

be more highly valued in exact proportion to their surplus

return. 



PART II: NATURAL LAND RENT



Chapter 14



Ricardo's Differential Rent: The First Part



    Ricardo, in his famous Principles, takes up what we may call

Contract rent, the rent which emerges when an owner lets his

land. It is generally granted that the law of this kind of rent

is true also, in all essential respects, of that income which the

owner of the land could obtain without letting it, by selling its

products. What has been said as to imputation has probably shown

that the analogy must be carried still further. The personal

income which land yields is, in the last resort, dependent upon

the fact that the land in question yields a return such that,

after the shares of capital and labour are deducted, there

remains a share which must, on natural laws, be imputed to the

land. The problem of land rent, conceived of primarily as a

problem of division of income, in the last resort contains also a

problem of distribution of return. As a problem of distribution

of return it will emerge in the communistic state just as it does

under existing social conditions, and in both cases the solution

is fundamentally the same. 

    Ricardo begins his statement with a disquisition upon

primitive historical conditions. So long as population is thin,

and it is unnecessary to cultivate even all its rich and fertile

land in order to provide food, no single piece of land can obtain

a rent. Who "would pay for the use of land when there was an

abundant quantity not yet appropriated, and, therefore, at the

disposal of whosoever might choose to cultivate. it"? Should,

however, population increase to a degree which necessitates the

cultivation of land of the second quality, rent immediately

commences on that of the first quality. Land of the second

quality would require a greater expenditure of costs, in order to

produce the same return as that of the first quality; it can

therefore be cultivated only when the increased demand has raised

the price of agricultural produce enough to cover the necessary

costs. But this price leaves a surplus to land of the first

quality, according to the saving of costs which it allows. If,

further, land of the third quality requires to be cultivated, a

rent emerges for that of the second quality, while the rent for

land of the first quality is increased; and thus every new and

poorer quality which is pressed into use creates a rent for those

above it, measured by the difference in quality. 

    To put it into exact figures. Suppose the value of wheat is

40s. per quarter, and that, with an expenditure of ?00, the

cultivation of a piece of land



 of the 1st quality produce a return of 120 qrs with a value of

?40

 of the 2nd quality produce a return of 100 qrs with a value of

?00

 of the 3rd quality produce a return of  80 qrs with a value of

?60



a private owner will confine himself to the cultivation of the

two better classes of land, and will calculate to himself from

the first class a rent of ?0. 

    In the communistic state the result will be the same,

granting the same assumptions. So long as land of the first class

is to be had in superfluity, or is "free," no share in the return

which it helps to produce will be imputed to it. And why? Because

people have still the choice as to which of the many lands of

equal quality they will cultivate, and because they are dependent

upon no single one of these. Land of the second quality is

cultivated only when that of the first is all under cultivation,

and when, at the same time, the demand for land produce has risen

sufficiently to meet the increased cost. When, by the higher

value of the return, however, the increased cost on the second

class of land has been thus covered, there remains to the first

class a surplus which must be attributed to the land as rent. The

land and its better quality are indeed the "cause" of the surplus

return. It is impossible to derive the surplus from the cost

goods, seeing that similar amounts and qualities of costs have

been spent on both classes of land. A very simple negative proof

will confirm the propriety of this method of imputation. Suppose

a piece of first-class land be left uncultivated, the surplus

return will immediately, disappear. the cost goods will be

incapable of reproducing it elsewhere, because there is no other

piece of land of the same quality to take its place. There is no

lack of practical opportunity to establish this conclusion. In

every question as to the utilising of such lands we have to be

fully apprised that they guarantee such and such rent if properly

cultivated, and that this rent will have to be given up if they

are left entirely uncultivated or used in some other way. If e.g,

we have to make a road, we shall soon know that it leads through

lands of the first quality by its costing extra the whole amount

of the rent. But why multiply examples? If we are to calculate at

all in production, it must be in this way. Were we to refrain

from reckoning the differential rent, it would mean that we

disregarded the circumstance that land, as a matter of fact, is

of different degrees of fertility; it would mean that we were

quite indifferent whether we got much return or little.

    In the inventory of the communistic state the lands of better

quality will be entered at an amount corresponding to the

capitalisation of their rents. The agricultural officials will

require to be made responsible for the return of a rent from

these better lands corresponding to their quality. In fact, in

all those connections it will be impossible for the communistic

state to act differently from any large landowner of the present

day, who tries to manage his property economically, and to have

an effectual control over his servants. 



Chapter 15



Ricardo's Differential Rent: The Second Part





    There is a second Part to Ricardo's theory which is

frequently overlooked, although it is really the more important.

From the very nature of land every piece of it has powers of

different quality. Just as only the best lands are at first taken

up, so are only the best powers in each piece of land. Of these

powers the poorest class -- so long as this class is in excess of

the demand -- gives no rent, and the better classes give a net

differential rent. 

    In this second part of Ricardo's theory also, the natural

principles of imputation are found to be in perfect agreement

with the rules he has laid down for the formation of contract

rent. This may be best shown by an example. Say, as before, that

the quarter of wheat brings 40s. Then a certain piece of land,

according as it is cultivated at a greater or smaller outlay in

capital and labour, will produce the following returns: -- 



 to a first ?00 of expenses the return is 120 qrs. and the value

?40

 to a second ?00 of expenses the return is 100 qrs. and the

value ?00

therefore to ?00 of expenses the return is 220 qrs. and the

value ?40

 to a third ?00 of expenses the return is  80 qrs. and the value

?60

therefore to ?00 of expenses the return is 300 qrs. and the

value ?00



Under these circumstances a private owner will find it

advantageous to expend only ?00. He gains thereby a return of

?0; and, instead of sinking the third ?00 in his land and

gaining a return of only ?60, he will do better to employ it in

some other direction, where it may give its full possible return

of ?00. From the ?40 return thus obtained, he reckons ?00 as

the costs; the remaining ?0 he can claim, and the tenant can

pay, as rent. Just so must the communistic state make its

calculations according to these natural principles of valuation.

There, too, natural principles will demand that only ?00 be sunk

in the land, and that the surplus of ?0 thus earned be imputed

to the land as rent.(1*) 

    The differential rent received from preferable powers of the

soil may be called the "Intensity Rent," because it emerges and

rises according as the land is cultivated intensively. This

"intensity rent," according as Ricardo conceives of it, might

quite well be a universal rent for all the lands of a country, or

of the whole world, supposing them to be all cultivated with

sufficient intensity. Ricardo's differential theory in no way

requires -- as is often said -- the existence of no rent land. It

is sufficient if there are no rent powers in the soil. 

    It need scarcely be said that "intensity rents" must receive

as exact consideration from the economist as the rent of better

lands. It is perhaps unnecessary to say anything further on this

point. 



NOTES:



1. If ?00 were sunk a total of ?00 would indeed be received in

return, but none the less would there be a loss of ?0 on the

third two hundred. If only ?00 were sunk, and the surplus of ?0

were imputed not to the land, but to the capital or to the

labour, we should make two mistakes, each contradicting the

other. Firstly, the land, as such, would be declared to yield no

return. The practical conclusion would be that it ought not to be

cultivated, and that the capital and labour should be otherwise

employed, in which case the whole ?0 would be lost. Secondly,

this application of capital and labour would be shown to be

peculiarly profitable -- the practical conclusion of which would

be that it would appear permissible to sink even more capital in

the land. But this ought not to be done, as ?00 is the highest

expenditure economically permissable. The land rent of ?0 is,

therefore, the rational expression of the most advantageous

disposition of production.





Chapter 16



Criticism of Ricardo's Theory



    According to what is certainly the most usual opinion, the

differential rent of better lands, or of better powers of land,

is to be explained simply by the fact that there are not

sufficient of such to meet the demand; that, in fact, as is

frequently said, they "have a monopoly." But it may easily be

seen that this is not sufficient for an explanation. We must add

two other assumptions. 

    First, the lands or powers of land last taken into

cultivation must be available in superfluous amount. In order

e.g, that first quality lands may bear a differential rent, not

only must these lands be insufficient to meet the demand, but

there must be besides them "free" lands of the second quality.

The limitation or "monopoly" of first-class lands is the

proximate occasion of rent, and rent would emerge in any case,

even if there should be no other qualities of land. Then the

interposition of second-class lands, which are more than enough

to meet the demand, and are consequently rentless, has the effect

of keeping down the rent of first-class lands -- which night

otherwise rise indefinitely -- to the amount of difference

existing between the qualities of the two. If second-class lands

were not "free," they also would bear rent; and this rent, again,

could only be kept down to the differential rent through the

intervention of a third class. In short, if there is to be a net

differential rent, there must be a last, rentless, and therefore

"free" category of lands (or powers of land) alongside the better

and limited ones. There must be both limitation and superfluity

of land. 

    Second, there must also be "monopoly" of capital and labour.

Why does any one prefer the better classes of land? Because on

them capital and labour prove more productive. But why should it

be of consequence that capital and labour prove more productive?

Because, as a general rule, we do not have enough of either. If

it were quite a matter of indifference what return was obtained

from definite amounts of capital and labour, because it was

always possible to make up any deficiency by employing other

quantities of the same, it would also be a matter of indifference

from which class of land they got their return -- assuming, of

course, that there was never any scarcity of at any rate the

poorest quality of land. And if, in face of such superfluity of

the poorest class of land, the better and best classes are marked

out and preferred, it is because man has to economise his labour

and capital. The differential rent measures exactly the advantage

which the better and best classes of land secure in the

accomplishment of that task. 

    Thus we see that, wherever a net differential rent exists,

land is partially limited (in the better and best classes),

partially over-abundant (in the poorer classes), while capital

and labour are always limited.(1*) To have overlooked this

circumstance is the first defect in Ricardo's theory. He states

positively that the amount of labour (and under this he includes

capital), which may be expended in production can be had, as a

rule, for the asking -- may be increased at will; while the

rent-bearing classes of land are to be had only in limited

amounts. This defect is connected with another and still greater

one and one that applies not to Ricardo alone; he has no general

theory of economy, of value, and of imputation. All his ingenuity

is expended upon details, such, for example, as the explanation

of land rent, and this in itself shows that these details can

only have been looked at and conceived of in a one-sided fashion.



    A further defect of the differential theory is that it does

not suffice for all cases. It sometimes happens that even the

last cultivated lands, or powers of land, return a rent, and for

this Ricardo has no explanation, or, to speak more exactly, no

law. Whenever the demand for land products has increased to such

an extent that the class of land last taken into cultivation is

not sufficient to meet it, while, at the same time, the value of

the land products has not risen sufficiently to permit of a new

and still lower class being put under the plough, the last

cultivated land returns a rent, although it becomes differential

only when the next class of land has actually been put under

cultivation. And when all the classes of land have been

exhausted, and cultivation in general cannot be further extended,

there emerges a universal land rent, -- universal not only for

all lands (for in this sense the "intensity rent" might be a

universal one), but even for all powers of land. This case -- of

the impossibility of extending cultivation -- occurs more

frequently than one would think. It is not, as would seem at

first sight, a thing to be expected at the very end of the

historical development of economic life, when the whole earth is

over-populated. It belongs rather to the normal phenomena which

occur in the course of this development. Indeed it is just as

regards the past that it can be established with perfect

certainty; while prophecies of what is to come must always be

uncertain, and can never be made with scientific exactitude. A

slight consideration will suffice to make this clear. 

    Land and capital, so far as regards the conditions under

which they are acquired, appear to stand in complete opposition

to each other. All capital, with trifling exceptions, has been

worked for by human hands, and the sum of capital is always

increasing and is capable of indefinite increase. All land, on

the other hand (with exceptions which are quite insignificant as

compared with the whole) has been in existence from the

beginning, and it is practically impossible for human power to

extend its compass -- so at least a geographer or physicist would

have to say. But can we say so economically? Certainly not.

Economically speaking, man has not from the first had command

over the whole solid surface of the earth and its treasures.

Starting with a very insignificant portion of it, the sphere of

his control has extended at a rate which scarcely comes behind

the increase of his capital. The limits of his power are not yet

reached, and he would be a bold man who would say when they must

be reached, and where their limits lie. Looked at economically,

there is always available to him only so much superficies and so

much fruitful soil as he has the means and the knowledge to

utilise. The development of agricultural skill and technique

generally, the employment of manures, growth of population,

emigration, scientific discovery, the spread of commerce, the

perfecting of the means of transport, increase of wealth in

capital and labour -- all these have gradually increased landed

property to an enormous extent. To the hunter belongs only the

surface of the ground; to the peasant who forces his plough down

into it belongs also its interior, and the deeper the plough

goes, so much more of the land comes into the service of man. In

our own time, indeed, the amount of land in far-away countries

which is at the disposal of European consumption, has increased

in a degree that is alarming to European agriculturists. If we

look back on the past, we might almost believe that it has been

quite the same with land as with capital; -- that at first the

provision of it was very scanty, and that later it has gone on

richly and steadily increasing. Certainly the error which this

opinion betrays would be no greater than that betrayed by the

commonly held opinion that land is quite incapable of being

increased. In any case, there can be no doubt of one thing. It is

conceivable that a time may arrive when all land available for

economic purposes has been taken up, and that, notwithstanding,

at some later period, so much new land, economically speaking,

may come into the world's possession, that a much greater

population may be maintained upon it, without even touching the

limits of subsistence. And has this conceivable case never been

an actual fact? Have we not accounts, handed down to us from

primeval times, of overpopulation and emigration caused by urgent

want? Has not the spectre of hunger haunted every land and every

people on the face of the earth, and is it not the case that only

the most highly cultured of nations, at the height of their

development, have been able to escape from its terror?

    Still, however that may be, even supposing it has never

actually happened that the limits of cultivation have been

reached, -- a theory which cannot bring the case of a "universal"

land rent under a law remains an inadequate theory. If we have no

law for the assumed case that all lands and powers of land bear

rent, we have no law for the undeniable fact that all

economically employed labour and capital yield a return; we can

say absolutely nothing more than that the better qualities of

goods have more imputed to them by the amount of their surplus

return. We are incapable of learning what shares are to be

imputed to the common qualities, which constitute the majority of

production goods. The law of a universal land rent, and the

universal law of imputation, are identical, and a theory which

has no formula for the former confesses its utter inability to

solve the problem of the valuation of production goods

generally.(2*) 



NOTES:



1. Among the trees of a primeval forest which have, as a rule, no

value, because they are available in superfluity, there are

nevertheless some which may receive value; all those, namely,

which have peculiar advantages as regards felling and carrying to

market -- say, e.g., that they stand in the near neighbourhood of

a natural watercourse. Their value is exactly represented by the

saving in costs -- saving of labour and transit -- which they

assure as compared with the trees less favourably situated, to

which no value is attached. Here is a capital which bears a

perfect analogy to Ricardo's differential rent from lands of

preferable quality. Even to the pure "intensity" rent there are

analogies in capital. The sheep on the plains of South America do

not receive value in their entire useful content -- I mean a

value corresponding to the entire usefulness of similar sheep in

Europe, or any other district of great demand -- but only in that

portion of the same -- say, perhaps, the hides -- which repays

the costs of transport to the sphere of the greater demand. The

remaining part is meantime valueless, but may also receive value

through an increase in demand. It is easy to infer from these

examples the conditions for a purely differential rent. 



2. A further fundamental defect in Ricardo's theory may be

pointed out;that he has omitted to notice the reaction of land

rent upon the return to capital and labour. Rent is certainly

dependent upon the current valuations of cost, but, on the other

hand, the valuations of cost are dependent upon rent, if not in

the same degree. The return reckoned to capital and labour is

essentially influenced by the amount of capital and labour which

is required for working the land, and by the returns which they

yield in so doing. 

    Finally, Ricardo might also be accused of having overlooked

the universal importance of the differential valuation (compare

Book III, chap. xiii). Even purely differential valuations may be

met with elsewhere than in the case of land, as we saw by the

examples just given of wood in a primeval forest and of the herds

of cattle in South America. But of course it is in the case of

land that we oftenest find the relation which leads to a net

differential valuation of the preferable qualities: viz.

quantitative superfluity as a whole beside quantitative

limitation as regards the best and better qualities. Compare with

this Menger, p. 143. 



PART III



THE NATURAL RETURN TO CAPITAL



Chapter 17



The Productivity of Capital



    Land being permanent and indestructible, it is not a matter

of surprise that it should continue yielding, year after year,

that return which it yields in one year. And if we designate a

continually-recurring return as "rent," the rent of land requires

no special explanation. It is much the same with the fact that

human labour is source of a permanent return. In the case of a

healthy person, labour power is renewed constantly after pauses

for rest and refreshment. 

    On the other hand, it is a matter for wonder to find that the

perishable powers of the soil, and all the movable means of

production, raw materials, auxiliary materials, implements,

tools, machinery, buildings, and other productive apparatus and

plant, which are consumed, quickly or slowly, in the service of

production, are sources of permanent returns, -- returns which

are constantly renewed, although the first factors of their

production may have been long before used up. This brings us face

to face with one of the most important and difficult problems of

economic theory; with the question, namely, how we are to explain

the fact that capital yields a net return.(1*)

    All capital yields, proximately and directly, only a gross

return; that is to say, a return purchased by a diminution of the

parent capital. The condition under which this gross return may

be the source of a net return is very easily formulated. In the

gross return must be found newly produced all the consumed

capital, and beyond this there must be a certain surplus. This

surplus will be net return; -- a return which may, permanently

and without diminution of the parent capital, be obtained and

consumed. 

    If now we ask whether this condition is actually fulfilled,

we find, in the first place, that the nature of capital does

permit of it. If capital is, on the one side, perishable, on the

other, it is reproducible. It serves for production and it is

produced. Is it, however, produced in sufficient quantity, and

produced from capital itself in sufficient quantity, to fully

replace what has been consumed, and leave a surplus beyond?

Before trying to answer this question I should like to make one

observation of a formal nature. 

    Capitals which yield gross return may undoubtedly be

designated "productive goods" on this account alone. They

certainly produce; they transform themselves from an unfinished

form of goods to a finished one, or to one that comes nearer a

finished one. It is, however, preferable to speak of capital as

productive only when it yields a net return. And in this sense

exclusively we shall understand the "Productivity of capital."

    As Bohm-Bawerk has shown, productivity may be either physical

productivity or value productivity. It is important that this

distinction should be clearly kept before us. Physical

productivity exists where the amount of goods which form the

gross return is greater than the amount of capital goods

destroyed; and in the foregoing deduction of the conceptions of

gross and net return we have assumed this physical productivity.

Value productivity exists where the value of the gross return is

greater than the value of the capital consumed. The task of our

theory is, in the last resort, to prove the value productivity of

capital; but for this purpose it is necessary first to prove the

fact of physical productivity, as the scaffolding on which the

other rests. The value productivity already presupposes the

determination of the value of capital, but the value of capital

can only be determined when the question of how to impute the

physical return has been answered, because the value of capital

rests on the share of return imputed to it. Just as the rent must

first be ascertained before the value of any land can be

calculated, and just as, generally speaking, the rules of

imputation must be recognised before the value of production

goods can be determined, so must also the imputation of the

return to capital first be settled before we can take up the

problem of its value. In pursuance of our division of the

subject, we have meanwhile only the problem of the physical

productivity of capital to deal with. 

    There is no doubt that the total return of all three

productive factors, land, capital, and labour, taken together, is

large enough to replace the capital consumed, and give a net

return. This is a notorious economic fact, and as little in need

of proof as the fact that there are such things as goods, or such

a thing as production. Of course, now and then, a productive

undertaking may be unsuccessful, and fail to cover its outlay;

indeed many undertakings furnish no usable product whatever. But

these are exceptions. The rule is that net returns are obtained,

-- indeed, net returns of such enormous magnitude, that not only

can the millions of human beings be supported, but capital can go

on accumulating out of the surpluses. 

    There remains, therefore, but one thing to ask -- whether a

share in this undoubted net return can be imputed to the factor

capital. But the question can not be put seriously. Why to

capital alone should no such share be imputed? Once understood

and granted that capital is one of the economic factors of

production, to which, with the others, the productive return is

ascribed (Book III. chap. iii), it is also understood and granted

that to it belongs by right a share in the net return in which

the productive return first embodies itself. Are we to suppose

that capital is always in a position to produce only somewhat

less than replace itself? This would obviously be an arbitrary

supposition. Are we, then, to suppose it capable only of

replacing its own loss, however various the success of production

may be? This supposition would clearly be no less arbitrary.

Whoever denies net return to capital can only do so by denying it

any return. 

    I should fear to repeat myself were I to bring forward any

formal proof of the fact that capital does have a share in the

productive net return. I shall content myself with mentioning one

or two cases which show, in eminently clear fashion, the

necessity for attributing net return to it.(2*) 

    Wherever labour is crowded out by capital, as, e.g., where a

machine takes over the work hitherto accomplished by human labour

-- a thing which will happen no less frequently in the

communistic state than it does now, -- the capital, or machine,

must be credited with at least the same return as that formerly

imputed to labour. But this was a net return: therefore, the

capital or machine must also be credited with a net return. Were

the machine capable of reproducing only its own substance as that

is worn away in course of use, it would be less effective than

human labour, and would not have had power to displace it. But

why should a machine such as this be favoured in the imputation

more than any other form of capital? What experience would speak

for this? 

    In accordance with the universal law of differential

imputation, every form of concrete capital of better quality has

a higher return imputed to it than the concrete capital of lower

quality, and this return is measured by the amount of increase in

productive results which the employment of the better qualities

brings. And as, when we look at production and its results as a

whole, it is only net returns that are taken into consideration,

it is thereby proved that, in comparing qualities of capital, the

standard of imputation must be taken from the net return. 

    Whoever employs his capital according to the measure in which

he sees it influence the productive net return, employs it well;

whoever does otherwise, employs it badly. On this point universal

opinion is united now, as it will be in the communistic state.

The universal opinion to which we refer is not, however, the

untrained judgment of the public in matters of theory, but the

ripe expression of experience.(3*)



NOTES:



1. In what follows I understand by the term capital the

perishable or (with the extended meaning explained in the text)

the movable means of production. This conception is adapted to

the conditions of a communistic state, in which the national

income is obtained solely through production. To take note of

those forms of capital which serve in the formation of income

outside of production, seemed to me out of place, these being too

closely connected with the specific conditions of the existing

economic order of things. For the same reason I also refrain from

taking into consideration those constituent parts of an

undertaker's capital which do not belong to the technical means

of production. I have, however, appended, in Book IV. chap. viii,

a discussion of the interest on consumption loans and house rent,

and, at the end of Book V. chap. xi, I have looked at the intent

which comes from the undertaker's wage fund. 

    To avoid misunderstanding, I wish once more to emphasise the

fact that, among the technical means of production, I do not

include the means of subsistence which must be held ready at hand

for the labourers. These are conditions of production, but not

its causes. The cause is here the labourer alone. And this is no

contradiction to our previous statement in Book III. chap. iii.

The things on which the labourer employs his strength, and the

things which maintain his strength, stand in totally different

relations to the productive return. The former have a direct

influence upon return; the latter influence it only through the

medium of the labour power into which they must first transform

themselves. If we wish to make the latter factors of production,

it can only be done by regarding the labourer as their first

product (compare Book V. chap. vii, on the "costs of production"

of labour). So far as regards his conception of the means of

subsistence for labourers I am thoroughly at one with Sax (in

particular p. 324), although I explain otherwise the emergence of

intent from this part of an undertaker's capital. 

    Immediately before these pages went to press, Menger's

treatise Zur Theorie des Capitals appeared in Conrad's

Jahrbucher. In this treatise he defends in animated fashion the

popular as against the scientific conceptions of capital, and

interprets the popular conception as embracing all the parent

wealth of an acquisitive economy existing in or calculated in

money, without respect to the technical nature of the instruments

of acquisition. As a matter of fact, the circumstance that

acquisitive instruments are calculated in money is of decisive

importance for their valuation. To calculate in money means --

leaving the form out of consideration -- first, to calculate

exactly, and second, to calculate with reference to exchange and

the unit of all exchange goods which it creates. We also look at

valuation entirely under these two assumptions, although we

substitute the internal exchange of goods in a state economy for

the exchange of private individuals. The natural laws we have

deduced hold only as regards industries on a large scale and

under a highly developed economy. 



2. Among such cases I should include also those where the use of

capital increases the previous productiveness of production. Here

we see with particular clearness that the additional net return

must be credited to the capital. It would, however, be an error

to believe that capital can receive a share of net return only

when its use has directly increased the previous productiveness

of production, or that it would be deprived of this share as soon

as the world became accustomed to the increased effects.

Experience shows us the productivity of capital even in a

stationary economy. On this account all theories are inadequate

which derive the productivity of capital solely from its capacity

to promote the development of economic life. 



3. The theory of interest, like that of rent, has always been

discussed very much by itself; discussed, I mean to say, without

any previous examination of the general laws of imputation. The

result, however, as regards interest, has been immensely less

satisfactory than as regards rent. It is easy to understand that

in the case of interest we have to deal with the essential point

in the problem of imputation, while in the case of rent we have

to deal substantially with a detail capable of being conceived by

itself, -- that, namely, of the differential imputation.

Bohm-Bawerk's great work Geschichte und Kritik der

Capitalzinstheorien (Innsbruck, 1884), translated as Capital and

Interest (Macmillan), has clearly shown to the scientific world

how unsatisfactory all previous attempts at explanation have

been. 

    Ties of family and of friendship bind me too closely to the

author to allow of any praise of his work from my lips being

counted of value by outsiders. I therefore confine myself to

remarking that everything contained in the following pages on the

subject of the return to capital and the value of capital, was

written under the influence of his penetrating criticism, and

that, if there is aught of value to be found in it, it could

never have originated without that influence. It is not

inconsistent with this that I should, nevertheless, arrive at

other conclusions than those towards which Bohm-Bawerk -- so far

at least as may be recognised from the critical and preparatory

work already published -- appears to point. 

    Note. -- Since writing the above, Bohm-Bawerk has published

the second part of his work, Die Positive Theorie des Capitals

(Innsbruck, 1888), translated by me as The Positive Theory of

Capital (Macmillan, 1891). -- W.S. 





Chapter 18



The Calculation of Return to Capital in Primitive and in

Developed Economies





    Those writers who maintain the productivity of capital prefer

to take the most primitive economic circumstances in order to

make their meaning clear. Thunen, for instance (in his Isolirter

Staat, 2nd edition, Book II, division I, p. 74) takes his readers

to a land in which there is no capital to begin with. In its

tropical climate the inhabitants live, in the most literal sense,

by the labour of their hands. There a labourer is in a position

to produce yearly the total amount required to maintain him for a

year -- we shall put this down at 100 -- and, besides that, 10%

more, or 110 units in all. At that he can live and also lay past.

And now some man, supporting himself meantime upon his savings

from former years, succeeds, after a whole year's labour, in

producing a bow, arrows, and a net. He is rewarded for this by

being enabled, with the assistance of the new tools, to obtain

henceforward a yearly return of 150 units, by means of which he

finds time to repair the damage suffered by his little capital

through wear and tear, and to maintain it always in the same

condition. The total increase to his income per year amounts to

40 units, and this increase is a permanent one in spite of the

perishable nature of the capital, because not only is the capital

perishable, but it can also be, and is continually being,

reproduced. To what factor is this increase to be imputed?

Obviously to the capital. To its credit alone can the increase be

attributed. This will be seen, e.g., in the fact that every other

labourer will be inclined to hire the capital at a price which is

based on the calculation and ascription to it of this surplus

result. 

    Similar statements are given by other writers. They are,

indeed, well adapted to clear up our ideas concerning the

productivity of capital in its most general outlines, and to

persuade the reader to its acceptance. On the other hand, they

are misleading almost in every detail as regards our developed

conditions of production, and, in particular, they give a

thoroughly false impression as to the measure of productivity. 

    In such primitive conditions as those pictured by Thunen,

where capital emerges for the very first time, the return to

capital is calculated at the entire increase of income, which

labour assisted by capital obtains as against labour unassisted.

In other words, the whole "share dependent upon its co-operation"

(see p. 91) is imputed to capital as its "contribution." And

rightly so. In these most primitive conditions there is a

considerable supply of labour power; indeed, as compared with the

scant occasions for using it, almost too much; on the other hand,

capital is scarce and greatly in demand. Much labour must be

expended without aid from capital, and the comparison between

labour assisted by capital and labour unassisted, forces itself

naturally upon every one. This is no fact found out by subtle

economic investigation; it is seen practically in men having

constantly to choose between the two kinds of labour. 

    But this is very different from the conditions under which we

now live. Practically such a choice is never placed before any

one. It would never occur to any one but a theorising economist,

to measure the value of capital by estimating what would be the

amount of loss if capital should not co-operate at all in the

production, -- any more than it would occur to any one to measure

the value of labour by estimating the amount of loss that would

ensue should labour refuse its co-operation. All labour is judged

on the quite intelligible assumption that it is brought into

co-operation with capital; all capital under the assumption that

it is brought into co-operation with labour. Production has

become ever so much more complicated, and with it the art of

calculating production. The simple formulae of former times are

not now adequate, and examples based on them can only be

misleading. 

    How, then, are capital and labour under present conditions to

be distinguished? The answer is not doubtful. According to that

complicated formula, and according to all those rules which

obtain, as regards the imputation of return in general.

    The "contribution" of capital is to-day far from amounting to

the whole "share dependent upon its co-operation." While that

share is very much equal to the total return of production, the

"contribution" is merely one single quota alongside of the quotas

of land and labour. 

    Only in one connection has the frustration of Thunen anything

to teach us about the measure of the return to capital. It proves

dearly that, in any case, there is a net return to be imputed to

capital -- in so far as it is properly employed; a return which

can be permanently obtained in spite of the perishable nature of

the various items forming the capital, and in spite of their

continual transformation in consumption and reproduction.

Capital, rightly employed, does more than simply renew itself; it

yields beyond this a surplus which must be imputed to it. This

proposition is proved beyond a doubt, as regards primitive

economic conditions, by Thunen and others; and in these primitive

conditions the progress of economy generally is shown through the

discovery and development of forms of capital. But will any one

assert that what was the due of primitive capital is not also the

due of the developed modern capital? 



Chapter 19



The Imputation of Gross Return and of Net Return



    We have said that capital, rightly employed, shows itself

productive, inasmuch as it reproduces itself with a surplus. This

proposition, although undoubtedly correct as a conclusion,

requires one essential modification.     Do the arrows, bows, and

nets -- the capital of Thunen's illustration -- really reproduce

themselves in the strictest sense of the term? Certainly not.

They produce nothing but fish and the spoils of the chase; in

this they exhaust their direct and proximate activity. They do

not in the least degree themselves bring forth new arrows, bows,

and nets, nor do they give direct assistance in doing so. The

return which, in the first place, falls to be imputed to them is,

consequently, a gross return in foreign things; things, that is,

from among which they cannot replace themselves; things with

which they may possibly be compared in value but not in quantity,

and by means of which a physical net return cannot therefore be

represented. But we cannot stop short in our consideration at

this point: as a matter of fact the indirect efficiency of

capital goes much further. The bows, arrows, and nets once

obtained lighten the conditions of their reproduction, if they do

not actually co-operate in it. They lighten it by means of the

extraordinary increase in the gross return of fish and game, as

consequence of which immensely more labour than formerly is free

to be employed in the creation of capital. Therefore, in the

total result, a net return does come in the end to be imputed to

these concrete forms of capital, just as if they did directly

reproduce themselves with a surplus. 

    The same argument holds for capital in the developed economy,

only that here the conditions are much more complicated and the

process, consequently, more difficult to follow. No capital, even

in the most highly developed economy, directly reproduces itself;

each produces first a gross return in foreign things, in which,

physically, its productivity cannot be seen. The capital of a

baker produces bread, that of a miller, meal, that of a peasant,

grain. In order that the baker may replace his capital again, he

must turn to the miller, and to all the other persons who can

provide him with the necessary materials and apparatus for his

production. The gross return of every capital must be exchanged

against the gross returns of other capitals, -- indeed, against

those returns which are attributed to land and labour, -- in

order that the capital may be replied, and the net return become

physically cognisable. The only imputation that ever takes place

directly is an imputation of gross return, but from that follows,

as a final consequence, an imputation of net return, however

circuitous the route may be, -- so long, I mean, as the

efficiency of capital is considered undiminished, and so long as

it is suitably employed. It is just as though every capital did

directly reproduce itself with a surplus. 

    In most cases the return to all the capital invested in one

business or one undertaking is grouped in one estimate. It

requires no proof, however, that, from the total return, each

separate bit of capital (assuming suitable employment) will have

its share. Every bit of capital, rightly employed, produces

directly a gross return of goods different from itself, and

finally, after the necessary exchange between similar gross

returns, reproduces itself and yields a net return. In this sense

machines, tools, raw materials, auxiliary materials, in short,

all forms of concrete capital, the smallest and the most

perishable, even those from which, materially speaking, nothing

passes over into the product, replace themselves and yield a

surplus. From this point of view every piece of coal which is

burned for purposes of production creates, in the last resort,

another similar piece of coal, and, beyond that, a perishable net

return. And, inasmuch as the replied portions of capital are

employed again and yet again, each piece of capital -- the

smallest and most perishable -- becomes the source of a permanent

rent.(1*) 



NOTES:



1. In the exchanges necessary to procure the goods which are to

replace the capital, in lieu of the directly obtained goods which

form the gross return, goods are, of course, estimated according

to their value. Capital goods, are, therefore, estimated at their

capital value. To this extent it appears that the knowledge of

the value of capital and of the laws which regulate it, must

precede the imputation of net return. Only in such a simple

instance as that given by Thunen can an imputation of net return

be made without a previous knowledge of the value of capital, and

this destroys our proof that the imputation of net return is

fundamentally independent of the valuation of capital. It is, of

course, practically impossible to employ this fundamental

principle so soon as production becomes complicated. But whenever

production becomes complicated every new calculation must

practically be laid on the lines of the old ones; otherwise no

conclusion could be come to. Every new determination of value

practically presupposes old ones (compare Book III. chap. v. at

end). As little, then, as the conclusion can be drain from this,

that theory requires value in order to explain value, so little

can it be concluded that, theoretically, the value of capital

conditions the imputation of net return. 















Natural Value



	by Friedrich Wieser



Book 2



Exchange Value and Natural Value



Chapter 1



Price



    Exchange gives rise to a phenomenon which, originating from

value, reacts upon it in the most powerful manner; this

phenomenon is price. It is not our task here to deal either with

price or with the forms of value depending on it. Our concern --

as will be shown clearly enough later on -- is rather to describe

natural value; i.e. value as we should find it in a community at

a high stage of development carrying on its economic life without

price or exchange. Nevertheless it will not do simply to

disregard exchange and the forms of value connected with it. A

description of social conditions whose actual or possible

realisation is extremely doubtful, would be somewhat purposeless,

if the description did not admit of some applications to life as

we know it. Now to make these applications we must understand

price and exchange value to the extent of rendering a comparison

possible. At the least their general outlines must be indicated,

so as to serve as background against which the clearer picture of

natural value, which we intend to draw, will stand out in relief.

In this way we shall be able to judge whether the fundamental

features in both contrast or agree. 

    For this purpose it will be sufficient to describe that

particular case of the formation of price in which its peculiar

principle can be most clearly discerned. This is at the same time

the normal formation of price under the organised division of

labour. On the one side, we have numerous sellers, whose aim is

the sale of stocks which they have produced for the market, and

which they could not possibly use themselves; on the other side,

we have numerous buyers who compete with each other in buying,

just as the others compete in selling. Menger's theory of price,

and that contained in Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, which goes

considerably farther, may be used as starting-points for our own

statement. Into any further consideration of the abundant

literature existing on the subject of price our present task will

not permit us to enter. 

    Suppose a person wishes to acquire an object, no matter what,

he will not, however strong his desire, agree to pay any price

that may be asked. There is a certain maximum at which he would

rather withdraw from the market than raise his offer further.

This maximum is determined by two valuations: first, the value in

use of the good that is to be acquired (which will be determined

according to the laws laid down in the previous chapters), and,

second, the exchange value of the sum of money that will have to

be paid (the estimate of which will be considered in the next

chapter). The sum of money whose exchange value is equal to the

value in use of the desired good, determines the maximum offer.

To offer more would involve a loss, as more value would be given

than received. This rule holds equally for all would-be buyers

without exception. Every one who thinks of making a purchase puts

both these valuations before him; establishes in his own mind

this equation or equivalence; and comes to the market resolved

not to go beyond it. But although the rule is the same for all

concerned, the results of its application in the individual case

are very unequal, inasmuch as the amounts that enter into the

calculation differ greatly from each other. The value in use of

the good that one buys will vary according to the different

degree of individual need -- which may depend on natural

inclination, on accidental circumstances, or on the degree of

satisfaction already reached -- and according to the amount of

supply one already has. The exchange value of the money, on the

other hand, will vary principally according to the amount of the

person's wealth (see on this subject the following chapter). When

one considers the very great variety of possible economic

situations, it will be seen that the equation or equivalence of

both values cannot fail to be very different from buyer to buyer.

The highest offer can be made by the person who is actuated by

the strongest desire, and is at the same time the richest,

because for him the highest real value is expressed in the

greatest sum of money. What a contrast from the offers of poor

men, in whose case the same degrees of desire are represented

only by a most trifling sum of money, or from the bids of those

whose desire, in the particular case, is so slight that they do

not care to set apart anything but a small sum towards its

satisfaction! 

    If we begin with the highest equivalent, that of the man who

is the richest and the most anxious to obtain the goods, and come

down gradually to the lowest, we shall obtain a descending scale

of maximum offers. By way of example we shall assume that these

range, in the hands of a hundred purchasers, from ? down to 1s.;

and we shall assume, first, for simplicity's sake, that each

purchaser is desirous to buy only one single good or one single

item. 

    Here we can see clearly what is the power that must decide

the competition of prices. A skilled seller may at times succeed

in inducing an inexperienced buyer to pay a price which goes

beyond his maximum; but, as a rule, the sellers will not be able

to do more than drive the buyers to their maximum. The endeavour

of a seller, who is honest but looks to his own advantage and

acts purely according to his own interest, will be to find out

those, among all the buyers, who can pay most, and to drive them,

if possible, to the margin of their purchasing power. On the

other hand, the would-be buyers will try to buy as much below

that as is possible. The inter-competition of buyers, therefore,

is to the advantage of sellers, and the inter-competition of

sellers is to the advantage of buyers. We shall now see how far

it is possible for each side to achieve its object. We assume as

before that the sellers are forced to get rid of the entire

quantity of goods they have brought to market, aid have no wish

to reserve any part of it for their own use, the goods having

been produced for sale and being of no personal use to the

sellers. 

    Supposing one single good is put upon the market, it will

obviously -- if all are equally alive to their own advantage --

fall to that buyer who has the highest purchasing power, viz.

that one whose money equivalent we put down at ?. He is in a

position which enables him to exclude all competing buyers, and

he will do so if he understands his own interest. He must, of

course, make up his mind to go the length of 99/, as this is the

price to which his most dangerous competitor may go, -- that one

whose purchasing power stands next to his own. And as he, for his

own part, is unable to give more than 100/, the price settles

between 99/ and 100/. 

    Suppose, again, that two goods are put on the market; the one

must fall to the first, the other to the second in the series of

competing buyers. The price paid by the latter, if rightly

determined, must lie between 99/ and, 98/; that is, between his

own equivalent and that of the next competitor, -- the buyer whom

he must outbid if he would not have his acquisition of the

desired good disputed. But that buyer, again, whom we called the

first, will not, under these circumstances, pay any higher price.

There is now no necessity for him to offer more than, 99/; it

will suffice if he, along with the second buyer, outbid the third

buyer's offer of 98/. Whoever buys in an open market, and from

competing sellers, pays for the same article the same price as is

paid by every one else. However great may be his own purchasing

power, he need not use it to its full extent; there will always

be a seller willing to let him have the good at that same lowest

price which has to be conceded on the market to buyers generally.



    If there are three goods, they will fall to the first three

purchasers, and the price will be fixed equally for all three

goods between 98/ and 97/, -- between the money equivalent of the

third and fourth purchasers. Where there are ten goods the one

price is fixed, for all buyers, between 91/ and 90/; in order to

dispose of all their goods the sellers must keep the price below

91/, and, in order to exclude the other competitors, the buyers

must keep it over 90/. For fifty goods the price will stand

between 51/ and 50/, corresponding to the equivalent of the 50th

and 51st purchasers; for seventy goods it will be between 31/ and

30/, corresponding to the equivalents of the 70th and 71st

purchasers. In short, the larger the stock which has to be sold,

the lower will fall the price, as this permits of the entrance of

more numerous and less capable purchasers, and the market price

established is one and the same for the whole market. If we give

the name of Marginal Buyer (following an expression of

Bohm-Bawerk's) to the weakest buyer, who, all the same, must be

allowed to purchase if the whole stock is to be sold, the law of

price will run thus: Price must at all times settle between the

equivalents of the marginal buyer and that of the buyer who

stands next under him; viz. that one among the excluded

competitors who has the greatest purchasing power. Where

commodities come forward in great quantities and have a large

sale, the degrees of difference between the equivalents of

various buyers, whom we should more correctly consider as classes

of buyers, -- are not great. And for such cases the law of price

may, quite correctly, be still more simply stated as follows:

Price is determined by the money equivalent of the current

marginal buyer, or marginal class of buyers. It settles at a

figure very near it, and indeed a little under it. 

    The very first glance shows us that the law of price is

nearly related to the law of value. The value of a stock

consisting of separate items is determined as a marginal value,

according to the marginal utility of the single good; the price

of a stock which is sold in separate items is also determined as

a marginal amount, according to the purchasing power of the

marginal buyer of the single good. In both cases what decides,

is, on the one side, the amount of the stock, -- addition to

which shifts the margin and lessens the determining amount, while

diminution enlarges it -- and, on the other side, the want with

its varying gradations. In the case of price, however, there is,

along with the degree of want, another determining fact which

does not exist in the case of value. This fact is the valuation

of money from the side of the buyer; that is to say, his wealth

and income. Before however proceeding to examine the exceedingly

important effects of this fact, we must assure ourselves that the

law of price just explained holds also in the case where buyers,

instead of desiring to purchase one single good, desire to

purchase several or more than one. Only if this is the case can

the law have any real interest for us. 

    We need not waste much time over this point. Such a buyer

will have in his mind a maximum offer determined in the manner

just described. The collective value in use of the goods to be

acquired, estimated in a sum of money whose exchange value,

according to the subjective valuation of the would-be purchaser,

is equal to this value in use, gives the maximum. The more items

there are to calculate, the greater will be the maximum, reckoned

as a whole, but the smaller will be the maximum of the single

item, because in this case the value in use of the unit will be

proportionally less (and the higher also will rise the exchange

value of the money as consequence of the increased expenditure on

the whole). If e.g. a person were willing to buy 10 goods at a

shilling each, but were made by the seller to buy 20 instead, he

would be able to give only a smaller price per item, as the

larger purchase would bring with it a smaller utility, and at the

same time the larger expenditure would be more heavily felt. At

no time, however, will any purchaser -- and this is our most

weighty proposition -- consent to pay anything but one and the

same price for one and the same article, and that price will be

the equivalent of the current "marginal item," say the 10th good

in the case of 10 items, or the 20th in that of 20 items --

always assuming that the market is an open one, and the buyer at

liberty to purchase more or less according to his pleasure. If in

any open market a price were demanded for any particular good

which was in excess of the money estimate of the marginal good,

the buyer would do better to abstain from purchasing this

particular good, for which he would have to pay more than its

value. The same considerations which -- in estimating the value

in use of a stock that may be divided up at pleasure -- lead to

every good, without exception, being valued at its marginal

utility, also necessitate that, in the purchase of a stock which

may be greater or less according to desire, for every good

without exception only the equivalent of the marginal utility

shall be paid. And here we see that the laws of value which we

have already explained have a direct influence on the laws of

price, and that the latter could not be understood without the

former.(1*) If this is once established there is little more to

say. At every extension o?his purchases the buyer will calculate

his maximum. If we were to add together the calculations of all

buyers we should obtain the quantities of goods which might be

placed against every conceivable price. Where goods are held for

high figures only small quantities will be sold, and that to the

most "capable" buyers for the satisfaction of their most urgent

demand. Where prices are low larger quantities will be sold,

partly to the richest buyers to meet their less urgent demand,

partly to others who are less "capable." But, at a fixed price,

only a fixed amount will be demanded and may be sold. If now

sellers, on their side, come to market with a fixed quantity of

goods which must be entirely got rid of, they will find the price

already determined. It is that price at which just this amount is

demanded. 

    Here again we have the same determinant facts; -- the amount

of supply already owned, the degree of want or desire; and the

purchasing power of the buyers. The two latter have, however, the

peculiarity that what decides is not simply the money equivalent

of the marginal purchaser, or the marginal class of purchasers,

but the money equivalent of the marginal purchaser, or class of

purchasers, for the marginal good or goods. 

    Where sellers do not wish to part with their whole supply,

but to retain a portion, either for their own use or for future

sale in some altered condition of the market; where, instead of

free competition on both sides, some monopoly exists, or the

sale, instead of being public and open to all, takes place

privately and in small groups or quite in isolation; -- in such

cases our law of price can act only imperfectly or in a greatly

weakened manner. At the same time the characteristic element in

the formation of price -- that the purchasing power of the buyers

is put in the scale -- will always, excepting, at most, the ease

of monopoly on the side of the buyers, be present and retain its

importance. Goods are not paid for simply according to the amount

of utility (i.e. of marginal utility) which they render to the

buyers, but also according to the amount of purchasing power

which the marginal buyers put on that utility. 

    Of the many weighty consequences arising from this

proposition, I shall at present refer only to one. "The highest

prices therefore," (to quote from the Ursprung des Werthes, p.

26) "are obtainable for those goods which are to be had only in

small quantity and are objects of desire to the richest classes;

the prices of such goods rise till all but the wealthiest classes

-- even those groups of the middle classes who are in most

comfortable circumstances -- are excluded from the circle of

purchasers. Goods which, owing to their inferior quality, are

desired only by the poorer classes obtain extremely low prices,

as also do those goods of better quality which are so plentiful

that the poorer classes must be admitted, to a considerable

degree, within the circle of purchasers. Medium prices are

reached by those goods of which the middle classes form the

majority of the purchasers, those who have small means either

being entirely excluded from purchase, or entering the struggle

of competition only in so far as will satisfy their intensest

sensation of desire for such goods. Changes in the economic

possibilities of great classes in a community will naturally

induce changes in the prices of goods. The greater the

inequalities of wealth, the greater will be the differences in

price. Luxuries will rise in price when great fortunes increase,

and will fall when they decrease."(2*)



NOTES:



1. Here we have a proof from experience for our statement in Book

I, chap. ix that (for the same owner) the separate items of a

stock, so far as they are equal to each other, have the same use

value, and are all valued according to the amount of the marginal

utility. One and the same buyer will not consent to pay other

than one price for the similar items which are all bought at the

same time: he will not pay more for one than for another, and for

none will he pay a higher sum than the marginal equivalent. This

shows that he values them all equally, and all according to the

same marginal amount. Otherwise there would be nothing to prevent

his paying different prices for them, and possibly paying more

than the marginal equivalent for a great many of them -- indeed

for all except one, the marginal item. 



2. It is as result of the recognition of this principle that we

first arrive at a complete understanding of the remarkable

phenomenon which has occupied the attention of so many theorists;

that the value of goods which can quite well be done without,

such as diamonds, may be so much greater than that of the

indispensable necessaries of life; the value of gold, for

instance, so much higher than that of iron. It has already been

shown, in the elementary theory of value, that the value in use

of an entirely insignificant good must be greater than that of a

much more useful one when the marginal utility of the former is,

owing to its scarcity, comparatively high, while that of the

latter, by reason of its superfluity, has fallen very low down on

the scale. Even greater differences are found, under certain

circumstances, in prices, and consequently in the estimates of

exchange value, than are shown in the different estimates of use

value. Diamonds and gold stand exceptionally high in price

because they are luxuries, valued and paid for according to the

purchasing power of the richest classes; while the coarser food

stuffs and iron are low in price, because they are common goods,

in regard to which the decisive factor is the purchasing power

and the valuation of the poor. 







Chapter 2



Exchange Value in the Subjective Sense



    The fact that goods can be bought and sold gives a new and

powerful impulse to the estimating of values in all individual

economies which exchange with one another. In the housekeeping of

a Crusoe only the value in use of things obtains; whereas, in all

individual economies which trade with each other, exchange value

also has to be considered. The best explanation of the nature of

exchange value, of its relation to value in use, and of the

services which it renders to the individual economy, will be got

if we examine separately the different cases of its occurrence. 

    Money is always, and by all who possess it, estimated

according to its exchange value. Its use consists in the spending

of it, -- in the parting with it in purchase of other goods (1*)

that are expected to satisfy those sensations of want which would

otherwise have no provision. The exchange value of money is the

anticipated use value of the things which can be obtained for it.

The law, therefore, which obtains for the latter obtains for the

former; it is demand and supply, according as these express

themselves in marginal utility, that decide the exchange value.

The various things which determine money value to the individual

are the following: -- the amount of money which is at his

disposal; the nature and quantity of the goods which can be

obtained under the existing market conditions and prices; the

utility which those goods are able to give, as also the utility

already secured by possessions otherwise acquired; and, lastly,

the amount and urgency of demand.(2*) 

    The unit of money always receives its value from the least

important expenditure which, in the circumstances of the

possessor, it serves economically to defray; every larger sum of

money, and the entire amount of money owned, contains this

marginal unit value as often as there are units. It is inevitable

that different persons give very various estimates of value to

the same sum of money. The circumstance which most largely

influences these estimates is amount of wealth and income.(5*)

The penny is more to the poor man than the shilling to the rich.

Every one must be conscious how very important it is, for the

proper ordering of his own economic affairs, that he should have

an exact idea of the value which money has for him. No one is

utterly ignorant of this, and with every good householder the

knowledge is almost a part of himself. 

    Besides money, all goods which are made or held for sale are

estimated by their possessors according to this exchange value,

-- whether it be that the owner cannot himself make use of them,

because they are unsuited to his personal needs, or that,

although he might be able to use them, the utility they would

furnish seems too trifling to be weighed against the proceeds of

a sale.(4*) The proximate basis of valuation is the expected

money proceeds, or the exchange value of that money; the ultimate

basis is that use value which is anticipated from the exchange

value of the money proceeds. Again the estimate of value leads us

back to use value, and again the law of marginal utility obtains.

The same good on the same market obtains for all sellers the same

price, but how different are the valuations of that good on the

part of those whose whole yearly income is dependent on their

sale, as compared with those whose enjoyment would scarcely surer

were they to do without selling them from one year's end to the

other! 

    Finally, numerous goods which their owners have not the

smallest intention of selling, are estimated by their exchange

value. In frustration we may make use of the example which

Bohm-Bawerk, who was the first to examine this particular

instance, gives in his Werth (p. 37). A poor man values his

overcoat on account of the use he expects from it as a defence

against cold, knowing well that, should he lose the coat, he will

be exposed to all the severity of the winter weather, as he does

not possess sufficient means to purchase another. Even to a man

in better circumstances the loss of his overcoat would be a loss;

but in this case it could and would be replaced at the price of

making another. The rich man, therefore, will not value his coat

according to its utility, but according to the cost of procuring

it; in his estimation this cost will stand lower than the

utility, and to that cost he can always reduce the injury he

suffers from its loss. Cases of this kind of valuation by

exchange value are innumerable. All household goods which, when

lost or stolen, can be replaced by purchase are thus valued. Here

we see that the proximate basis for valuation is the market price

at which the purchase can he made, while the ultimate basis is

again a use value; that, namely, which is anticipated in the

valuation of the purchase price.(5*) To sum up. The exchange

value which we have here explained is that value which is

ascribed to goods, either by reason of the owners' intention to

sell them, or because of the possibility of replacing them by

purchase. More briefly stated, it is that value which attaches to

goods on account of an anticipated act of exchange. Exchange

value in this sense and use value are of the same nature; the

former is derived from the latter, and is one of its forms of

development. Both forms of value follow the same general laws;

both are subjective; and the amount of both varies according to

personal circumstances. The price of an article never completely

expresses the exchange value it has for its owner. This depends

further upon the "personal equation" of money to him. 

    Subjective exchange value cannot be absent in any individual

economy without causing the greatest confusion in all its

exchange relations. The "personal equation" of money is

indispensable in every economy, in order that we may weigh

against each other goods estimated according to their use value,

and goods estimated according to their exchange value. Without it

no expenditure, no purchase, no sale could be logically made. The

poor man could not enter the market as a poor man, nor the rich

man as a rich. Every separate act of exchange depends upon it,

and thus not only the regulation of individual economies, but the

whole of exchange depends upon it. 

    It is most wonderful that a fact of such universal practice,

and of so great importance, has, until quite lately, been almost

entirely neglected by theory. Menger was the first to give it a

clear theoretical explanation, and to adopt it in his system; and

it is not the least of his many services to economics. 



NOTES:



1. Or, as we say simply, in purchase of goods -- money and goods

being generally thought of as in opposition to each other. 



2. For instance, the value of a shilling to me depends (1) on the

number of shillings I have to spend; (2) on what and how much I

can buy in the shops for a shilling; (3) on what use I can make

of the shilling's worth of goods when I get them -- which, again,

depends (a) on how much I have of similar goods already; and (b)

on my natural or acquired capacity of consuming or employing such

goods. -- W.S.



3. See Jevons, p. 152. 



4. Of course the author does not mean that the consideration of

possible personal use of his goods ever comes into the mind of

the maker or merchant who supplies the market. Their "use" to him

is their "exchange." Wieser is only making out the logical point

that even goods made for sale would not be estimated at their

exchange value if it were not that the personal use is less than

the exchange use. -- W.S. 



5. On the change of motive which results from this in the

conflict of price, see Bohm-Bawerk's Werth (p. 515). I may

perhaps be allowed to point out that in my Ursprung des Werthes

(p. 185) I alluded briefly to the case described above. 









Chapter 3



Exchange Value in the Objective Sense





    No one can take his own personal valuation of money, and of

the money value of goods, outside of himself, and apply it to

other people. No one will persuade a business man to let him have

a commodity at half-price simply by proving that it is more

difficult for him to procure the half-price than for some other

person to procure double the price. And no business man could

sell an article at twice the market price, simply because he

could prove that the double gain was necessary to enable him to

satisfy his most urgent wants. Every one needs to have an exact

subjective estimate of the value of money to himself, as a

private individual economising his own resources, in order to

decide for himself what attitude he may take up with regard to

things outside of him. But this personal attitude can have no

effect on the movement of goods in the great economic exchange

between one economy and another, or in the end between any

economy and his own, except in so far as he may succeed in

influencing the prices of goods. It is the prices that absolutely

decide in exchange. Goods fall to those who pay the highest

prices, and -- what is most important -- the amount expended upon

production is regulated by the prices expected from the sale of

the goods. Those goods which will be sold at the highest prices

attract the most means of production. The rank of goods in

economic exchange -- their external economic power -- is

absolutely decided by their prices, however individuals may judge

as to their intrinsic importance. 

    When we speak generally of the value of goods we mean the

economic rank given them by their prices. A good whose market

price is ?00 has, in the common usage of speech, absolutely, and

for every one, ten times more value than one whose price is only

?0. The dearest good is, in the ordinary use of words, also the

most valuable. But we must make one single limitation: goods have

ascribed to them as value only those prices which are paid for

them in the usual run of cases. Exceptional prices, usurious

prices, and "cut" prices form no foundation for value; and

accordingly goods whose prices fluctuate greatly have, in common

usage, no fixed "intrinsic" value.

    As a matter of fact some particular designation is

indispensable for the ranking of goods in economic exchange, and

it is impossible to find any other designation than that of

value. And this not simply because we are forced to it from the

outside as it were, by ordinary usage of speech, but because it

essentially justifies itself. What subjective value does for the

individual economy, -- measuring every outlay and every return,

and deciding the amount of consumption that is permissible and

the extent to which production may be extended, -- is done for

economy generally by this ranking of goods as it is determined by

relation to the objective prices. It is the measure for outlay

and returns, and upon it distribution and production are

dependent. But it must be emphasised that the word value alters

its original sense somewhat, when transferred from the subjective

relation to wants to the objective relation to price. Subjective

value represents a distinct feeling; that of being dependent upon

the possession of a good for the satisfaction of a want, -- a

distinct degree of personal interest in goods. Objective value,

on the other hand, merely represents a definite price; a definite

amount of payment which is expected or required in buying and

selling. The former has its measure in the different gradations

of desire, the latter in the quantities of coin, -- in the

figures of the price. 

    Of course internal valuations of personal interest do, always

and without exception, attach to objective value also, but these

valuations are only subjective, being greater for one and smaller

for another. Objective value or price is not in the least the

expression of the economic valuation of goods, even when it is

the result of economic competition, and of the individual

valuations of all the different members of the economic

community. Price is a social fact, but it does not denote the

estimate put upon goods by society.(2*) Luxuries are paid for

more highly than necessaries, but who would affirm that they are

therefore of greater social importance? Those very persons who,

on the market, come to an agreement regarding the price of goods

-- compelled thereto by the power of circumstances -- will each

reserve his own judgment upon the importance of the goods to him

personally; and that authority which is earliest called upon to

deliver the social judgment, the government, is universally

considered to be the furthest removed from recognising the prices

of goods as a measure of their social importance. A government,

indeed, is, for the most part, concerned with the carrying

through of just such economic tasks as could not be justified by

their money return, if they were not justified by their utility. 

    In what follows, when the word "exchange value" occurs, I

shall always mean "exchange value in the objective sense." There

is no need to formulate the law of "exchange value"; we know it

already, if only in a general way. It is the law of price.(2*) 



NOTES:



1. The ordinary conception, which makes price the social estimate

put upon goods, has to the superficial judgment the attraction of

simplicity. A good A whose market price is ?00 is not only ten

times as dear as B whose market price is ?0, but it is also

absolutely and for every one ten times as valuable. In our

conception the matter is much more complicated, and according to

it we obtain the following propositions. 1. A is paid for with

ten times as much money as B: its price is ten times greater. 2.

Its objective exchange value is also ten times greater -- the

weightiest consequence of which is that ten times the cost may,

and, if practicable, will be expended upon its production. 3. But

these relations of price and of objective value do not in the

least degree correspond with the relative position of the two

goods in regard to their economic importance or subjective

valuation. Price alone forms no basis whatever for an estimate of

the economic importance of the goods. We must go further and find

out their relation to wants. But this relation to want can only

be realised and measured individually. Suppose both goods are

owned by the same person (or by people under exactly similar

conditions of want and provision), A will, of course, have ten

times the importance of B. But it may just as well happen that A

has exactly the same importance for one owner as B has for

another; it may indeed happen that A, in spite of its greater

exchange value, has for its owner, supposing him to be a rich

man, even less value than B has to its owner, supposing him to be

a poor man. If there are many goods of the class A and many of

the class B, the individual valuations of the various owners will

be widely diverse, and a unanimous judgment is not to be

expected. And the question how it is possible to unite those

divergent individual valuations into one social valuation, is one

that cannot be answered quite so easily as those imagine who are

rash enough to conclude that price represents the social estimate

of value. 

    See further, on the relation of objective to subjective

exchange value, my Ursprung des Werthes (pp. 10 and 21; also

Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, introd., etc.), and Sax (chapters xlviii and

xlix). 



2. Exchange value is, so far as concerns its application, without

doubt the most important form of value, inasmuch as it governs

the largest sphere; -- that of industrial economy generally.

Political economy, outside that chapter where the theory of value

is given, is almost exclusively concerned with it. No wonder,

then, that theoretical treatises have taken it as their end. But

application is one thing and explanation another. To explanation

subjective value is chief in importance, for only through it can

exchange value be reached. Subjective value is the original and

perfect form of value; exchange value taken by itself and

unrelated to subjective value is imperfect and unintelligible.

What does it signify to say that one article costs this and

another that price in money, if we cannot say how money and

prices are themselves valued? Theorists who have confined

themselves to the examination of exchange value, or, what comes

to the same thing, of price, may have succeeded in discovering

certain empirical laws of changes in amounts of value, but they

could never unfold the real nature of value, and discover its

true measure. As regards these questions, so long as examination

was confined to exchange value, it was impossible to get beyond

the formula that value lies in the relation of exchange; -- that

everything is so much more valuable the more of other things it

can be exchanged for. Why the exchanged things had value; why

things generally were worth anything to us; and how this value

was to be measured; -- these theories could never explain nor

hope to explain. Value was conceived of relatively, by referring

one thing to another; -- as the ratio of valuable things.

Absolutely and by itself value was not to be understood. It is

significant of this inception to state that one thing cannot be

an object of value in itself; that a second must be present

before the first can be valued. 

    Theory has only very gradually shaken itself free from this

misconception, this circle. Where an absolute theory was

attempted -- such as the labour theory, or that which explained

value as usefulness -- some logical leap generally reconnected it

with the relative conception. It was forced into this by the

overestimate of exchange value from which it seemed impossible to

get free. A striking example of this is Ricardo's theory of

value. As a matter of fact value is still chiefly regarded

relatively. German literature has for long had the great advance

of much penetrating criticism of exchange value, and of manifold

attempts to supplement it, but it has nevertheless failed in any

final solution. Among the later reformers of the theory of value,

Jevons is distinguished for the strictness and accuracy with

which he separates the two conceptions of value from one another,

but he fails to construct a theory of subjective value (see

second note to Book I. chap. ix), and to determine the functions

of both kinds of value. Menger, on the other hand, has a complete

theory of subjective value, but makes no attempt to develop

objective value. 

    My own investigations in the Ursprung des Werthes are almost

entirely occupied with subjective value. And even favourable

critics have concluded from this that I do not recognise

objective value. The reproach is the less merited that (on page

38) I have especially acknowledged the necessity for an objective

conception of value. The relation of subjective and objective

value has been best described by Bohm-Bawerk, and -- particularly

as regards the distinction of their separate functions in

economic life -- by Sax. 





Chapter 4



The Antinomy of Exchange Value



    Exchange value -- that is, as just explained, objective

exchange value -- shows the same movement as subjective value.

With every addition to the amount to be sold (demand remaining

constant), goes a fall in the return got for the single item,

while the total return rises: this is the "up grade" of value.

But, when a certain point is reached, the total return also

falls: this is the "down grade" of value. And where, finally,

there is universal superfluity, no price whatever can be

obtained. 

    The causes of this movement are even stronger in the case of

exchange value. It is induced not only by the natural limitation

of wants, inasmuch as these cannot reach beyond the point of

satiation, but also by the actual limitation of the purchasing

power of many buyers, who have not means enough to satisfy their

wants to the point of satiation. Goods which would still find

purchasers, so far as wants are concerned, often find no sale in

the market, and consequently the upper limit of price is often

reached sooner than that of subjective value. 

    There would, nevertheless, be just as little reason to speak

of an antinomy of exchange value as of an antinomy of subjective

value, were it not that the economic order, under which society

exists, gives to exchange value an efficiency in the general

business economy, which goes far beyond that of subjective value

in the individual economy. In every self-contained private

economy utility is the highest principle; but, in the business

world, wherever the prodding of society with goods is in the

hands of undertakers who desire to make a gain out of it, and to

obtain a remuneration for their services, exchange value takes

its place. The private undertaker is not concerned to provide the

greatest utility for society generally; his aim is rather to

obtain the highest value for himself: -- which is at the same

time his highest utility. Utility approves itself as the first

principle in the undertaker's economy; but, just because of this,

in the conflict between exchange value and social utility, it is

exchange value which is victorious, -- so far at least as the

undertaker has power to act according to his own interest. 

    Proudhon, therefore, is right -- although he may not have

formulated his contention quite correctly -- when he affirms the

antinomy of exchange value. Every undertaker finds it to his

advantage when he succeeds in turning free goods which he cannot

sell, into economically scarce goods which he can sell. And it is

to his advantage when he is successful in reducing the amount to

be sold, and raising the returns, just as it is to his

disadvantage to increase the amount that is to be sold, and

thereby diminish the returns. 

    The conclusion which Proudhon draws from this -- that the

discord can only be resolved by a socialist organisation of

society -- is nevertheless incorrect. 

    In the main the antinomy does not exist in the "up grade" of

the movement of value. And in this up grade is found by far the

greater number of the actual forms of value. Further, the

antinomy only holds in so far as the undertaker is able to rule

society. But where there is really free competition no undertaker

has this power. Under free competition, social utility will be --

as it ought to be the first principle of economic life. Here each

of the competing undertakers is bound to strive to widen to the

utmost the compass of his undertaking. The increase of supply

which the individual producer causes is, in relation to supply as

a whole, too trifling to have any material effect in lowering

prices, while it materially increases the amount which the

individuals have to sell. Thus every one calculates, and, on the

strength of this calculation, production is stretched to the

utmost possible extent. The economic history of our own time is

rich in examples which prove that competition can press prices

far on the down grade of exchange value. 

    In any remaining cases, society -- if it is to escape injury

-- will, of course, require to carry on production, or have it

carried on by individuals, on common account; but such cases are

too few to call for the socialist organisation of society. From

the first, governments have undertaken such responsibilities. The

antinomy of exchange value does not necessitate a complete

overturn of the free economic order of society; it merely

requires that it be supplemented by suitable interference on the

part of governments. 



Chapter 5



The Service of Exchange Value in General Economy



    If we consider the elements which go to form exchange value,

we are forced to the conclusion that the charge of antinomy is

not the heaviest that may be raised against it. Entirely apart

from this, the law of its formation remains such that, even in

the most favourable circumstances -- say when there is no

disturbing element, no suspicion of force, dishonesty, or error,

and when the transaction is one we are accustomed to call free

and just, -- exchange value is calculated to render its service

in economic life only in an imperfect manner, and with

consequences which society feels to be serious evils. 

    It must be premised that the service rendered by exchange

value to general or industrial economy, as compared with the

service rendered by subjective value to the self-contained

economy, is greater by one additional task. In the latter, value

has only to measure outlay and return materially against each

other, in the former, it must also do so personally. The material

or economic-technical service of exchange value relates chiefly

to production. Here it has the function of control. It gives the

measure for production and for expenditure of costs. Goods should

be produced according to the rank of their value, and other goods

should be sacrificed for them as costs only in so far as the

comparison between the value of amount produced and the value of

costs allows. The personal service of exchange value, on the

other hand, comes in, principally, in the distribution of the

products acquired among the separate individuals taking part in

the exchange; in this case value is the measure of the personal

acquisition. To every participator in the great economic process

must be assigned a return equal in value to the amount of his

outlay -- whether it be outlay of wealth or expenditure of

labour. 

    The exchange value of all goods which are brought upon the

market in stocks or quantities, is measured as a marginal value.

That is to say, each unit of the stock is valued at the same as

the marginal equivalent, and the whole stock is estimated as a

multiple of the unit, -- as product of the amount into the unit

value. So far exchange value gives the same appropriate and

faultless assistance in the economic calculation as marginal

value generally does. Its applicability to this kind of

calculation is indisputable. It is, then, unnecessary to repeat

in detail what has already been said on the subject in general in

in Book I chapter xi. 

    In order, however, properly to appraise the service of

exchange value in economic life, it must be remembered that it

does not contain exactly the same elements as does value in use

in the self-contained economy. The latter simply depends upon

utility: the former is besides dependent upon purchasing power

(see Book II. chap. i). Value in use measures utility; exchange

value measures a combination of utility and purchasing power. The

stock which is greater in use value (in the "up grade") is also

always the richer in utility; the stock which is greater in

exchange value is not necessarily so. In the latter case the

higher value may arise from higher utility, but it may also arise

from the greater wealth of the buyers, and the strong inducement

held out to them to throw their riches into the balance in the

war of competition. 

    In the material service of exchange value, as well as in the

personal, this peculiar method of its formation obtains

importance. As a consequence of it, production is ordered not

only according to simple want, but also according to wealth.

Instead of things which would have the greatest utility, those

things are produced for which the most will be paid. The greater

the differences in wealth, the more striking will be the

anomalies of production. It will furnish luxuries for the wanton

and the glutton, while it is deaf to the wants of the miserable

and the poor. It is therefore the distribution of wealth which

decides how production is set to work, and induces consumption of

the most uneconomic kind: a consumption which wastes upon

unnecessary and culpable enjoyment what might have served to heal

the wounds of poverty.(1*)

    It may be of interest to follow somewhat more particularly

the law of distribution, in so far as it is conditioned by the

law of exchange value. The favouring of the rich, and with it the

perverted employment of goods, really goes much further than the

mere fact of wealth would allow one to suspect. The rich have not

only the advantage over the poor of possessing more means

wherewith to purchase goods; they have the further advantage of

being for the most part in a more favorable position to utilise

their means. In the battle of price the decision lies with the

weakest buyers, who are, as a rule, also the poorest; and price

is adapted to their valuation. They must, therefore, pay for the

goods exactly as highly as they value them, while their stronger

competitors, who pay the same price, pay under their personal

valuation. The beggar and the millionaire eat the same bread and

pay the same price for it; the beggar according to the measure of

his hunger, and the millionaire according to the same measure --

that is, according to the beggar's hunger. The price which the

millionaire might be willing to pay for the bread, supposing he

were hungry and driven to offer his maximum, never comes into the

question. It is only where the rich compete among themselves for

luxuries which they mean to reserve for their own enjoyment, that

they pay according to their own ability, and are measured

according to their own personal standard. 

    But the more the ability of the rich is spared in the

purchasing of necessaries, the greater are the means which they

have over, wherewith to extend and increase the prices they offer

for luxuries, and the more defective is the impulse given by

consumption to production. 

    The law of value in the individual economy is strict, but its

strictness is undoubtedly necessary and salutary. It forbids

satisfaction to go beyond a certain marginal point, namely, the

point beyond which, when everything, including the future, is

carefully weighed, the means possessed at the moment will not

suffice. Any violation of this prohibition brings its own

punishment, when, to make up for the trifling want that has been

rashly satisfied at the moment, a far more urgent desire later on

has to go unsatisfied. The law of price follows the law of value

in demanding a marginal point beyond which purchase must not go,

but it does not present the same unquestionable and material

necessity; and the natural and reasonable strictness of the

prohibition is thereby changed into what seems personal and

inconsistent severity. The man who cannot furnish the price paid

by the marginal buyer is excluded from competition within the

economic circle, just as, in the individual household, the quite

trifling desires are excluded from satisfaction. As in the

household there are marginal wants, so in economic life are there

marginal entities, and anything below that level is permitted to

exist only by way of charity. But while, in the individual

household, the marginal line is drawn naturally, in economic life

generally it is influenced also by the manner of the distribution

of wealth. In the midst of the comfort and luxury of the opulent

classes, law condemns the poor to a restriction, as though there

was no affluence, and nature herself forbade the greater

satisfaction. 

    These are the charges which may be brought against the law of

exchange value. They would soon make short work of it could we

not answer them. The examination of these charges and their

answer does not, however, belong to the theory of value, but to

the greater theory of economics and economical laws; and this

book does not propose even to exhaust the theory of value. I only

wished to explain the elements in the formation of exchange value

so far as is necessary to show clearly what I should like to be

understood by the term "Natural Value." We have now arrived at

this point, and need hesitate no longer in presenting to the

reader my explanation of the expression. The thing itself is not

new to us; the value which we looked at in the first book, under

the elementary theory, is natural value. 



NOTES:



1. On the effect of exchange value on distribution see

Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, p. 510.





Chapter 6



Natural Value





    Even in a community or state whose economic affairs were

ordered on communistic principles, goods would not cease to have

value. Wants there would still be, there as elsewhere; the

available means would still be insufficient for their full

satisfaction; and the human heart would still cling to its

possessions. All goods which were not free would be recognised as

not only useful but valuable; they would rank in value according

to the relation in which the available stocks stood to the

demand; and that relation would express itself finally in the

marginal utility. Social supply and demand, or amount of goods

and utility socially compared with one another, would decide

value. The elementary laws of valuation, as we have explained

them, would be entirely and unlimitedly effective for the whole

community. 

    That value which arises from the social relation between

amount of goods and utility, or value as it would exist in the

communist state, we shall henceforth call "Natural Value."(1*) I

choose the name in full consciousness of the double sense which

an appeal to the "natural" has in the disposition of human

affairs. In its simplicity, purity, and originality it is so

attractive, and at the same time so contradictory to all

experience, that it is doubtful whether it can ever be more than

a dream. So too we shall think of the communistic state as the

perfect state. Everything will be ordered in the best possible

way; there will be no misuse of power on the part of its

officials, or selfish isolation on the part of its individual

citizens; no error or any other kind of friction will ever occur.

Natural value shall be that which would be recognised by a

completely organic and most highly rational community.(2*)

    The laws which we found in the elementary theory of value are

its natural laws, as those would take shape under the simplified

assumption that goods come into men's disposal without requiring

to be first produced. If we do away with this assumption we

obtain the natural laws of value in production. It will now be

our task to find out these laws. We shall ask ourselves what

productive instruments would be likely to obtain value in a

communistic state, whether labour alone, or also land and

capital; in what measure they would obtain value; whether there

is a natural rent from land and a natural interest on capital --

and so on through all the circumstances of production, till we

arrive at the question of cost value and its natural measurement.



    The relation of natural value to exchange value is clear.

Natural value is one element in the formation of exchange value.

It does not, however, enter simply and thoroughly into exchange

value. On the one side, it is disturbed by human imperfection, by

error, fraud, force, chance; and on the other, by the present

order of society, by the existence of private property, and by

the differences between rich and poor, -- as a consequence of

which latter a second element mingles itself in the formation of

exchange value, namely, purchasing power. In natural value goods

are estimated simply according to their marginal utility; in

exchange value, according to a combination of marginal utility

and purchasing power. In the former, luxuries are estimated far

lower, and necessaries, comparatively, much higher than in the

latter. Exchange value, even when considered as perfect, is, if

we may so call it, a caricature of natural value; it disturbs its

economic symmetry, magnifying the small and reducing the great. 

    The fact that natural value forms an element in the formation

of exchange value, puts our investigation in touch with reality,

and gives it its empirical importance. The value which would be

recognised by an extremely rational and completely united

commonwealth is not entirely foreign to that value which is

recognised by the society of to-day. Every individual desires for

his own part to form a rational judgment about value, but it is

not always within his power to do so; and, in the coming into

connection with others in exchange, the final effect becomes

altered, as I said, into caricature. There are innumerable more

or less correct approximations to natural value. Every one finds

them within his own economic circle; and even when the single

circles come together these individual valuations are not

entirely lost, but only somewhat altered. It will be of interest

to investigate closely to what extent the phenomena of exchange

value are of natural origin, and how great, accordingly, is the

formative power of natural value in existing conditions of

society. I believe the sequel will show that it is enormously

greater than is usually supposed. Land rent is, perhaps, the

formation of value that is most frequently attacked in our

present economy. Now I believe our examination will show that,

even in the communistic state, there must be land rent. Such a

state must, under certain circumstances, calculate the return

from land, and must, from certain portions of land, calculate a

greater return than from others: the circumstances upon which

such a calculation is dependent are essentially the same as those

which to-day determine the existence of rent, and the height of

rent, The only difference lies in this, that, as things now are,

rent goes to the private owner of the land, whereas, in a

communistic state, it would fall to the entire united community.

In such a state it would not form personal property, but it would

be calculated separately in the total income of the community,

and that on essential grounds; -- namely, in order to find out

what is the quota which individual lands contribute to the total

return, and to judge therefrom what outlay may and ought to be

expended to obtain this quota. In other words, the

economic-technical service, that of controlling production, would

remain, while the personal part it plays, as a source of private

income, would fall away. Should our examination succeed in

establishing this and similar facts, no one will be able to deny

that it helps us to a clearer understanding of existing economic

conditions. It would show what part of the present forms of value

not only exists for the satisfaction of self-interest, but

renders at the same time a technical service to social economy;

it would show therefore what part must never be given up, on pain

of leaving the economy without power of calculation and without

control.

    On this account the examination of natural value will be

useful, as well for those who wish to understand the economy of

the present, as for those who wish to evolve a new one. Defenders

of the existing order of things, equally with those who are

fighting to prepare the way for a new and ideal state, may,

without prejudice and without going against their principles,

unite in this study. Natural value is a neutral phenomenon, the

examination of which, whatever may come of it, can prove nothing

for and nothing against socialism. If land rent and interest on

capital are natural phenomena of value, they will have their

place in the socialistic state also, without necessarily breaking

it up and leaving the way clear again for capitalists and

landowners. Every natural form of value may be left its material

office, without connecting with it any personal privilege of

income. 

    So little is natural value a weapon against socialism, that

socialists could scarcely make use of a better witness in favour

of it. Exchange value can have no severer criticism than that

which exposes its divergences from the natural measurement,

although, indeed, this forms no particular proof for the essence

of socialism. As is well known, however, the socialists have

another theory of value. This we shall find again and again in

contradiction with the claims that rest on natural value, and

although we say nothing against socialism, but wish to remain

throughout within the neutral sphere of natural value, we shall

be obliged again and again to speak against the socialists. 

    It will be of advantage to the statement which follows if we

first try to make a general survey of the socialist theory of

value. 



NOTES:



1. What I propose to call "Natural Value" has been hitherto

called social use value. With the word "value in use"

(Gebrauchswerth) are connected too many misunderstandings to

permit of our using it without danger. Use value is commonly

understood as usefulness, or something closely related to that,

and not as actual value. It is, moreover, rarely used in

connection with production, and I wish to speak as much of the

value of production goods and of costs, as of the direct use

value of consumption goods. 



2. The question whether such a community can or ever will exist

is one which does not in the least concern us. We shall content

ourselves with imagining it, and it will be an excellent aid in

raising what would remain. of our present economy if we could

think away private property, as well as all the troubles which

are a consequence of human imperfection. Most theorists,

particularly those of the classical school, have tacitly made

similar abstractions. In particular, that point of view from

which price becomes a social judgment of value, really amounts to

a disregard of all the individual differences which emerge in

purchasing power, and which separate price from natural value. A

great many theorists have thus written the value theory of

communism without being aware of it, and in doing so have omitted

to give the value theory of the present state. By making our

assumptions quite clear, and guarding against a similar error, we

may do more for value as we find it than they have. 







Chapter 7



The Socialist Theory of Value





    Socialist writers, however much they find to object to in

value as it is in the present day, have little enough to say

concerning its future. They give us very scanty information as to

the part it would have to play in the socialist state. Karl Marx,

in explanation of this reserve, says that "the social relations

of man to his labour and to the products of his labour are here

transparently simple." It would appear that value, in the

socialist sense, resembles those organs of the human body of

whose existence, when diseased, we are painfully conscious, while

in health they are scarcely noticed. Physicians even, who know

their pathology thoroughly, are not able to say what vital

functions they serve. 

    The socialists teach that the one and only source of value is

labour. In the socialist state there are to be only two objects

of value, -- labour, and consumption goods produced by labour.

Land and capital will not be objects of value. Value presupposes

utility, but does not originate in it. It is created by labour,

and the expenditure of labour naturally attracts to itself the

interest of man. Its measure is labour-time, or even the exertion

involved in labour. Of the social services rendered by value only

that of the distribution of goods is retained, and even this only

to a limited extent; the produced consumption goods, estimated

according to their labour-value, are distributed among the

labourers according to the amount of labour service they have

rendered. Productive land and capital are the exclusive property

of the state, and are neither objects nor standards of the

distribution. The other service rendered by value, that of being

the controlling power of social economy, and, in particular, of

production, is not claimed at all. The only claims allowed are

those of utility or of use value, but by "use value" is not to be

understood value in the sense we give to it, but utility pure and

simple, and therefore utility without that peculiar measuring

power which arises from comparison of want and provision. 

    This, in outline, is the socialist programme of the future

for the valuation of goods, -- although, of course, not expressed

in the original language of its authors. In my opinion there has

never been, in the whole course of history, a more important

change contemplated in the social order than that now desired in

economic life; and never has plan of alteration been more

imperfectly thought out. To change a feudal kingdom into a modern

administration, or a monarchy into a republic, or an aristocracy

into a democracy, would be nothing to this; for it is the attempt

at an economic revolution which would affect not only those few

who are interested in political matters, but the whole body of

the people, -- affect them, too, just where they are most

strongly conscious of their own interests. Dreams of political

freedom, of equality, of brotherhood, even the religious dreams

of a kingdom of God on the earth, however fantastically tricked

out, have never betrayed so imperfect a knowledge of their

object, as does the socialist theory of value. These have at

least the excuse that they appeal to feelings of human nature

which may soar to unknown heights, and which, of their very

nature, give nourishment to the most extravagant expectations.

But value is a thing for the most unimpassioned thought. Here it

is wrong for any one to let imagination speak instead of reason,

-- wrong for the academic writer, and ever so much more wrong for

the social reformer and agitator. Not for one day could the

economic state of the future be administered according to any

such reading of value; indeed the first preliminary arrangements

for its introduction would show its utter uselessness. 

    To a certain extent, however, the socialists are justified by

their very opponents. The idea of labour value, and many other

ideas of socialist theory, originated among the bourgeois

economists, and were found by the leaders of the labour party to

be, theoretically, perfectly developed: it only refined to make a

practical application of them for the benefit of the socialist

party. It was hard not to make use of the advantage thus put into

their hands. If it be acknowledged that labour alone creates

value, it seems impossible to deny the claim that the labourer

alone should enjoy the value. In the academic struggle the

socialists undoubtedly got an important tactical advantage

through the unqualified acceptance of that theory -- the theory

held by a large section of their opponents, and a section which,

under the circumstances, might be considered the most formidable.

If all the tremendous conflict of interests could have been ended

by the arguments used by the spokesmen of the socialist party in

their wordy warfare, at a certain period of the literary

development the victory of socialism would probably have been

complete. But, of course, what was good enough in argument would

have broken down in face of facts, for no amount of plausibility

can impose on them, -- and, after vanquishing their opponents

with one theory, the socialists would have required to make up

another to support their position. 

    In the socialist theory of value pretty nearly everything is

wrong. The origin of value, which lies in utility and not in

labour, is mistaken. The relation of supply to demand -- that

fact which impels us to attribute utility to goods, and upon

whose fluctuations depend, in the last resort, the fluctuations

in amount of value -- is overlooked. The objects to which value

attaches are not all embraced, for among those must be included

productive land and capital, both as elements in the calculation

of costs, and also per se. And the service rendered by value in

economic life is only half understood, inasmuch as the most

essential part of it, the material control of economy, is

neglected. 

    All of this we shall require, -- now that we have made

acquaintance with the elementary phenomena, -- to demonstrate in

the circumstances of production. In particular we shall have to

show that, in the natural order of economy, labour is valued

according to its utility, value attaches to land and capital, and

land rent, as well as interest on capital, is calculated among

costs. If this were to be neglected production would become

chaos. 













Natural Value



	by Friedrich Wieser







Book 6



Value in the Economy of the State



Chapter 1



Introduction



    In the exchange transactions of private economies with one

another, objective exchange value acts as the economical measure

of goods, while, within individual private economies, this part

is taken by subjective value as each individual owner estimates

it, whether it be subjective exchange value in connection with

objective exchange value, or use value independent of it. All

these forms of value, reflecting with more or less truth their

common prototype, go back to one original form, viz. that which

we have indicated as natural value; natural value being, in the

last resort, the resultant of two simple fundamental components,

quantity of goods and utility of goods. Even such phenomena as

land rent, interest on capital, costs, are natural phenomena of

value which could be suppressed only by a force so powerful that

it would at the same time injure economic life and action itself.



    Besides private economies there exist a great many public

economies. The question now is whether, in them also, the value

of goods holds the same place, and whether in them it takes on

any new and peculiar forms. I shall limit my inquiry to the most

important of social economies, that of the state, and deal even

with it only in the most general way. The theory of social

economies is yet in its infancy, and it would be impossible to

discuss value in them at all exhaustively without first having

thoroughly gone into a great many other subjects. It, therefore,

appears to me best to confine myself to an entirely general and

comprehensive statement. 

    State economy divides itself into two great spheres, the

economy of income or finance, and the economy of expenditure or

administration. Administration, however, belongs to the economy

of the state only in so far as it is determined by economical

considerations. This is the case mainly where regard is had to

the material interests of the people, that is to say, in the

economic administration or the economic superintendence of the

state; but there is no single form of national activity but must

follow economic principles, if only in the second instance; viz.

in regard to the careful and economical employment of its

resources. 

    Up till quite recently economists have not, either in finance

or administration, recognised in value that importance which, by

analogy, might be suspected from its role in private economy.

With regard, in particular, to finance, theory has managed to do

almost entirely without value. The principles of taxation have

been and are almost always stated without value being mentioned,

or if mentioned it has been, at the most, only cursorily touched

upon by way of comparison. Taxation gets its warrant in specific

considerations, not in general economic ones. We speak of minimum

of subsistence, ability to pay, sacrifice of taxation,

progressive taxation and so on, almost entirely as if they were

facts and conceptions belonging to a distinct sphere, while

neither is the relation of this sphere to the fundamental

phenomena of all economy made clear, nor is any attempt made to

make it clear. 

    Adam Smith and his school treat the economic administration

of the state also in a similar manner. They explain it simply by

the necessities of national life, and value never enters into

their consideration. Where they do make mention of it exchange

value is always understood, -- that being the only value which

the school, as a rule, recognises. Any peculiar value pertaining

to the economy of a state is never discussed, as in general all

economic conceptions are borrowed entirely from the circumstances

of private economies, and bear their characteristics. Connected

with this -- as cause and effect -- there is a strong tendency to

limit the sphere of state economy, and to extend that of private

economy. Every theory formulates its conceptions in conformity

with its fundamental tendencies, but it strengthens these

fundamental tendencies in turn by the logical weight which the

conceptions once constructed exert. A person who recognises no

other value than exchange value will, wherever his common sense

says that it is a question of value, generally allow exchange

value to decide the matter in its one-sided way, or will, at all

events, give to it too great a preponderance. The way in which

Adam Smith rejects protection and argues for free trade may be

regarded as typical of the school. The national income is to be

measured by exchange value: but thus measured free trade will

undoubtedly give the larger income in the near future:

consequently, as it is always the income of the present that

forms the capital of the future, free trade assures the greatest

amount of well-being for all time to come. 

    In Germany this one-sidedness of the English school was early

recognised. Many writers, as, for instance, Friedrich List,

actively combated it. List placed his "theory of productive

forces" alongside of his "theory of value": exchange value was to

be the determining force in private economic relations, whereas,

in the economy of the state, "productive force" was to take its

place -- an antithesis whose inadequacy is most clearly shown

from the consideration that "productive forces" are themselves

estimated according to exchange value. Most writers took a

different course. They tried, gradually, and at first altogether

academically, to broaden the private economic views of the

English School, in such a way as to make them as far as possible

applicable to all economic relations. As regards value in

particular, exchange value was traced back to the general

conception of use value, and then conceived of as national or

social use value. Thus little by little the theory altered its

formal character. It undoubtedly became more rounded, more

plausible, more adaptable, but at the same time more indefinite

and inexact. Without following accurately the further development

of this theory, I may point out its most important fact: that the

scientific discussion did finally give up its academic

hesitation, and, in spite of the slightness of its theoretic

foundation, laid down with success and decision principles for

the practical formation of a state economy. Like the financial

system of the European states, their economic politics were

gradually reformed by the active assistance of theory, although

theory itself had not completely accomplished its task, nor,

indeed, was quite aware what that task was. The "theory" was a

highly-developed technology, capable of giving right direction,

although it did not succeed in finding its justification -- and

with that, of course, its limitation -- in absolutely convincing

clearness.

    The lately published work of E. Sax (Grundlegung der

Theoretischen Staatswirthschaft) is the first to complete the

transition from technology to the theory of national economy, and

has thus at last reached a goal aimed at by the German economists

through a long and steady development. In the sphere of

administration Sax has succeeded in indicating how public

interests may have the widest play, while still maintaining a

fixed economic conception which holds fast by the essentially

economic. The economic is one and the same in all its forms,

everywhere entirely distinct from the non-economic. Very

important is the application of Sax's work to the sphere of

finance -- all the more important that here he had almost no

predecessors -- and that the idea is thought out into details

with great clearness. The whole system of imposts rests on value:

this simple proposition makes the science of finance for the

first time what it should always have been, a part of political

economy. "Imposts of all kinds are examples of collective

valuation which find their full explanation in the general nature

of the phenomenon of value. The truth which finds expression in

this formula is directly decisive for the theory of national

economy, as a branch of the total theory of political economy,

balancing that of private economy. The simplicity of the solution

is a guarantee of its correctness. The apple falls from the tree

and the stars describe their courses in obedience to one and the

same law, that of gravitation. A Robinson Crusoe and a nation

numbering a hundred million souls obey one and the same law in

their economical transactions, that of value" (pp. 307-8).

    The statement which follows is so general and so condensed

that I have had but little chance of going into the rich contents

of Sax's book. In the interests of the statement I have,

moreover, considered it wiser, even where I disagree with Sax, to

refrain from the most part from any attempt to prove my

divergences with any great exactitude, as, in this portion of my

work, even more than in the former, I have neglected the literary

aspect of the subject. Here, as formerly, my task has been to

demonstrate, comprehensively and as a whole, what has hitherto

been considered only in isolation, if at all. It appeared to me

foreign to the plan of my work, and likely only to increase the

difficulty of the task which chiefly concerned me, -- that of

affording a survey of the whole subject, -- were I to let myself

be carried away by criticism and polemic into detail which I

should not have gone into for its own sake. 



Chapter 2



The Province of a State Economy



    It is generally assumed that the object of the individual

economy is provision for the wants of the individual -- that is

to say, those wants which the individual feels as an individual;

and that the economy of a community provides for the common or

collective wants -- that is, those which are experienced by the

individual as member of a community, or, to put it differently,

the wants of a community. The economy of a state therefore

provides for the wants of the state, i.e. those wants experienced

by the citizens of a state in consideration of their civic

connection with each other. This conception, however, scarcely

corresponds with the actual division of the economic sphere.

National interests, which are undoubtedly to be reckoned under

the head of collective interests, are frequently furthered by

personal sacrifice and expenditure. And more numerous instances

may be adduced of the contrary case -- that individual interests

are fostered by collective efforts. The desire to possess a means

of coming and going to one's business, is undoubtedly personal in

the highest degree; but the highways of traffic have been

included among the concerns of the commonwealth almost since the

beginning of time. In the communistic state the care of providing

for the entire sum of individual wants, would fall altogether to

the economy of the state without these wants having changed their

nature in any way. It must, therefore, be some circumstance which

does not touch the nature of the want itself that determines the

division of the economic sphere. 

    A simple consideration enables us to recognise what

circumstance this is. 

    The personal ability of the individual is in many cases

sufficient to secure him the realisation of his personal wishes.

In particular, the sphere within which the individual is capable

of making himself felt with effect, is quite extraordinarily

enlarged when men have learnt to make use of the division and

co-operation of labour. By means of this they enter into

combinations and exchange with one another, and thus increase

enormously their power of work, while, at the same time, they

calculate and distribute out again to the individual the

advantages obtained, and thus remain separate from each other, as

individuals with individual rights. There are, however, certain

results which demand a more intimate kind of connection, -- a

condition of real community, -- and cannot be obtained without

it. The desire to obtain these results, which often amounts to

the feeing of a peremptory necessity, leads to the formation of

the commonwealth. 

    There are various reasons which may make the attainment of a

certain result dependent upon the formation of collective bodies,

and upon the carrying out of collective actions. 

    In the first place may be mentioned the nature of the action

in question. For many kinds of action the individual, as

individual, is not qualified; he feels himself too weak, or, it

may be, quite incapable. From the first it has devolved upon the

state to represent the common weal, in cases where nothing but

the solidarity of many or of all is able to create the force that

is lacking to the scattered individuals. Only as a united state

can a people hope to ward off its enemies, and to protect its

citizens when in foreign countries. Only a union of people can

succeed in guarding a country's peace, and preserving order

against crime within its borders. From the general feeing of

justice are obtained the weight and power necessary for the

laying down of laws which will bind every one, and for the

appointing of judges and officers who will make every one bow

before the one common law. And thus numerous interests, partly

collective, partly the most ordinary general interests of the

individual, lead to an ever-widening extension of the sphere of

the state's activity, wherever the opinion prevails that only the

state possesses the power of offering any guarantee of the

satisfaction, or the full satisfaction, that is desired. 

    In the case of such actions as are executed in common, there

is an overwhelming tendency to bear the burden in common, and to

enjoy the results in common. Even if the power of the state is

set in motion for the sake of one solitary citizen, the occasion

cannot well be judged merely from the standpoint of the interest

of that one citizen. The very fact that the power of the state

has been set in motion at all, engages the interest of the

public, because this power, once set in motion, cannot be allowed

to move in vain. All its future success depends on the

recognition of this. For this reason the outcome, for instance,

of every single criminal or civil process is full of importance

to the whole community. Every such process must be so conducted

that respect for the law may be strengthened, not shaken. But

generally speaking the occasions on which the machinery of the

state appears on the scene are, in their origin, matters of great

importance and of great compass -- frequently, of the greatest

importance and the greatest compass; they are indeed such matters

as only the united strength of the whole people is sufficient

for. This circumstance of itself makes it impossible, as a rule,

to divide out among the individual citizens the result obtained

by the combined effort, or even to charge it to the individual

according to its effects; hence the necessity of waking the

benefit universally accessible, or ascribing it to the people as

a whole without further distinction. It happens comparatively

seldom that individuals can be indicated and singled out, whose

interests are exceptionally concerned, and for whom the services

of the state may be exceptionally interposed and charged. 

    In the second place, just as the results of a war are not to

be bought or sold, and a war cannot therefore be carried on as a

private matter,(1*) so it happens that, among the undertaking for

which the means and powers of the individual citizens suffice,

there are very many which must be excluded from the circle of

private business because of the impossibility of obtaining any

profit out of them. The most various circumstances may have this

effect. The streets of a town would be useless for purposes of

traffic if they were not free to use without payment; this makes

it impossible that any citizen should retain public routes for

his own benefit. The same principle holds in all cases where

goods whose production costs something must be made over to the

public free of charge -- "quasi-free goods," as Menger calls

them. Many undertakings also, although the public interest

demands them at once, give promise of return only in the distant

future; -- so distant indeed that no private individual could be

expected to wait for it: this is the case, e.g., as regards many

railways. Very often again it is doubtful whether the return of

an undertaking will ever be sufficient to cover the costs, while

at the same time the results in case of success are temptingly

large; here private enterprise would hesitate, either on account

of the great amount of capital necessary or for other incidental

reasons. Very often there is a scarcity of capable and energetic

private undertakers, simply on account of the defective

economical development of the citizens. And there are often cases

where the goods concerned are, for the private economy, only in

process of becoming -- still incomplete, unripe, latent; where

the goods must first be got at, or the goods that are to

supplement and complement them be discovered, before they become

capable of rendering any useful service. How much latent labour

power there is which must first become conscious of its own

existence and train itself, before it can find a market! What

hidden wealth may not slumber in a land favoured by nature but

uncultivated, its existence suspected, even known, but out of

reach owing to the general backward condition of industry, of

wealth, of education, of credit, of law, or of peace! And,

although, in such a case, there is as yet no secure foundation

for private enterprise, what government would not regard it as a

duty itself to come forward and take hold, not only in the way of

general administration, but by economic undertakings which train

and ripen human faculty though they may give no direct return?

Sometimes only the want is there, crying urgently for

satisfaction, while those who feel it have no power to pay for

its satisfaction; in this case no private undertaker can do

anything, and the state must step in to mitigate an evil which

might grow to be a great public ill. Many other similar

circumstances might be added, all acting in the same direction;

that is to say, excluding private enterprise by reason of their

unprofitableness, but demanding the activity of the state on

account of the importance of the goods concerned. 

    In the third place, many undertakings which lie within the

power of a citizen, and which also hold forth to him a promise of

gain, are reserved to the state, for the simple reason that they

would put too much power into the hands of the private

undertaker, or assure him too great a gain. The fear is that the

exceptional position they would necessary give to the person who

undertook them might be misused. The businesses which belong to

this class are mostly necessary monopolies, -- particularly

monopolies of great extent, such as the post and the railway. We

do not expect, in an independent private undertaker, the

requisite reliableness, or the will to undertake such huge

businesses, or to carry them through as we should like; or we

expect that too high a price would be charged for the service.

But in all these points people look for something better from a

government. This does not, however, in the least involve that the

form of undertaking for profit be entirely rejected. It may be

retained, but, with the endeavour to obtain the highest business

return, must be conjoined, in some way or other, the endeavour to

serve the interests of the public. In particular, where any

considerable want is concerned while the power to pay is wanting,

the service must be undertaken at limited prices, -- that is to

say, valuation according to exchange value must be replaced by

valuation according to natural value. Thus emerges the "public

enterprise." In the communistic state all production would be the

affair of the state, and fall under public enterprise, from a

consideration which amounts essentially to this; -- that private

production is one-sided, and looks to the interests of the richer

classes, while putting in the background the interests of the

community in general. Even the affairs of the private household

would be, for the most part, given over to the state. 

    If we cast a glance over the whole series of duties which

constitute the economy of the state, it will easily be seen that,

apart from the diversity of originating causes just described,

they are also distinguished from each other by their content.

Certain of them -- of which the last-mentioned group is the best

instance -- are very closely related to private undertakings.

Like them they have to do with the direct application of labour

to goods; they have to do with detail and with individual

production; and they are scattered in countless separate actions

and occupations -- many of these of a similar nature -- over

countless separate goods. Here it is considerations more remote

and far - reaching that exclude private administration in matters

where, otherwise, it might be suitable enough. This can be most

clearly realised if we consider the businesses of production and

of housekeeping as transferred to a communistic state. These

would indeed cease to be matters of private economy in the

personal sense, but, essentially or technically, they would

remain, if the expression may be employed, "economic in detail."

    Quite different is the character of the remaining acts of

state economy, which chiefly belong to the first and second

groups just described. Their duties do not admit of being

discharged by private economies for various reasons, but these

reasons all lead, in the last resort, to the same issue; -- that

such acts are beyond the calculation of the individual, either

because their products cannot be bought and sold, or cannot be

bought and sold individually. Their results go without money and

without price to the public, -- either in whole or in great part,

-- according to what Sax calls the Princip des allgemeinen

Genussgutes. They are transactions on a great scale, working with

large means, and large returns, -- returns which it is often

entirely impossible to distribute. They assure the general

foundations of personal life and of economic action. Their

results must be distributed over all the community and not

divided out individually, even supposing it possible to conceive

of them as distributed to the individual. Of course they are

undertaken on account of the utility they promise; but it is

frequently far from certain -- as e.g, in the case of war --

whether the desired result will ever be attained. And even if it

is attained its amount can, for the most part, be only

approximately determined, partly on account of the wide range

which it covers, partly on account of the large number of persons

concerned, partly on account of the impossibility of conceiving

the individual's share in it, partly on account of the long

process of development, and the long time that must elapse before

many of its effects emerge. Very often all that one knows of an

action is that it must not be neglected, and that we must summon

all our forces to undertake it; while it is almost entirely

uncertain how in the end the life of the people may be affected

thereby. Often it is other generations that must pass judgment

upon it. 

    In the communistic state also, if all economical matters are

to devolve upon the state, decisions will certainly be made from

this point of view; the affairs of the household and of ordinary

production will be kept separate from those of the general

economic and state administration. In the former case goods will

be estimated at their natural value as that is now determined in

private economy, i.e. according to marginal value; in the latter

case, this form of valuation will be -- as we shall go on to show

-- to a great extent abandoned. Alongside of it, or in its stead,

will be placed another form of valuation, which we may best call

"national economic" valuation, -- a term which certainly does not

express the formulas of communism, but those of existing

economical conditions. 



Chapter 3



Value in the Natural Economy of the State



    Suppose the utopian state of communism actually realised,

there also, as we have just seen, where all economic life has

become the concern of the state, must the same distinction as now

be made between private economy and state economy, though

possibly under different names. On one side must be grouped by

themselves all those businesses of the household and of

production which are now left in the hands of private

individuals, together with many undertaking which essentially

belong to private economy, but are at present, for special

reasons, conducted by the state. On the other side and distinct

from these, must be placed all matters of the general

administration of the state -- or of all that is economic in it

-- and of economic politics in general. Of course, there would be

no lack of transferences to and from each group, and whatever

might be the ruling consideration in the one group would have a

place in the other. This does not, however, in any way conflict

with the statement that the leading principles in each must be

different. 

    In the former, or private economic group, where goods are

capable of being measured very accurately as to their amount and

utility, the main endeavour must be to obtain from every

practically measurable portion of goods the greatest amount of

generally recognised utility. This endeavour must find its

expression in an estimate of value which takes its measure, for

each single good, from the margin at which the most perfectly

utilised supply meets the most perfectly sifted demand. In the

sphere of production such an estimate of value takes, as we are

aware, the form of an estimate of return or of costs. The value

of stocks of similar goods must be represented as multiples: the

value of production goods combined in the shape of products as

sums of multiples. The individual amounts must be calculable --

in many instances very exactly calculable -- against each other.

An exact economic calculus must be established, the advantage and

disadvantage of every sufficiently familiar process being put in

figures; and it must be regarded as the triumph of economic art

to exactly ascertain and exactly realise that plan which the

value calculation indicates as the best. 

    In the latter, or national economic group, the first

principle must also be to secure the greatest amount of utility,

the highest well-being of the citizens. But the utility and its

amount will not be so exactly estimated; will often, indeed, as

we have already proved at length, be very inexactly estimated. As

the means necessary to achieve the ends of the state are for the

most part very extensive, and the more or less cannot be so

exactly determined, the indefiniteness of the valuation will be

increased from the side of the goods also. The estimate of value

will often be very vague, and in many cases unanimity of opinion

regarding it is not to be expected. More exact estimates will be

obtained only as regards such goods as are also employed in

private economy, by transferring to them the definite estimate

obtained by private economy, and also as regards such goods as

are obtained through production. But where national economy makes

use of specific goods which do not, either by reason of their

employment or origin, take to themselves the estimate of private

economy;(1*) where national economy stands absolutely and

entirely by itself, and seeks to guard public interests by

specific public methods; there, in place of the quantitative

estimate of the value of goods in masses, will emerge the vague

and disputable valuation of interests, influenced by inclinations

and passions.(2*)

    The opposition between natural value in national economy and

natural value in private economy reduces itself, in effect, to an

opposition between vagueness and definiteness, subjective

valuation and exact calculation. Even thus the contrast is

sufficiently great to obtain clear and peculiar expression in

practical politics. Theoretically, of course, there can never be

any doubt as to the relation of the two. Just as private economic

interests, where they compete with each other, are ranked

according to their relative importance, so the interests of

private and of national economy are ranked in relation to each

other. The more important aim takes precedence of the less

important -- this forms the theoretic basis on which the estimate

of value is built. But how will this rule work in practice when

any doubt arises as to the degree of importance? As a matter of

fact, the indefinite nature of national economic valuations must

in practice frequently give rise to doubts as to the exact

relation which the acts of private and of national economy should

bear to each other. Very frequently it is the same goods that may

be employed by either private or national economy; in the last

resort, indeed, there is nothing but one fund out of which to

provide for both, and only a few goods are from the first

specifically reserved for one or the other sphere. A

characteristic and common instance of the competition between the

two interests occurs where an undertaking, which is profitable as

a private business as shown by its calculable return in direct

results, is maintained, from the side of national economy, to

have an unfavourable, destructive, or undermining effect; that is

to say, as regards results which are more remote and difficult to

follow. Alongside of this we have the converse instance, that an

undertaking which is unprofitable as a private business, and

whose valuable returns do not cover the costs, may, from the

point of view of national economy, be regarded as profitable,

whether tending to progress or conservative as the case may be.

What holds as regards individual undertakings, also obtains as

regards whole groups of these, -- of the great acts of

legislation and administration, of the various branches and

spheres of production, of the activity of the producing class of

a nation. It might e.g be disputed whether agriculture or the

labouring classes ought to have public subsidy -- i.e. support

which might not be justified, from the point of view of private

economy, by the value of the land products or the results of

labour, but might be justified if one looked at the maintenance

of the stability of the national economy and of the life of the

people. 

    In the communistic state, as in the economy of to-day, there

will be no lack of occasions which will continually force people

to decide anew between considerations of the quantitative and

calculable proximate returns -- considerations of direct profit,

-- and of results more remote and less calculable --

considerations of general interests. Suppose that the subject

were some technical improvement like the establishing of

railways, discussions would undoubtedly arise, -- as they did at

the time when railways were introduced, -- as to their utility,

feasibility, and consequences. And even after experience has put

an end to the general discussion, there will still continue to be

a conflict of opinions as to the more exact relation between the

calculable results and the incalculable. Or, possibly, there may

be a doubt whether the industry of a people should take the

direction of trade or of agriculture; whether the power of the

labouring classes should be more utilised, or more economised;

possibly, also, whether it would be wise to carry on war, whether

preparations should be made for it, or whether it might he better

to foster the arts of peace, and so forth. And certainly there

will always be one party which calculates, and which looks

dispassionately to the profitableness or unprofitableness of any

scheme, and another party which looks far ahead and leaves room

for imagination and passion. Under different names the economical

oppositions of interest to-day will recur. The conflict which we

may observe now between exchange value and public interests,

depends accordingly -- apart altogether from the opposition of

personal advantage -- upon a difference in economic aims which is

inevitable, and arises out of natural economic conditions. 

    If it must be confessed that, in the communistic state, the

private economical valuation of goods is not satisfactory because

it sometimes neglects necessary deductions, sometimes essential

additions, and so comes out too high or too low, we must a

fortiori say the same of exchange value in the present order of

things, where it goes too far in emphasising the characteristics

of the private economy. It is the exact calculation and the

incalculable but actually observed influences, that, together,

make up the full value of goods. The theorist must admit so much,

however hard it is for him, when he considers how greatly

economic theory loses by it in exact conception of its formulas

and precepts. How simple and how easy to apply any advice

whenever only calculable quantities are concerned; -- whatever,

calculated by exchange value, yields a profit is economically

permissible; everything else is forbidden! And how misty and

obscure all theoretical solutions become when they put absolute

laws aside, and are obliged to appeal to concrete existing

circumstances to decide for them! In the end it is to politics we

must leave the task of deciding, as well as of carrying out its

decisions in the concrete -- remembering that politics belongs

not only to the politician but to political science. however much

the pride of theory may suffer in recognising this, it is a fact

not to be gainsaid. In order to observe and understand things,

they are often thought of as being less complicated than they

really are: and this is right enough when nothing further is

intended than to simplify the process of thought by beginning at

the easiest. But it is not permissible to call a halt at this

point, and apply the solution thus found, without more ado, to

reality. This is the sort of thing that might be described as

"the disease of theory": to take things first in the way in which

they can be most simply grasped, and then to represent the whole

world according to the picture we have just been able to think

out for ourselves; to take what is most easily grasped, or at all

events most precisely grasped, for the actual. 

    Like every exaggeration this also produces its own reaction,

viz. the opposition to all theory whatever. The book which my

readers now hold in their hands is a proof that I do not share in

this opposition. Possibly it may not prove equally clearly that I

consider every other direction of investigation, besides the

purely theoretical one, necessary and significant in its own

place; but no candid critic will, I hope, find any reason to

dispute this. 

    That the theory, even when it recognises the influences of

national economy upon value, in some sort paves the way for

politics, is not likely to be denied. The man who has thought out

the theory of value to the end, even within the limits just

mentioned, will have cause to point with pride to the help which

this has afforded him in political science and practical

statecraft. It is a matter of the first importance -- one without

which no decision can be arrived at, -- to recognise that there

is a sphere within which the estimate of exchange value is

applicable, and another in which it is not. Now if we could

define these spheres, even in the most general way; if we could

keep entirely and clearly separate the laws of the national

estimate and the laws of the private estimate of value, so that

every one who followed with sufficient earnestness would be

convinced that they corresponded to the essential demands of

economic action; if it were possible, besides, to indicate the

directions in which the actual course of things diverges from

these laws most frequently and with the most serious results: in

that case the foundation for political action would be so plainly

laid down, and would compare so well with all the errors and

difficulties which beset its path without these principles, that

no one would deny that such a theory had justified its existence.

To mention only one special case. The representing of goods by

weighed and counted sums of barren metal or paper, and the

consequent valuation of goods, and of the well-being they secure,

by numbers and figures, by items and weights, is in itself a

somewhat mysterious matter; a matter which a man who wishes to

obtain a clear view of things might imagine to have an artificial

and unhealthy origin; a matter which does, in fact, lead many an

honest and intelligent thinker to such a conjecture. It is, then,

a conclusion well worthy of consideration when a science succeeds

in proving that such a manner of procedure is, at bottom and in

its own place, sound and simple, and that it would be impossible

to obtain a more exact and distinct measure for the thousandfold

variety of economic satisfactions, than that afforded, under the

necessary conditions, by the natural marginal value of goods. 



NOTES:



1. We may take as illustration the case of a barren island whose

occupation is demanded by military or political considerations.



2. Even in private economy, all thing considered, one has to deal

with masses of goods and with wants of great compass: private

undertaking are in fact more numerous than state undertaking, and

form the principal part of the body economic. All the same, the

extent of the undertaking, in private economy, has only to a

trifling extent that indefiniteness of valuation which it so

easily gives rise to in national economy. In private economy one

has to deal with more, but smaller objects; in state economy,

with isolated but more wide-reaching matters. In the former all

quantities finally resolve themselves into divisible sums; in the

latter, they do not. This contrast is so important, and

recognition of it affords so deep an insight into the structure

of exchange value, that, at the risk of repeating myself, I shall

try once more to give to it as exact expression as possible. 

    There are two considerations which must be carefully taken

into account if we would understand the calculus of private

economy. 

    First: all stocks of goods of a similar kind -- and, along

with these, all goods which, as products, relate themselves

through costs to such stocks -- come within the range of the

marginal law, and are measured as divisible sums made up of the

smallest units, each unit estimated at one and the same value.

This makes it appear as though all wealth were split up into

"atoms," but it is so only in appliance; as a matter of fact

within the sphere of the marginal law every "atom" in the whole

circle of wealth is valued by this method of measurement; not

only are all the marginal employments put in evidence but, with

and though them, all permissible employments from the highest

down to those standing on the margin, -- only that we are saved

the trouble of putting into the calculation any but the marginal

uses. This makes it possible to calculate even the almost

infinite quantities which are destined to meet almost infinitely

various wants. For the purposes of carrying on ordinary private

business, for instance, the whole enormous agricultural wealth of

a nation can be quite properly grasped through the ordinary

economic estimate of the same, even although this estimate, which

only takes stocks and marginal employments into consideration, is

very far from giving expression to the whole importance which

those satisfactions that are provided through agriculture have

for the life of the nation. There is, therefore, nothing more

misleading than to introduce a treatise on the price of

agricultural products by a disquisition upon the importance of

agriculture in this latter sense. The "surplus value" left out

from the calculation need not be taken into the calculation; for

one thing, that it is omitted, not only in agricultural taxation,

but everywhere, and, for another thing, that, as regards detail,

a quite adequate balancing of agriculture against trade,

industry, and the other branches of economy, and also of the

individual businesses of agriculture against each other, may be

obtained, if only the margin be everywhere observed down to which

wants are satisfied, production extended, and cost goods

expended. 

    If this same agricultural wealth be considered with regard to

the purposes of general economic politics, the point of view

changes. We are no longer concerned with innumerable individual

goods as opposed to each other, but with that which affects them

all in common. Thus agriculture, or great parts of it, become a

whole; then is the time to consider the importance of all its

services; and then we have to face an enormous complex of results

which must all be estimated in their entire extent. 

    Second: by private economy the whole productive return --

again taking into account the smallest quantities -- is

distributed among the complementary productive factors without

remainder. The sum of all the "productive contributions" is equal

in value to the total return, and the productive value is

consequently as clearly calculable as the value of the products.

On the other hand, in questions of economic politics, if the

destinies of large quantities of production goods have to be

weighed all at one time, the estimate of the "contribution" does

not suffice. It becomes necessary to undertake the exceedingly

difficult task of considering how deep the "complementarity" of

the productive factors in its ultimate ground may reach, and how

far these factors mutually condition one another -- in the way of

fructifying or serving as foundation -- if they are all at once

brought together in masses, or severed from each other. Here,

again, in the "contribution" of private economy we calculate only

the marginal value, whereas, in the total "co-operation" of

national economy, we calculate the more far-reaching and less

easily calculable importance of the goods. 

    This must all be understood with the above-mentioned

limitation, that we have here indicated only the leading

characteristic of the two economic systems, while each system

always shows traces of the other, and the transitions from one to

the other escape notice. 



Chapter 4



Value in the Present-Day Economy of the State





    The conduct of economic life, as actually carried on, adds

another and a stronger contrast to that which naturally exists

between private and national valuation. 

    The state as it actually exists -- unlike the communistic

state -- has not the management of all economic matters, but only

of a trifling portion of them. And, again, all economic goods do

not belong to the state. Indeed it does not possess even enough

for the proper carrying out of its own objects. As a rule it

possesses only the buildings and the fixed plant necessary for

the exercise of its pubic functions. Whatever beyond is required

for the current service must, for the most part, be handed over

to it by the citizens in the shape of annual contributions from

their property and income. The most important of these

contributions are raised, as we know, in the shape of taxation,

and to the consideration of this alone we shall here confine

ourselves. 

    Schaffle (Steuerpolitik, p. 17) has already laid down the

principle on which the goods which form the income of the

citizens should be divided out, between taxes on the one hand for

the satisfaction of public interests, and domestic outlay on the

other for the satisfaction of private wants. He calls it the

"principle of proportionate provision for the wants of the

individual and the wants of the government." The income of the

citizens must always be devoted to those employments which at the

time are the most important. There must not be too rich an

endowment of the pubic housekeeping at the expense of keeping

down the citizen's, nor of the private housekeeping at the cost

of deterioration in the pubic service. 

    Sax has developed the same idea still further. Goods obtain

their value from the uses to which they are put. The correct

principle for the appropriation of income to the purposes of the

state is therefore simple; it is the universal principle of

economical employment, viz. that goods be employed in accordance

with their value. If the state should claim too much, it

diminishes value, by expending goods for purposes of state

economy which would have a higher value if employed in private

economy. If it claims too little, value is again diminished -- as

in this case also the entire importance of the goods is not

realised. 

    This law obtains its full significance in consequence of the

fact that riches are unequally distributed, and that personal

incomes and, moreover, personal wants are of different degrees.

If every one had the same wealth, income, and wants, all the

citizens would have to contribute the same quota of taxes. But as

this is not so, they must contribute unequal quotas and again it

is value which provides the measure. Every individual economy, in

respect of the relation of supply and demand peculiar to it, has

what Sax calls an "individual Werthstand." The same amounts of

goods are valued differently, or, what amounts to the same thing,

the same amounts of value are expressed in different quantities

of goods. To understand this expression of Sax, it may be best to

recur to a fact which we have already taken as a starting-point

in arriving at the law of price. We said that every intending

purchaser who goes on the market calculates to himself, or ought

to calculate, the money equivalent of the goods he wishes to buy,

i.e. the sum of money whose value to him will equal the value of

the goods, so that it is not economically permissible for him to

go beyond it. Now a similar money-equivalent must be calculated

for the value which the services of the state have to the

individual citizen. More than this money equivalent it cannot,

economically speaking, be the duty of any citizen to pay in

taxation, but, on the other hand, it is the duty of every one to

pay taxes up to this amount in order to meet the costs of th e

public service. 

    This acknowledged, the next matter is the more exact estimate

of the individual equivalents. The circumstances which decide are

wealth, income, and want. The greater the wealth and income, the

greater will be the subjective equivalent or the taxation; and

the greater the degree of want, the smaller will be the

subjective equivalent or the taxation. All the same, taxation

cannot simply be fixed proportionally to wealth and income: a

progressive rate of taxation is justifiable. The man who only

earns enough to sustain the physical minimum of existence has

nothing left to give up to the state. I cannot go further than

this and show the reasons which Sax gives for the claim of

exemption of those who are at the minimum of existence, for the

progressive rate of taxation, and all the other familiar claims

of modern taxation. While it need scarcely be said that, as the

science grows, many things will probably be formulated otherwise,

still he has reached the essential matter. In all points which

have been indicated as important by economic discussion up till

the present, and which developed legislation has called into

notice, he has discovered the connection between them and general

economic facts and principles, and thus given to what has been

empirically reached a basis in theory. 



    Hitherto, as regards the most important points of the theory

of taxation, the science of finance has rested its tenets on an

appeal to the claims of justice. In this almost unanimous

dependence upon outside and non-economic considerations, the

imperfect condition of that science betrays itself even more than

in its lack of agreement over the purely economic part of its

investigation, and so far as this remains it must resign all

claim to be regarded as an essentially economic doctrine. Thanks

to the labours of Sax this is to a great extent altered. All the

principal requirements of the theory of taxation have obtained an

economic foundation in being derived from the general economic

categories --  Want, Goods, Economy, Value. In spite of this,

however, I cannot believe -- though this brings me into

opposition to Sax -- that the economic basis of taxation has

proved so perfect as to be able to dispense altogether with

considerations of justice. Without attempting any complete proof

of this statement -- which could not he done without the

difficult and tedious work of distinguishing between the economic

and the just, -- I should like to advance one single argument

which appears to me sufficiently to corroborate its correctness. 

    Sax as we have seen requires that every one pay in taxation

the full money equivalent in which, according to his own

individual standpoint of value, is expressed the value of the

services of the state to him. This claim is certainly absolutely

economic, in so far as it prevents the less able being taxed at

their maximum or above it, while it taxes the more able under

their maximum. The claim is, further, certainly an economic one,

in so much as it excludes the possibility of any one being taxed

above his maximum. But in so far it is not an absolutely economic

claim; it rests also upon the legal assumption of private

property; it would be uneconomic if it could be proved that

private property is itself uneconomic. But how would it be if

this claim were set against one which demanded that the rich, and

possibly the middle classes also, should be taxed at their

maximum, while the poorer and poorest classes were taxed below

it? What could be opposed to this claim? Certainly no absolutely

economic consideration; for the result of this being realised

would be, economically considered, a more perfect satisfaction of

the people's want. The only thing that could be opposed to it

would be the consideration that, as a matter of justice, the same

formal fundamental proposition must hold for all, -- equal

justice for all; a consideration which might, perhaps, in the

last instance, be traced back to an economic basis, but which, in

the present state of scientific development, is simply derived

from the feeling of justice, and represents a quite distinct

phase of that feeing. It may possibly be that, at a later period

of time, it will be declared the duty of the rich to free the

poorer classes from all pubic burdens, in order somewhat to

mitigate the privations they suffer from the unequal distribution

of wealth. Sax himself suggests (page 522) that, when that time

comes, there may be an active endeavour, based on altruistic

motives, to extend exemption from the "physical" minimum of

subsistence to a "culture" minimum. It is possible that this

endeavour might be only a symptom of gradual development in the

direction of freeing the weakest and weaker classes, entirely or

in part, according to the degree of their weakness, from the

burden of taxation.(1*)

    As it is with the ordering of taxation, so is it, in my

opinion, with all valuations in private and national economy, in

so far as they have to weigh the conflicting interests of many

persons. The principle which will reduce to a common measure of

advantage the interests of persons who are differently situated

in respect of wealth, has, I think I may venture to say without

hesitation, not yet been found. So long as it remains

undiscovered, it is impossible in such cases to dispense with

some reference to that ranking of personal claims with which the

feeing of justice is somewhat satisfied. If we give our assent to

the principle of taxation demanded by economic theory, it is only

because, without having an entirely strict theoretical

justification for it, practical considerations which cannot be

rejected compel us to approve of private property, and, moreover,

of a degree of its utilisation quite definite and in accordance

with modem ideas. 



NOTES:



1. Sax (page 522) remarks that, in any case, as regards the

over-burdening of the rich, the economic margin is already given

in their "individual valuation looking to possible taxation." But

even granting that this margin is of purely economic origin,

there remains, as we have seen, inside of it, sufficient room for

the activity of other than purely economic considerations.



Chapter 5



The Fundamental Law of Collective Valuation



    If the burden of taxation is distributed among the citizens

in the manner just described, a very remarkable contrast emerges

between the law which regulates pubic imposts, and that law of

price (under free exchange on a market uncontrolled by the state)

which regulates the burden that must be borne by all individuals

when they wish to acquire goods produced or offered for sale by

private industry. As return for the services of the state, or as

contribution towards meeting the costs of these services, each

individual gives the maximum which he is able to give, the full

equivalent. In free exchange, on the other hand, the

(approximate) maximum is paid only by the marginal purchaser; the

other purchasers get off more cheaply, as the one price is

established for all, and no one requires to pay more than the

equivalent of the marginal purchaser, even although his own

valuation may be much higher. The state, accordingly, takes

advantage of the purchasing power of every one in a much more

thorough way; and, more especially, the purchasing power of the

wealthier citizens. It does not suffer the rich to pay according

to the standard of the poor, but insists that every one shall be

taxed in accordance with the full measure of his own personal

estimate of the value which the services of the state have for

him.

    Hence is derived a peculiar law of national economic

valuation -- as of collective valuation generally. In every

self-contained economy equal quantities of goods have an equal

value; similar items, or fractions, or units, of a stock have for

their owner the same value. This law holds also in all free

economies, and for the economic bodies created by it; similar

goods have on the same market the same price, the same exchange

value. But it is different in the case of the national economic

body, as, generally, in that of every collective economy which

binds together several otherwise independent economic subjects to

carry out distinct purposes. Here the goods which belong to the

individual economic subjects, and from which the taxes are to be

drawn, are valued as unequal, -- equal taxes have unequal value,

the same value is expressed by unequal taxes. The valuation of

individual wealth and income on the part of a government agrees

exactly with the individual degree of valuation for purposes of

taxation; a government estimates the property of each person

exactly as he estimates it himself, and in so far the collective

economy is not like a self-contained economy. Not until the

government comes to the spending of the taxes does it act in

accordance with the universal law; not till then do sums, which

were valued as unequal so long as the government had to collect

them, come to be equal in value.(1*)

    Not only, then, does the levying of taxes rest on valuation,

but in the levying of taxes is directly expressed a distinct

valuation; a valuation which -- as regards the wants of the

public housekeeping -- estimates every good at a lower figure in

proportion to the number of other goods which are bound up with

it in one individual's wealth, or in proportion to the limited

character of the private wants to which it is devoted. In other

words, the theory of taxation, in its economic foundations,

belongs not to the applications of the theory of value, but to

the theory of value itself. 

    The fact that, when levying taxes, a government, in contrast

to the general law of ordinary economic life, rates economic

property differently according to the individual circumstances of

those who are taxed, has, economically speaking, undoubtedly

beneficial results. It allows that the public burdens of the

poorer classes be put at a lower figure; it allows the ability of

the wealthier to bear taxation to be more fully utilised; and it

thus places the taxes where they will cause least injury to the

satisfaction of private needs. Were the state to act otherwise;

were it to impose equal contributions, like poll taxes, on every

citizen; it would inflict on the poorer classes privations in no

way compensated by the extended indulgence in luxury that would

now be possible to the richer. 

    To this extent it might be desirable that the same principle

should also apply in free economic life; that there also each

should pay according to the amount of his purchasing power. In

this way a universal equalisation of satisfaction might be

attained; if every person were obliged to pay a dearer price

according as he possessed more means, riches would offer no

advantage, poverty no privation; all would have in the long run

the same satisfactions. It need scarcely be said that, so long as

our economy remains free, this cannot be. For so long as it is

so, every one will strive to buy as cheaply as possible, and

sellers will meet buyers in the same spirit -- inasmuch as they

will make the slightest advance in price an occasion to give the

preference to the buyer who offers it, and will not in the least

insist on adapting the objective amounts of price to the

subjective purchasing power of the buyers. And just because this

law of the free economy is so closely united with the freedom of

that economy, it would be useless to condemn it for the undoubted

evil effects which it directly has upon the distribution of the

satisfaction of wants. In order to judge adequately, one must in

any case take into consideration as well the effects of economic

freedom -- or, to put it differently, of private economies and

private property -- on all other economic relations, and

particularly as regards the formation of productive returns. It

may very well be that private property gives rise to great

inequalities in the satisfaction of wants, while it,

nevertheless, secures, even to those who receive the smallest

share in the general distribution, an enormously increased

satisfaction of want on the whole the reason being the enormous

increase in productive return which it allows and bring with it.

And here, perhaps, may be found a reason for the remarkable

phenomenon that one and the same community should contain at the

same time two such diverse organisations as a free economy and a

collective economy. In the former of these it diverges from the

natural measure of value in that it over-estimates the goods

reserved for acquisition by the rich, while, in the latter, it

diverges from it in that it puts all goods possessed by the rich

at a low figure so far as the public housekeeping is concerned.

In the former the community is governed by a law which spares the

rich, except where they come into competition with each other;

while in the latter it lays down a law for itself which utilises

their purchasing power to a quite unlimited extent In the former

it favours the unequal distribution of satisfactions: in the

latter, it helps to equalise them. Such deeply-rooted divergences

can only be explained by showing that the two organisations serve

different purposes, -- purposes in which personal freedom demands

different scope. 

    We could not follow out this line of thought without leaving

the sphere of the theory of value, and trespassing into the wide

sphere of economic justice and economic philosophy. The

explanation of the social organisation within which the

valuations take place, is a task with which the theory of value,

with its limited means, is not capable of dealing. And it is not

only the theory of value which is unequal to this task; only a

theory of society, which took into consideration other than

merely economic facts, could adequately undertake it.

    If now, in closing, there is one thing which, more than

another, I wish to repeat with special emphasis, it is the

intention which has dominated me throughout the whole work, and

in every part of it, -- the intention to be, in the best sense of

the word, empirical. I may perhaps hope that the attainment of

this object has not been disturbed by the fiction -- undoubtedly

unempirical -- of a natural value and of the utopian state of

communism. So far as I can judge of my own work, I have nowhere

pointed to any foreign non-empirical power in the actuality of

economic life. The only liberty I have taken has been to leave

out of consideration facts of whose activity there could be no

doubt: -- the actual imperfections of valuation, the

individualism of our economy, and, finally, the inequality of

wealth. At the same time, however, I have not neglected to

indicate, at all events in a general way, the directions in which

these circumstances must of necessity cause value, both in the

private economy and in the economy of the state, to deviate from

the natural standard. I hope that my statement has not by this

means become untrue, though I know very well that it must of

necessity be imperfect. But what is incompletely stated is

certainly not, on that account alone, non-empirical -- if it were

so, what statement would be empirical, seeing that we are unable

ever to do more than investigate mere fragments of the great

organic structure of our world? All judgment as regards any

attempt at investigation must depend on whether the fragment,

with which the inquiry is concerned, be large enough and solid

enough to have a coherence of its own, and to deserve

consideration by itself. If the imperfect description of the

phenomena of value, which I have attempted to give, is justified

in this sense, it is empirical. 

    The form of the fiction cannot have misled any one. I might,

of course, have stated drily that I intended to abstain from the

consideration of certain facts. But like one who wishes to look

at certain things undisturbed by the impressions of other things,

and aids his senses by spreading a veil over the disturbing

objects, I thought to aid imagination by making use of the easily

comprehended figure of a communistic society, concerned to

abolish in actuality all that I wished to disregard in thought.

The fiction which I have employed must be regarded in that light

alone, and I trust that the veil has been transparent enough to

allow the complete body of phenomena to be clearly outlined at

every turn under its slight disguise 



NOTES:



1. A great deal of the history of taxation may be explained by

the fact that people only learnt gradually to distinguish between

the valuation of goods in national economy and in free economy.

In ordinary economic life one feels injured who has to pay a

higher price than any one else; and it can be easily understood

that in face of this rooted opinion, it was hard to introduce the

principle that every person should pay more taxation for the same

state services according as he possessed more goods for the

satisfaction of his wants -- and that not simply but

progressively.













Natural Value



	by Friedrich Wieser







Book 5



The Natural Cost Value of Products



Chapter 1



The Law of Costs



    Production goods which are capable of being employed in

several ways receive their value, as we are aware, from the value

of the least of their products, the production of which is

economically permissible; that is, from the marginal product or

from their contribution to the product. This value attaches

equally to all similar articles or similar items of a productive

stock, even to those which are actually employed in more

remunerative ways. In a stock of iron each part has an equal

value with every similar part in the stock, based on the marginal

contribution. It is the same with a stock of coal; the same with

any available supply of labour of equal quality; the same with

any other production good. Assume that, in a productive stock of

the class a, the item put to the most insignificant use gives a

product of 1, every item in the stock will have the value of 1;

every item of the class b has the value of 2, if the marginal

productive contribution of the class be 2, and every item of the

class c has the value of 3, if the marginal productive

contribution amounts to 3. 

    Now, as a rule (the exceptions will be discussed later on)

production goods retain that value which is ascribed to them

before the beginning of the production -- in anticipation of the

best possible result, -- after the completion of the process of

production; that is to say, they retain it still in the products

which they have been transformed into. To take the former

figures, the product of the elements 10a + 10b + 10c, will, as a

rule have the value 10 + 20 + 30 + 60, and the product of the

elements 10a + 20b + 10c, will have the value 10 + 40 + 30 = 80. 

    This law may be expressed differently according as we state

it from the side of production goods or from that of products. 

    In the former case it runs thus: -- similar production goods

maintain, as a rule, in every product, first, a similar value,

and second, that value as it attaches to them through their

marginal productive contribution. This is the correct formula. As

the law of costs is usually understood, however, the second

clause would be left out; thus giving a formula for relative

values, but not for absolute amounts of value. 

    In the latter case the law runs thus: -- the value of a

product is, as a rule, a complex obtained by multiplying the

quantity of production goods employed by the value of the

productive unit, or -- taking into consideration the fact that

every product is always produced from several productive factors

-- it is a sum of such complexes (10a + 10b + 10c, or 10a + 20b +

10c, and so on). From this formula, which indicates the absolute

amounts of value, there follows another for the relations of

value. It is that the values of products which have one

productive factor in common are, to each other, in respect of

this common factor, as the quantities of it requisite for their

production. This is the correct formula. As usually understood

the law runs more briefly thus; -- the values of products are to

each other as the costs requisite for their production. This,

again, is merely a relative, not an absolute expression. Closer

consideration shows that it is not possible to apply this

relative formula so long as it stands alone. The amount 10a + 20b

+ 10c is not twice as great as the amount 10a + 10b + 10c, but

twice as great only as regards the factor b; the general relation

can only be established when the absolute values of a, b, and c,

are known. If a = 10, b = 20, and c = 30, the ratio is as 80 to

60; if b = 100, it is as 240 to 140. 

    In the Ursprung des Werthes I called products which have one

productive factor in common Productionsverwandt, which may be

rendered in English as "cognate." They represent, as it were, the

descending line of this factor, and stand to one another in

collateral relationship. All products made from the same quality

of iron are cognate. Many products are cognate to each other in

more than one respect, e.g. products of iron in the making of

which have been expended similar kinds of labour or similar fuel.

Understood in this sense, it is always cognate products to which

the law just stated refers. 

    This is the well-known law of costs. The task now lies before

us to explain and prove it.(1*)



NOTES:



1. I have formulated the law of costs only with relation to the

so-called costs of production. Besides this we speak sometimes of

costs, when we refer to expenses of purchase. By this is meant

the sums of money a buyer has to expend to obtain possession of

goods. An exactly analogous law obtains as regards these costs.

All sums of money of equal amount destined for the purchase of

goods ave equal value to the one owner, and all goods purchased

for money -- under certain assumptions entirely analogous to

those conditions which hold as regards the law of costs in

production -- have to the one owner a value in proportion to

their costs of purchase (see Book II, chap. ii). The law of costs

of production has, however, a more far-reaching importance than

the law of costs of purchase, inasmuch as it is not, like the

latter, limited subjectively, but also holds as regards objective

exchange value. In consideration of these more far-reaching

effects it is entitled to a special statement. 

    Sax has stated the conception of costs still more

comprehensively (see chap. 56 in his Grundlegung der

Staatswirthschaft). Nevertheless, important though the results

thus obtained may be, it appears to me that, for the reason just

stated, it is right to hold by the narrower conception of the

costs of production, as against this wider one. 

    In connection with the present book, see Ursprung des

Werthes, pp. 97, 103, and 146; further, in Bhm-Bawerk's Werth,

pp. 61 and 534; as also Sax, p. 327; and, finally, the parts

referring to this subject in Jevons and Walras. Menger does not

treat of costs. 



Chapter 2



The Conception of Costs



    Whatever economic production goods a man has within his

disposal, whether lands, capital, or labour power, he counts part

of his wealth -- although they do not directly increase his

satisfactions; and he does so with just as much right as he

counts those consumption goods wealth which permit of direct

enjoyment. The possession of production goods gives the promise

of acquiring consumption goods later. Production, therefore, not

only creates value, it also destroys value. Only so long as one

is taken by surprise at the emergence of productive value, in

that it is unexpected, is it reckoned as pure gain. When the

Phoenicians -- as the fable goes -- accidentally came upon glass

among the ashes, only the gain of production would be present to

their minds; but whoever, thereafter, began to produce glass, and

in doing so was obliged to pay attention to the materials of its

production, would learn perforce the destructive part of

production. If production, on the one side, brings forth

products, it limits, on the other, the producing powers. On this

account it is every one's duty to see that his production is

always directed towards the greatest possible result, in case he

should consume more value than he will eventually gain. 

    This circumstance receives more distinct form and emphasis in

the case of production goods capable of many and various

employments. Here care must be taken to choose those employments

which will prove the most economically efficient, both as regards

kind and amount. Circulating capital or labour power devoted to

any one production, is thereby absolutely withdrawn from all

others; the same is true of fixed capital, and even of

unconsumable land, during the period of the production to which

they are devoted. In consideration of this fact the devotion of

means of production to individual undertaking must always be well

considered. It is necessary, for this end, that the man who

resolves on the making of one special product, should form an

exact idea of the value of all the other products whose

manufacture is thereby rendered impossible. But how can this be

done? It is done by taking account of the value of their common

economic factors of production. In these factors the value of all

"cognate" products, without exception, is incorporated.

Productive value, consequently, occupies a position of mention

among the whole circle of cognate products. Whenever the value of

any class of products falls or rises, and thereby either the

extension or the limitation of other branches of production is

demanded,(1*) the effect is first communicated to productive

value, and is then passed on from productive value. The products

and the value of the products adjust themselves, in each

individual case, to the productive value, and the productive

value indicates the limit of production common to all. 

    In this way we reach the point of view from which production

goods are conceived of as costs. The first element in it is that

the productive employment figures as outlay, as sacrifice, as

loss; the second is that, in virtue of this, attention is called

to the equalisation of several connected productions. To say that

any kind of production involves cost, simply implies that the

economic means of production, which could doubtless have been

usefully employed in other directions, are either used up in it,

or are suspended during it. Costs are production goods when these

are devoted to one individual employment, and, on account of

their capacity of being otherwise employed, take the shape of

outlay, expenditure.(2*) The measure for estimating costs is

always the productive marginal utility, as it is found on

consideration of all the employments economically permissible. 

    Thus only those production goods which we have already (in

Book III. chap. xii) called "cost goods," as opposed to "monopoly

goods," can be regarded as costs. Productive elements which admit

of only one kind of employment, do not share the multiplicity of

conditions necessary for the emergence of what we recognise as

costs. A mineral spring, which can be used only by drawing off

its contents and putting them into bottles, must, obviously,

stand in a quite different relation to the value of the product

from the unskilled labour which fills the bottles, but is capable

of a hundred other uses besides. "Monopoly goods" simply take to

themselves the value of the products imputed to them, and do not

conduct it back again to these products, as do "cost goods," --

while cost goods are the parent goods of the great productive

relationships, within which they act as combining forces and

equalisers of value. The more various the employments of any

productive element are, and the shorter the processes are, -- as

this continually necessitates new deliberations as to how the

goods are to be employed next -- the more does their employment

in production obtain the character of a sacrifice whose amount

must be well weighed if the proper balance of production is to be

maintained. Unskilled labour and the commonest kinds of floating

capital, are, consequently, the goods to which the conception of

costs most frequently applies. 



NOTES:



1. If, for instance, the price of cotton thread is reduced,

thread manufacturers will not pay the former price for cotton

yarns. But if cotton spinners are compelled to quote a lower

price to thread manufacturers they cannot ask a higher price from

cloth weavers. Thus the weavers get their raw material cheaper

because of the fall in the price of the cognate product, thread,

and this tends to an extension of the cloth manufacture. -- W.S. 



2. This definition requires a slight readjustment only in so far

as interest and land rent (see below, Book V. chaps. xi and xii)

are reckoned among costs. Interest and rent -- or the goods which

constitute them -- are not production goods; they are simply

elements of the production calculus as production goods are. 



Chapter 3



Foundation of the Law of Costs



    The value of costs determines the value of products in two

ways. In general it determines it indirectly, by regulating the

supply produced; but, in individual cases, it determines it

directly by communicating the amount of its own value without any

intermediary. 

    First: as regards the indirect action of costs. In the value

of the costs is expressed the expectation of the greatest

possible return from production. In order to fulfil this

expectation, the relation between the amounts of all cognate

products turned out must be well weighed and proportioned. If too

much be produced in any one direction a loss will have to be

borne elsewhere, which will be more sensible than the gain

resulting from the over-production. If too little be produced in

any one direction a similar loss will be felt, which it will be

impossible to make good by over-production elsewhere. 

    Whether too much or too little has been produced is seen

exactly in the value. If the value of products -- as it results

from the equation between supply and demand -- is less than that

of the costs, too much has been produced; the costs which should

have brought forth products having higher value have brought

forth only goods having less value. Where the value of the

product exceeds that of the costs, too little has been produced

-- with one exception which will be mentioned shortly; -- the

costs have not been employed entirely in bringing forth products

of the highest value the very anticipation of which gave the

costs their value. If products, then, are to be produced neither

over nor under cost they must be produced exactly at cost value,

if they are to find the most economically advantageous

distribution of production.

    If we ask why products thus produced -- neither under nor

over costs -- have value, and why they have definite amounts of

value, we shall doubtless find that they have themselves alone to

thank for it. They create it out of their utility, taking into

consideration the amounts produced. The circumstance that costs

of a certain value have been expended in making them, is of no

consequence as regards their value. The cost value does not

determine the use value; the use value exists of itself, and

sanctions the cost value. 

    Second: as regards the direct action of costs. Under certain

circumstances it is economically permissible to produce things

whose use value exceeds their cost value, while they must, none

the less, be estimated at their cost value. This direct action is

the most striking of the two. Assume that the amount of costs

necessary for an article has the value of 6, and that the first

article produced has a use value of 10, while the use value of a

second article would amount to only 1 (compare Book I. chap. iv

and Book III. chap. viii): the production must be confined to one

article. How is it to be valued? This will depend upon

circumstances. In a moment of extreme danger a weapon will be

estimated according to its use value. But suppose a man to be

leisurely preparing and equipping himself for an adventuresome

journey, he will not think of valuing the best of weapons more

highly than the materials and labour available for the purpose of

producing and reproducing them. The loss of the weapon can always

be made good -- supposing one has the necessary leisure and means

for its reproduction -- by a sacrifice in costs, the amount of

which is certainly less than the importance possessed by the

weapon itself in a moment of urgent need. A good having a use

value equal to 10, and a cost value equal to 6, must be estimated

at 6, so long as its reproduction is possible and the

satisfaction of want is not prejudiced by the delay. 

    The same argument as leads to our valuing at marginal utility

any single item of a stock which happens to be actually devoted

to satisfying a want of higher grade, leads to our valuing at

cost value and no more, a product whose specific use value

exceeds its cost value, supposing we have also in our possession

the means of producing and reproducing it at the proper moment.

For, as, in the one case, the marginal use is really the only use

threatened, so, in the other, the cost value is the only value

threatened. Here is a new application of the marginal law. 

    Cases of the kind just described attract particular notice on

account of the fact that the influence of costs upon the value of

products is independent of amounts produced. If the cost value,

in the example just given, rise from 6 to 9, or fall to 2, one

product only will be produced, and its value likewise will follow

the changes of the cost value, and rise to 9 or fall to 2,

without the amounts produced being changed. Ricardo, with the

keenness of observation peculiar to him, pointed to the

consideration of those instances, in which the value of the

product adjusts itself to the cost value without any change of

amounts, as a very important one from the point of theory. As a

matter of fact it is so, although Ricardo was wrong in the place

he gave it. He wished to prove from it that costs are

fundamentally an independent source of value, whereas, as a

matter of fact, it proves simply that costs may, in certain

isolated cases, directly determine the amount of the value of

products. It is, however, chiefly decisive in that it gives us an

insight into the connections of the process of valuation such as

could scarcely be obtained otherwise. It gives us, indeed, the

most unequivocal and umdeniable application of the marginal law

that it is possible to find anywhere. 

    Moreover, even in this case, the fact that costs have been

expended is of no importance as regards the value of products.

The decisive circumstance is, that costs could again be expended,

and secure a higher utility at a less sacrifice of utility.(1*)



NOTES:



1. The foundation of the law of costs given in the text appears

to be applicable only to natural value, and not to exchange value

or price. But it is also applicable to them. The proximate

explanation of the validity of the law of costs, in the case of

price, is that producers are not willing to sell under cost, and

-- where there is free competition -- are not able to sell over

cost. But why is it that they will not sell in the former case,

and why does competition make it impossible to sell in the

latter? In the last resort it is because every one applies for

himself, as well as he is able, the natural laws of valuation,

and those laws bring him to that amount of product, or that

valuation of what is produced, from which the law of costs

results. Competition -- i.e. the efforts of others who apply the

same natural laws -- then forces him to give expression, in the

price which he asks from the consumers, to the valuation which he

has made for himself. The actual position of price depends,

therefore, essentially upon the actual position of competition,

particularly on how far the efforts of competition are limited by

the "hindrances to equalisation." These "hindrances" are

peculiarly strong in international trade, in which, accordingly,

the law of costs holds only very slightly. 



Chapter 4



Conditions Under Which the Law of Cost Obtains



    It is unnecessary to say that products only come under the

law of costs. The products which principally come under this law

are those which are produced frequently, regularly, and in large

amounts, and, in particular, those in the production of which

cost-goods are exclusively employed. Products whose manufacture

is strictly and narrowly limited by confessedly monopoly goods do

not experience the influence of costs at all. All alterations in

costs in such cases go, not to products, but to the monopoly

factors of production; every dilution of costs raises, and every

increase lowers, the value of these factors.(1*)

    Such products too as are to be re-employed in production --

i.e. all produced concrete forms of capital, or "capital goods,"

as we may call them for convenience sake -- come under the law of

costs. Thus the valuation of capital becomes an exceedingly

complicated matter. One has always to combine two things; -- the

return to the capital and its costs. Both amounts stand in mutual

relation, and tend, so far as possible, towards equality. The

greater the value of the return, the greater the costs that may

be expended in producing it; and the greater will be the

expenditure of costs, so far as is practicable and necessary: the

smaller the requisite expenditure of costs, the smaller will

finally be the value of the return, whether this result from the

fact that production finally is correspondingly extended, or from

the fact that the valuation of the utility is directly pressed

down to the level of the costs. If a machine does very good work,

that is a cause for valuing it highly; but if it can be cheaply

produced, the machine itself, and, finally, its products also,

will find a low value. The costs of producing capital transmit

their effects right down to the fruits of the capital, however

remote these may be, so long as they fall within the producer's

field of vision, and can be taken into consideration in the

estimates of value. 

    Products which come under the law of costs do not, however,

come under it in all circumstances. To do so they must come under

consideration as products, i.e. as dependent upon the elements

from which they are formed. If they are estimated independently,

if they are valued in isolation and for themselves, their own

utility alone -- or their marginal utility -- will determine

their value, without their productive marginal utility being

taken into consideration at all. 

    This is most clearly seen in the case of the immediate

determination of value by costs. Why in this case is the

valuation made according to costs? Because the products can

always be obtained again at the sacrifice of the costs, and, just

on that account, only when they can be obtained at this

sacrifice. If the possibility of their reproduction be excluded

through any circumstance whatever -- say e.g. that the import of

some article is stopped by a blockade, or that demand has

increased so rapidly that production cannot keep pace with it, --

the value will be estimated at the full amount of the utility (or

marginal utility) which the products are expected to give. As a

rule, there are such abundant supplies of all products -- partly

in the possession of private householders, partly in the larger

stores of producers and merchants  -- that people are provided

against the smaller increases in demand. Valuation by costs is

suspended only in the case of large and permanent disturbance of

production. If reproduction remains possible, although at a

higher outlay than before, -- not, however, coming up to the

height of utility, -- the law of costs will still obtain, only

that the determining amount of costs will have risen. If demand

decrease, or unforeseen supplies increase the stock, to such an

extent that the marginal utility falls below the amount of costs,

the law of costs will be suspended until marginal utility shall

have so far risen as to render production again practicable. 

    The same applies where costs do not directly determine value,

but determine, in the first instance, only the extent of

production. The influence of costs ceases so soon as, and so far

as, the possibility of production ceases. Here again may be

observed the same influence of accumulated stocks -- that,

through the medium of them, all smaller disturbances in the

provision for want are equalised.(2*)

    When the disturbances which caused the suspension or

imitation of the law of costs are over, it again becomes active.

So far as is at all possible, men try to conduct production

according to a universal plan which embraces all the productions

"cognate" at the time. Isolated production prevents complete

utilisation of the means of production; it limits provisions for

human want too greatly at certain points, while going too far in

other directions, or, what is still worse, leaving production at

certain points entirely alone. On this account there is always a

tendency to return to the most comprehensive conditions of

production, and thus, so far as is possible, to the valuation

according to costs. 

    If society were ever to arrive, in its economic life, at such

perfection and control that no plan of production ever

miscarried, that there was no interruption in exchange, that no

unforeseen loss of goods happened, that all acquisitions of goods

could be anticipated to the fullest extent and in the most exact

degree, that, finally, the demands should never vary or, at

least, that the variations should always be adequately

anticipated: -- in such circumstances the law of costs would be

the only form in which the general law of value would appear as

regards those goods in respect to which it holds. It is not to be

expected that any disposition of affairs could bring social

economy to such perfection. Even in the most perfect condition of

society there will be changes, such as must for the moment limit

or extend the sphere over which the law of costs holds sway. 

    If the socialists expect that, in their future state,

valuation by costs will be all-sufficient, they are in error,

unless man is able to exert such mastery over the natural

conditions of the life of goods, that no harvest shall ever fail,

or, indeed, be overabundant; and, moreover, unless the national

life can be assured of a perfectly peaceful course, such as can

be conceived of only when war has ceased, when invention is no

more, and when no new need ever emerges. 



NOTES:



1. Thus in the cotton thread trade neither changes in wages nor

in the price of raw material seem to affect prices; they only

increase or decrease profits. -- W.S.



2. Up to a certain point costs do -- even in such cases as these

-- directly determine value. All goods that can be supplemented

from stocks in warehouses and the like, which stocks again can be

renewed through production, thereby appear to us directly as mere

combinations of their productive elements. And to this extent it

may be said that, on the whole, the cases where costs directly

determine value predominate. 



Chapter 5



The Determining Amount of Costs



    The circumstance, as such, that a good has involved costs,

and that it has involved a certain amount of costs, does not

determine its value. Not only must the conditions under which the

law of costs obtains be fulfilled, but the justifiable amount of

costs must be observed. 

    It is only the "socially necessary" costs, the smallest

amount of costs required, that determines value, whether the

determination is "indirect" or "direct." In cases of "indirect"

determination, cost value requires the sanction of use value.

Whatever is expended uselessly receives no value, and whatever is

superfluously expended, -- expended in excess of what is

necessary to obtain the utility -- receives no value. In cases of

"direct" determination of value, the important thing from the

first is the outlay requisite for reproduction. 

    The value of products which are economically produced with

the smallest cost, must consequently alter should there be, later

on, any change in the determining amount of costs. And, in

particular, if the amount of costs should become less, the value

of commodities produced at the old dearer rate must fall, from

the moment when the new and cheap goods are capable of meeting

the demand, or even sooner than this, so far as the old stocks

are large and dare not be held back in view of the increasing

production. 

    It may be that all the products in demand cannot be produced

at the one cheapest rate of cost. Then, of necessity, the amount

of costs must rise. The value of goods produced at different

costs is determined throughout by the highest cost necessary; the

portion which has been produced at the greatest expense must be

valued correspondingly high, if it is permissible to produce it

at all at so great an expense; and the other portion, which has

been produced more cheaply, must be valued equally high, because

all products of equal quality must have equal value. 

    All these propositions are well known both theoretically and

practically, so far as regards exchange value. It is of interest

for us to know that they also obtain as regards natural value. 



Chapter 6



The Law of Costs and the General Law of Value



    If the statement of the law of costs just laid down be

correct, there can be no doubt regarding its relation to the

general law of value. 

    Between costs and utility there is no fundamental opposition.

Costs are goods valued, in the individual case, according to

their general utility. The opposition between costs and utility

is only that between the utility of the individual case, and

utility on the whole. Whoever thinks of "utility" without

thinking of "costs," simply neglects, in the utility of one

production, the utility of the others. And whoever produces, in

the individual case, at the least cost, produces, on the whole,

with the highest utility, inasmuch as he thus saves all the

opportunities of utility possible, and consequently in the long

run utilises all these opportunities to the utmost extent. 

    Thus where the law of costs obtains, utility remains the

source of value. More than this, marginal utility remains the

measure of value. The only thing is that utility and marginal

utility are no longer determined in a one-sided way within the

limits of each particular group of products, but over the entire

field of cognate production. Over this field it is always the

common productive marginal utility that decides. The result of

the productive combination 10a + 10b + 10c possesses the common

marginal utility of all productive goods of the class A ten

times, and so with the classes B and C. It consequently stands in

a definite ratio of value to the product resulting from 10a + 20b

+ 10c, and this ratio corresponds to the general law of value,

according to which separate parts of a stock are to be valued by

multiplying the number of items by the marginal utility. Even

products which, in outward appearance and destination, are

entirely different from one another, if traced back to the

productive elements of their manufacture come ultimately into the

same value relations as do the separate parts of a stock. A

cupboard and a table are in themselves different goods; reduced

to their productive factors they are of the same nature, belong

to the same class of supply, and receive a corresponding

expression of value. The law of costs is a peculiar and

complicated conception of the general law of value, used in a

peculiar and complicated case, vis. where the connection of goods

with one and the same stock is not apparent from their outward

appearance, but can only be recognised after reduction to the

productive elements of their manufacture.

     This statement would be imperfect if we did not add that the

law of costs as regards products is by far the most usual form

assumed by the general law of value. Products of almost every

kind are continually being reproduced, and consequently their

value must continually be decided by comparing the amount of the

productive supplies with the amount of the productive demand. The

vast majority of changes in value are occasioned by the changes

which occur in the coming forward of production goods (or in

their production, where they are themselves objects of

production), as also by technical changes, or changes in the

conditions of production which make the quantity of costs

necessary to produce the goods greater or less. Thus it happens

that variations in the value of products are traceable, in the

majority of cases, to some cause which is to be found in

production goods. Even in cases where the change of value first

arises in the demand and in the products, the effect of this

circumstance communicates itself, through the medium of the cost

goods, to the cognate products, and causes their value to rise or

fall. A product which is "cognate" with a hundred others, will,

in all probability, be affected a hundred times by changes in

their supply and demand relations, for once that it is affected

by a change in its own relations; and all these influences are

communicated to it from outside through the cost value. And thus

it is that changes in any single supply and demand must pass

without leaving any trace, unless they chance to be exceedingly

comprehensive, and are, therefore, capable, as against the supply

and demand over the whole circle of cognate production, of

disturbing the determining marginal utility. 

    The phenomena of costs are, therefore, a new proof of how

greatly the objective conditions of the existence of goods

influence the value of goods. How far the value of goods, in its

final form of "cost value," is from being the mirror of that

subjective fact from which it is derived -- the value of wants!

The circumstance that cognate products are produced by different

quantities of the same productive elements, brings their

subjective valuations into a ratio, the terms of which are

derived entirely from the objective conditions of production;

while the impulses which call for their emergence, as well as the

absolute value amounts of the elements whose multiples enter into

the ratio, remain subjective, and thus prove the subjectivity of

the source and nature of value.

    It was impossible that the influence of costs upon the value

of products could escape the observation of economists. None the

less has recognition by economic theory of the law of costs

remained for long very imperfect. It was conceived of only as a

relative law -- that the value of products was as the quantity of

costs; but as to what was the nature of costs, whence they

themselves receive their measure, what absolute amounts might

accrue to the value of products, -- on these points economists

were no more capable of saying anything than they were capable of

explaining the numerous contradictions which were inevitable so

long as costs were conceived as the final cause of the value of

products. Possibly it is the greatest triumph of the theory of

marginal utility that it fully explains the obscure conception of

costs, with which every other theory had to reckon, and with

which no theory could come to any reckoning. The labour theory

alone has attempted it, but it has thereby -- as we shall go on

to show -- introduced into theoretic political economy the

greatest errors that have ever been perpetrated within its

sphere. 



Chapter 7



The So-Called Costs of Production of Labour



    Through a very strange error in judgment the classical school

of political economy has put forward the proposition that the

exchange value of human labour also is determined by costs of

production. 

    The costs of production of human labour -- if we substitute

the prosaic personal meaning of this expression for the

impersonal and figurative one would be the costs of producing the

labourer. What a monstrous idea! Can it be that there is a

"production" of labourers in the same sense as there is a

production of material things? Has such a thing ever been said

even in the darkest ages of barbarism? Surely another name at

least might have been chosen. But leaving the name, let us get to

the substance. 

    The substance is, that, by the cost of production of labour

is meant the necessary cost of maintaining the labourer and his

family; the means of subsistence which the labourers themselves

regard as the minimum necessary to keep themselves in life, in

strength, and in ability to work, to bring children into the

world, and to bring them up to labour. And as the price of goods

can never stand permanently either above or below the costs of

production, so it is asserted that the wages of labour can never

stand permanently either above or below the existence-minimum. Of

course, this proposition can never be understood to apply to any

but the commonest and worst paid form of labour, seeing that the

better paid labour does raise itself above the lowest wage level

that can be considered permissible. 

    On the one side, so far as regards the impossibility of

sinking below the minimum, there is, as a fact, a close, indeed a

frightful analogy between the law of wage and the law of costs.

Where the labourer has no other income to spend than his wage,

wages cannot indeed fall permanently below the amount marked by

the prices of the necessary means of subsistence. If the means of

subsistence are scarce and dear, a higher wage must ultimately be

conceded. Misery and death are the imperious forces which bring

about this result, inasmuch as they reduce the number of

labourers until the reduced supply has raised wages sufficiently

to cover the necessaries of life. 

    But how is it as regards the other side? Is it true that

wages can never rise permanently above the costs of subsistence?

Is there the smallest analogy, or even an apparent analogy,

between the pressure exercised by the cognisance of cheaper

conditions of production upon the valuation of products, and the

pressure which might be exercised upon the valuation of labour by

cognisance of cheaper conditions of life? Economists of the

classical school assert that there is, and thereby they bring

again into the question motives which have as little in common

with the considerations that govern the production of goods, as

the law of nature, which says that he who can find no means of

sustenance must die, has with the considerations that govern the

manufacturer who discontinues a business when it fails to return

him its costs. The motive which is called upon to prove that wage

cannot maintain itself above the minimum of subsistence is the

power of the sexual instinct. If means of subsistence become

cheaper and more abundant, there is the more room for increase of

population, for marrying, producing children, and supporting

them. The supply of labourers can go on increasing, and wages go

on diminishing, until the maximum of population possible to

maintain, and the existence minimum of wage, are again reached.

This result is possible. But must it ever happen? Does it always

happen? What has experience to say? It speaks plainly enough --

so plainly that even those who assert that the law of costs

obtains for labour find themselves forced to add to that law

certain clauses which amount to nullifying it. Thus a clause is

added which says that what determines wage is that amount of

subsistence which the labourers themselves regard as the

permissible minimum, since experience shows that the minimum wage

differs from time to time, from place to place, and from nation

to nation. But this clause cancels the law. If the opinion of the

labourer is to be decisive, there can be no more talk of a

compulsory, objective, fixed standard of wage. In yet another

direction experience speaks still more conclusively. We notice

everywhere that the wage for different kinds of labour is of

varying amount. Only some of the labourers, and that not by any

means the majority, are always held down to the lowest possible

wage. But how could this be the case if the whole position of

labour were entirely governed by the power of sexual impulse as

is asserted? Would not the supply of labour under such a

supposition be overwhelmingly large, -- as a rule, and in the

long run at all events, -- and wages be reduced to the minimum in

all branches of production? Would not all wages be equally low?

The fact that higher wages are continuously maintained in the

higher branches of labour, is a clear proof that the height of

wage continues to be determined by considerations which are too

powerful to admit of their favourable results being suspended by

the sexual instinct; or -- what amounts to the same thing -- that

the sexual impulse does not possess that destructive power which

is ascribed to it. And if it does not possess this as regards one

class of labour, it is impossible to see why it should be held

necessary as regards the other class. 

    If the law of costs were true as regards wages of labour, it

would also be true as regards the natural value of labour. The

forces which are relied on to prove the law of costs in regard to

labour, would, of necessity -- if they do act as is asserted of

them -- have an equal effect under any social organisation. If

the sexual impulse were possessed of such surpassing strength, it

would, even in a communistic state, increase the number of

labourers to the highest point which could be maintained at the

existence minimum; only that here, where the labouring class

would include the whole nation, the consequences would be so much

the more comprehensive and destructive. To-day's "iron law of

wage" would be extended in the future to an iron law of universal

misery. 

    Modern economists are almost unanimous in repudiating the

application of the law of costs to labour in its older and cruder

form, but, on the other hand, they concede to the consideration

of the costs of maintaining the labourer another effect. It is

the effort of every class of labourers, they say, to retain the

level of life to which they have once attained, making their

claim of wages in correspondence therewith and striving to

realise their claim, besides regulating their marriages and the

size of their families in conformity. The wage, once become

customary, is said to have a tendency to maintain itself as a

permanency, and to resist the tendencies which would press it

down. This law also, if it were a true law of wage, would have to

be recognised as a natural economic law, as it also is founded

upon a universal force. Experience, however, does not seem to

justify it. Do not wages continually rise and fall? It is to be

feared that the quite intelligible wish of the worker to retain a

standard of income once reached has not the efficacy ascribed to

it, of resisting the chances of an unfavourable issue to labour.

If the return to labour falls, the natural value of labour falls,

without being in the least prevented by the previous customary

level of comfort, and it is in the highest degree likely that its

exchange value will fall along with it. For although these do not

by any means invariably coincide, -- do we not often see wages

falling short of natural value? -- as things are, it may be

considered an exceedingly rare occurrence that wages are in

excess of natural value. The result which might be expected from

the postponing of marriage and production of children would, in

any case, come much too late; it could only be felt after years,

in a succeeding generation, when circumstances would probably

have been long before completely changed. Of course, the desire

to obtain the highest possible income is a motive which cannot be

considered as quite insignificant among the many motives

determining the return from production. It is as fraught with

consequences as are intelligence, skill, favourable natural

circumstances. But why should this motive be brought prominently

forward only as regards the return to labour? Is it not equally

powerful as regards the products obtained from land and capital?

And why should its influence be limited to the amount of income

once obtained? Does it not go beyond this to the procuring of

fresh income? The truth is that men endeavour to make all

productive returns as large as ever their personal capacities

will allow, and that the returns so obtained determine the value

of the productive factors, -- of labour, as of all the others. It

is impossible to consider it even plausible, that a cause shall

be effective as regards labour alone, by which the level of wage

once reached obtains a peculiar power to maintain itself

permanently unimpaired.

    Here too the modern economists, who advance such theories,

probably do so merely in order to bring the law of wage into

correspondence with the general law of the price of commodities.

In one as in the other, they start with the false assumption of a

fundamental opposition between costs and utility, and wish to

find value between the "upper margin of utility" and the "under

margin of costs." But even supposing such an opposition did

exist, it would not at all events be in the least applicable to

labour. It is not possible to force labour into all the economic

categories in which material goods by their nature are placed. A

producible article is a good, that is, a useful thing -- in two

respects; firstly, in virtue of its effects -- the effects in

which it is "of use"; and, secondly, in virtue of its origin and

upkeep, in which respects it is materially a matter of property.

Labour can only be regarded as a thing in the former respect: in

respect of its useful effects the economic use of labour may and

ought to be considered. In the latter respect, labour is an

affair of persons, and its origin and upkeep cannot be decided by

purely economic considerations. It is overstepping the

permissible sphere of economic control when the attempt is made

to interfere with the personality of the labourer without regard

to other considerations; and economic theory goes beyond its

sphere when it claims to explain the facts of personal life

exclusively by economic considerations.(1*)



NOTES:



1. As labour is not the product of the labourer's means of

subsistence, so, conversely, the means of subsistence cannot be

regarded as the productive factors of labour. In other words, the

labourer's means of subsistence are not capital. If labour be a

good of the second rank, producing any kind of good of the first

rank -- a consumption good -- the labourer's fund of subsistence

is in no way a good of the third rank, producing the labourer; it

is again merely a good of the first rank, a consumption good for

the labourer. This has a result of great importance as regards

value. Value is communicated, as we have seen, first from the

want for goods of the first rank, and then from these to the

goods of second rank, and so on through all the ranks. If means

of subsistence were capital, they would receive their value from

the value of the service rendered by the labourer. But as they

are simply means of subsistence, they receive their value from

the wants which they provide for. 



Chapter 8



The Cost Theories



    I have hitherto almost entirely refrained from criticising

outside theories of value. Up to this point, the subject of

costs, none of these contains any foreign element whatever. What

renders them inadequate is chiefly their inadequate explanation

of the true elements of value. Should I have succeeded -- as I

scarcely dare hope -- in proving beyond dispute the theory to

which I have given my adhesion, all other theories in themselves

are thereby confuted inasmuch as it completes what they began.

Where they have said only half, the whole has been said; where

they have only approximated to truth, the truth itself has been

found. But it is otherwise -- though of course only in the case

of some of them, -- with those theories which derive the value of

goods from costs. They appeal to a foreign element which does not

lie in the path I have chosen to follow, and must therefore be

dealt with, as it were, on a bye-path of criticism. At the same

time, it must be said that this foreign element contains so much

that is plausible, that there would be a presumption against any

one who passed it by without remark, and a suspicion that his

statement did not embrace the entire truth.

    As I said, it is only some of the theories of costs with

which we are here concerned. 

    All such theories have this one point in common, that they

place costs and utility in opposition to each other, and explain

them as dissimilar principles of value. They differ, however, in

their manner of treating the principle of costs. Some limit

themselves to collating the individual elements of costs, and

showing their influence upon value, without answering, or even

bringing up, the essential and fundamental question as to what

costs really are, and whence they obtain their influence and

economic importance. Criticism of these theories is superfluous.

They contain no error to criticise. Their fault lies in their

silence; in their stopping short at the very heart of the

subject. 

    The rest of the cost theories must be judged differently.

They give to the idea of costs an entirely distinct meaning; a

meaning which is certainly -- taking it all in all -- incorrect;

but one which, in view of the largeness of its theoretic

intention, may be pardoned, and even regarded with some

recognition and respect. This division of the cost theories may

be marked by the title of Labour Theories, as the element of

labour forms their theoretic starting-point. Ricardo's system

indicates the high-water mark of the labour theory; the socialist

system is its final consequence. Many writers who reject both of

these systems, nevertheless take the fundamental motive of the

labour theory into their own systems. In fact, there are very few

writers who have kept entirely free from it. The critic has

consequently a large task before him. I make no secret of it that

to do battle with those views, as developed by economic writers,

seems to me a matter of considerably more importance that they

arise, in the last instance, from popular opinions widely held.

The fundamental idea of the labour theory is foreign to no one;

everybody has frequently enough had practical occasion to apply

it. But for this, Ricardo's system would never have obtained its

great hold, and this circumstance may prepare us to expect in the

future ever new formulations of the labour theory, should it not

be possible meantime to purify theoretically the popular view,

and lead it back from its exaggerations, which are easily

traceable to the imperfection of popular reasoning, into its true

and incontestable form.(1*) 



NOTES:



1. In his Werththeorien und Werthgesetz, in Conrad's Jahrbucher

for 1888, W. Scharling, one of the latest writers upon the theory

of value, has again traced it to the fundamental motive of the

labour theory, although with considerable amplification and

modification. He derives value from the difficulty of attainment,

or, more exactly, from the amount of effort which he who wishes

to acquire an object is spared by attaining his end through

exchange. I shall not at this point dwell on Scharling's positive

work, but rather refer the reader, in regard to his fundamental

motif, to the succeeding chapter. Only, in passing, I may note

that, among the efforts which are to give the standard to price,

Scharling includes that (p. 558) "which it costs (at an auction)

to distance other bidders," or what it costs "to overcome an

owner's disinclination to part from his goods." Both of these

efforts have their origin in nothing else than the payment of

that very price whose standard they are supposed to explain. In

this sense there might be included among the difficulties of

attainment the fact that thing must be paid for with money, while

people are bound to be economical with money. His views on the

theory of marginal utility are given, in an illustration cited by

Bhm-Bawerk, of a boy to whom "the pleasure of eating an apple is

more than seven times but less than eight times that of eating a

plum." "Let us Suppose" continues Scharling "that the father

comes and says to his boy: 'Our neighbour has given you

permission to pull as many apples from his garden as you wish';

the boy will at once alter his opinion as to the relation between

apples and plums, although his taste for and his enjoyment in

consuming the fruit remains unchanged. But the effort which the

possession of one apple saves him from putting forth, is no

longer the same." To my mind this illustration, which Scharling

advances in opposition to the theory of marginal utility, is

really a proof of that theory. In what way has the situation

changed after the father's speech? Clearly that the boy may now

have as many apples as he will, while formerly he had only one,

i.e. the available supply has been increased to superfluity. And

thus the result is attained which the theory of marginal utility

demands; the valuation of the apples is entirely altered.

Scharling's opposition would be justified if it were directed

against a theory which made value depend simply upon utility and

not on marginal utility. In our theory, along with utility, all

the influences are weighed which determine the degree of

utilisation, and of estimation of utility, by the supply; indeed,

even those influences which determine the amount of supply by the

conditions of production. 



Chapter 9



The Cost Theories (continued). Labour as an Element in Cost



    It cannot well be questioned that, among the costs of any

product, the labour necessary for its making comes first. Every

product withdraws the labour-power that is devoted to it from

other products to which it might have been devoted. There would

be nothing further to say on the subject, were it not that labour

calls for economic deliberation as to its employment on a second

ground besides that of its utility. Labour carried too far

becomes a burden, and brings a succession of serious personal

evils in its train. Where labour brings pain, strain, or danger,

there is good reason to think seriously over these consequences;

and, on their account alone, to regard every act of labour as a

sacrifice which should be made only if it is certain to be

adequately recompensed by its result. It is in this sense that it

is commonly said that production "costs" labour, and it is in

this sense that most economists conceive of labour as a cost

good. Not the utility but the personal sacrifice of the labourer

is to determine the economic valuation of labour, and its

influence upon the value of commodities. 

    To decide how much is right in this conception is one of the

most difficult tasks of political economy, and, as the theory has

developed, one of the most important. Beginning with the idea

that labour is valued according to the personal sacrifice it

involves, and going on to the wider idea that labour is the only

production good, that all products are directly products of

labour, and that all costs are labour costs, the conclusion has

been reached that the sacrifice of labour necessary for the

production of a good is the exclusive source of its cost value,

indeed, of its value pure and simple. From its relation to the

labour sacrifice the conception of value receives its content,

the amount of value its standard. In Adam Smith we find, as was

said in the preface, this "philosophical" conception of value

coming into collision with a second "empirical" conception.

Ricardo's system aims at proving that this "philosophical"

conception is almost realised in the empirical formation of

value. Finally the socialists roundly demand its complete

realisation, and condemn the empirical deviations as

disturbances. In connection with this conception of value, a

second conclusion, which relates to the origin and aim of human

economy, is drawn from the same premises. Human economy derives

its origin, in the last resort, from the fact that goods must be

obtained at the price of the sacrifice of labour, and the aim of

all economy is ultimately to make the sacrifice of labour

necessary for the production of goods as small as possible. And

thus, when we endeavour to examine the position of labour as a

cost good, we find ourselves plunged into the quarrel of theory

as to the fundamental questions of political economy. 

    The opponents of the Labour Theory do not in my opinion give

it full justice. They try to overturn it completely, whereas it

is by no means entirely false. It is conceivable, only it does

not fit in with facts; it is, if the expression may be allowed,

philosophically right, but it is not empirically realised.

    It is possible to conceive of a condition of economic life

under which the single consideration of the sacrifice involved in

labour would determine the value, both of labour itself and of

all products. The widespread recognition which Ricardo's theory

has obtained can only be explained by the fact that it is founded

upon a conceivable and attractive fundamental idea. Men learned

the meaning of "value" as a whole -- not as a philosophical

conception, but as applied to the circumstances of everyday life

-- for the first time, and then overlooked the fact that the

"value" of actual life was not completely explained. I shall

endeavour to formulate with all possible distinctness those

conditions under which the labour theory would apply. This is the

best means of enabling us to recognise how far these fall short

of realisation in existing economic circumstances. 

    Suppose that a community -- already abundantly provided with

all the material auxiliaries for labour -- had at their disposal

so great a supply of labour power, and so few wants, that they

were able to satisfy completely and without delay any desire that

they might happen to feel, simply by putting forth the exertion

necessary to produce the means of satisfaction. In this case the

means of satisfaction so produced would have no value from the

consideration of their utility, because as assumed -- they were

to be had immediately at all times and in superfluity. On the

other hand, the consideration of the exertion of labour required

to produce them must give them value. Every product made and

possessed would save an effort; the effort, namely, involved in

its reproduction. And, so far, one would have a lively interest

in holding on to any possession once obtained. The amount of this

interest would depend upon the exertion saved by the possession.

A product with a utility expressed by the intensity of 100, and

necessitating labour equal to 10, would have a value of 10, and

would have no value at all if its reproduction cost no effort. 

    The conceptions of value and wealth evolved from the assumed

circumstances would, formally considered, be such as should arise

if value and wealth were derived from consideration of the

utility which the goods assure, while, all the time, materially,

they would be completely different. Value would be the importance

which goods would then have in virtue of the interest every one

would feel in securing exemption from the undesirable pain of

labour. Wealth would be equivalent to great possessions of goods

securing immunity from the pain of labour. The advantage of

wealth would be rest. Poverty would not mean want, but only

unrest, pain. By a little increase of exertion any advantage of

prior possession could soon be overtaken. 

    That this is not the poverty which the poor man knows: that

this is not wealth as men really estimate it: that this is not

the value or the economy of which we have any experience: --

requires no proving. If merely by pain men could be rich, the

very people who are to-day the poorest would long ere this have

become the richest. Nothing in reality is as assumed by the

labour theory. Our desires are too great, the material resources

at our disposal too limited: our labour power too small. No

economical possession can be lost without some enjoyment being

lost. The idea of utility cannot possibly be separated from the

purposes of economy and the conception of value. 

    There is only one question that may still be asked. It is

whether consideration of the sacrifice of labour does not always

enter into the valuation of labour as a cost-good, and thus into

the Cost value of all products, alongside of and bound up with

the consideration of the utility of labour. But neither is this

the case. It could not be so. Such a possibility is excluded, not

empirically but logically. Productive labour can never have value

on account of the utility which is dependent upon its success or

non-success, and also on account of the personal effort which it

involves. In what circumstances does an act of labour have use

value? When, in event of its failure, the utility has to be given

up, because the labour cannot be put forth a second time; or

when, in the same case, the repetition of the service demands

that another use of the labour be abandoned, and its expected

utility with it; in other words, when there is not sufficient

labour available to meet the demand, when labour power is not

available in superfluity. And in what circumstances would a

service be estimated according to the sacrifice involved? When,

in event of failure, one would not need to give up the utility,

because it could always be obtained again at no greater expense

than the repeated effort; in other words, when all the available

labour power had not a predetermined and distinct destination,

but when there was always free labour power available in

superfluity. Labour could only be estimated at once by its

utility and by personal effort, if it were at once capable and

incapable of repetition; if there were at once a deficiency and

superfluity of labour powers. Where the available labour power is

less than the demand, labour value will be estimated exclusively

according to utility. Where the available labour power is in

excess of the demand, it will be valued exclusively with

reference to the labour sacrifice.(1*)

    Even where labour value is estimated by utility, naturally

one does not cease to consider the toils and dangers of labour.

And although the consideration of these does not directly enter

into the value of labour, it will continue to be a consideration

so long as toil is felt to be toil, and danger danger. It may

even obtain an indirect influence upon valuation, as it must

continue to receive economic consideration in several

connections. 

    These connections may be exactly enumerated.

    First, before undertaking any labour a man has to consider

whether the utility outweighs the effort. Only those acts of

labour whose result outweighs the hardship entailed can be

reasonably performed. Herein, moreover, is contained the reason

why labour, estimated by amount of hardship alone, is less highly

valued than when it receives its value from its return. This also

gives rise to another important issue. The circumstance that

expenditure of labour is felt to be a burden, must somewhat

affect the selection of employments to which it is devoted. It

may occur, as Sax (see note) has forcibly shown, that a less

useful employment of labour is chosen before a more useful one,

because the latter requires comparatively a greater amount of

exertion. 

    Second, when labour is once decided on its performance must

always be ordered in such a way that the toil and danger are made

as light as possible. 

    Third, the fact that labour is felt to be a burden has the

effect of curtailing somewhat the supply of labour as a whole. If

labour were not burdensome and exhausting; more labour would be

expended than is. And thus the use value of labour is, as we have

already suggested, indirectly affected, by being placed at a

slightly higher level on account of the diminished supply.

Services of equal utility, but of different degrees of hardship,

are so regulated in regard to value that the more troublesome

labour is more highly appraised. But this result can only ensue

when the supply is really diminished. Wherever the fear of toil

and danger does not have an actively deterrent effect, or where

it is overcome by the presence of other motives to such an extent

that the supply remains undiminished, the value of labour does

not increase. Experience shows that the most wearisome, wearing,

and least healthy of employments are valued least highly, because

they are the most easily accessible to the great majority, and

are consequently the most amply supplied. In the communistic

state it would not, in all probability, be in any wise different.

The great majority of the citizens will always be suited for the

coarsest kind of work only, and those kinds of work are at once

the most burdensome and the simplest. And while the communistic

state would be plentifully supplied with this sort of labour, so

that it could be employed down to the smallest possible return in

utility, the better labour powers, in virtue of their more

limited number, would require to be economised and have careful

consideration given to their employment, just as happens to-day.

Utility and not toil would, in general, afford the standard for

the valuation of personal services. 

    But we are not finished with our consideration of the labour

theory. Its greatest errors relate to the valuation which it

gives to capital as an element in cost.(2*)



NOTES:



1. It is not at all impossible that, at one and the same place,

there may be a lack of labour in certain departments -- e.g.

skilled labour -- while there is superfluity in the available

supply in others -- e.g. common hand labour. In such a case the

services of the former are estimated by utility, and the latter

by amount of hardship. Under primitive economic conditions the

"supply of labour power" is frequency too large; not until there

has been a considerable advance in civilisation does it become

the rule that labour is insufficient. Further, even the labour

power of one and the same individual may be too small as regards

certain requirements of labour, and at the same time too great as

regards others. It happens almost invariably that labourers whose

capacity for performing some particular form of service is not

sufficient to meet the economic demand for such services, have

always sufficient capacity remaining to meet the trifling

necessity for labour in their own private lives. With this is

connected the fact that labour power is never entirely worn out;

after performing the labour of his particular vocation, man

refreshes and restores his energy best by light and distracting

employments. Even in a country where the economic demand for

labour is entirely insufficient, there are not lacking occasions

in which labour may be estimated according to the amount of

hardship involved. Every individual is continually finding such

occasions; and every one thus learns from his own experience the

fundamental motif of the labour theory. 



2. See Ursprung des Werthes, p. 103, and also Bhm-Bawerk's

Werth, p. 42, and, on the opposite side, Sax, chapter 45. Sax,

starting from the correct proposition that only those goods

should be produced whose utility outweighs the burden of labour

they involve, appears to me to go rather far in the conclusions

he draws, when he says: "If the Unlust connected with the want in

question (i.e. the Unlust which originates from the want not

being satisfied) is less than that of the burden of labour, then

the desire for the good will be a passive one. The want itself

ceases to be felt." Only in so far as the desire is "active" does

the expected product receive a value in thought. That, as I have

said, seems to me to go too far. In considering whether a thing

should be made or not, the value, as derived from the expected

utility, will be estimated undiminished; and, at the same time,

the expected toil will be weighed as a thing by itself. If I

hunger but am too lazy to work, I still continue to feel the

hunger, and thus estimate the value of food according to the

measure of my hunger; only it may happen that the presentation of

this value is not sufficient to overcome my laziness. 



Chapter 10



The Cost Theories (continued). Capital as an Element in Cost



    In any compete estimate of costs there can be no doubt that

the figures representing the necessary consumption of capital

must be added to the costs of labour. Of two products costing

equal amounts of labour, that one must be dearer for which the

greater consumption of capital is required. Thus it has been

calculated ever since capital was possessed by man, and thus it

will continue to be calculated, even in the communistic state.

The necessity for it is so obvious that even the adherents of the

labour theory bow before it. Even they admit that the costs of

capital co-operate in determining the value of products. There is

nothing for it but to try and reconcile their theory with this

incontestable fact. To do this there is only one resource, but

one so singular that only a kind of theoretical infatuation could

avail itself of it. If all costs go back in the last resort to

labour, and if the existence of capital-costs cannot be denied,

capital-costs must ultimately go back to labour-costs -- capital

must be labour. 

    The attempt to reduce capital to labour has been made in two

ways, both of them following out the same fundamental idea.

Labour must be shown to be the primary economic element, and

capital represented as a secondary or derivative form of it.

Labour value appears as the primitive economic value from which

capital value is derived. 

    The first of the two efforts made to prove this proposition

is deduced from the manner in which capital works. The effect of

all capital is either to save labour or to increase the result of

labour. Does not a machine save human labour? Does it not bring

it to greater productiveness? As a matter of fact, there are

forms of capital which are able to render services as human

labour renders them, and which can, to that extent, be

substituted for labour. But can this be maintained of all

capital? What labour power, for example, does a raw material

replace? And, on the other hand, it may undoubtedly be said of

many kinds of labour, with equal right, that their effects are

either to save capital or to increase capital. Capital frequently

supplants labour, but frequently also labour supplants capital.

Where wages are low every undertaker will save his capital and

employ more labourers. 

    The second attempt is much more important. It points to the

origin of capital. Here we go back to the first beginnings of the

acquisition of capital. All capital has, in the last resort --

says this theory -- been obtained by labour, and on this ground

all capital ultimately represents labour. In the most varied

forms, and illustrated by a perfect wealth of examples, this

thought finds itself in many writers. It is found in Adam Smith

and Ricardo, and it is triumphantly adopted by the socialists in

order to make good their contention that all costs are

labour-costs, and that capital is simply "materialised labour."

    It is not easy to imagine greater contradictions than the

labour theory presents when it takes up this line -- more

particularly in the extreme socialistic conception of it. Let the

reader judge! First, the economic valuation of labour is

explained by the peculiar nature of labour -- that its employment

necessitates personal sacrifice. Then capital, after being

recognised as materialised labour, and so labour that has become

impersonal, is subjected to the same valuation; -- a proceeding

for which there is no possible justification. First, it is

asserted that labour is the only productive power; that it alone

produces, creates goods, creates value; that capital is merely

its dead instrument: and then capital emerges from its shell and

becomes labour, which contributes its part in determining the

cost value of goods. At first it is asserted that capital and

labour stand in the strongest opposition to one another, and then

every distinction disappears save the one, that capital, like

labour, may indeed give value, but may not, like it, receive

value. Materialised labour is labour, but no share in the return

shall be imputed to it. 

    It would not be right to entirely reject a theory on account

of its contradictions. There might be a kernel of truth in it,

and that kernel might be rejected along with the rest. We shall,

therefore, submit the contention we are discussing to a further

test, though, truth to tell, it will only be to find that seldom,

if ever, has so small a truth been clothed in so much error. 

    As we have seen, products are valued by their costs only when

they can be reproduced for the amount of the same. Capital, as a

rule, consists of products, and this proposition applies to

capital as to other products. Capital may be valued according to

its costs in so far as it can be reproduced for the amount of the

costs. The costs actually expended since the beginning of history

in gradually forming our present capital -- and it may be noted

in passing that no one knows the amount of these costs, and that

there has never been offered a less accurate standard for any

measurement whatever -- are taken as little into consideration as

any costs which, though actually expended, would never again be

so expended. If all that was wanted economically to replace the

capital consumed was to regain it by labour, then capital might

be economically measured by labour alone, and would represent

economically nothing but labour. If, for instance, coal consumed

could be replaced simply by the labourers bringing new coal to

the surface, without any assistance whatever beyond the labour of

their hands, the coal would be worth just so much labour as was

needed to bring it to the surface. If a machine could be made by

labourers, without any other assistance than that afforded by

other labourers collecting for them valueless materials, and

simply using their bodily strength to shape and combine them, the

value of this machine would be measured by the quantity of labour

that had been expended upon it. So long, however, as capital is

consumed in order to produce capital, the factor of capital

cannot be dismissed from among the costs of capital, and,

therefore, from the costs of all the products of capital; and, so

long as it is credited with the use value which experience

assures us may be received from it, this factor will continue to

be counted alongside of labour in the estimates of costs. 

    The idea that capital represents labour and nothing more, may

be held so long as economists draw their examples, as they

usually do, from the circumstances of a Crusoe or a savage, where

the chief features are the slaying of wild animals, primitive

bows and arrows, bark canoes, rude axes, and the like -- where

capital, so to speak, is always conceived of in a state of

nature. In face of the complicated economical phenomena of a

wealthy and developed society the idea loses all weight. The

labour theory, with its assumptions which take no count of

historical development, was well enough in a science belonging to

the time when men spoke of Natural Rights and the Philosophy of

Nature. At that period of history this theory was worth being

taken up by any gifted genius who could make it throw a first ray

of light into the dark mass of economic phenomena. Even at a

later period it might have tempted some thoughtful mind to give a

thorough systematic examination to its illusive ideas. But for

men who have gone through the school of the founders of our

science, and have had the benefit of all the experience and

elaboration of these founders, and of their successors, it is

only worthy of a schoolboy to hold for ever by the opinions of

the first teachers. A great thought may in the long run turn into

a childish error. 

    To the manufacturer who owns it, as to the labourers whom it

aids, and as indeed to every one, a machine is an instrument,

capable of certain useful work, whose production necessitates a

certain consumption of labour, of other machines, of tools, and

so forth. What must people think of a science which casts aside

this simple definition, and informs the manufacturer that, in his

machine, he possesses merely the "materialised" labour, the

"previous" labour, of all those who have ever contributed

anything towards the complete machine since the making of the

first rough tool onward? It is an ingenious way of looking at

things, no doubt, but one that lends extraordinary little aid

towards advancing the practical purposes of economic life. What

buyer has ever paid a price, or seller demanded one, what

producer ever expended costs, or what chancellor ever laid a tax

upon value, based upon such a consideration as this? Is it

conceivable that any one will ever allow his economic conclusions

to be guided by such a consideration? After all, in economic

theory we must make up our minds whether we intend to explain

economic life, or to pursue after useless and fanciful ideas. 



Chapter 11



The Cost Theories (continued). Interest as an Element of Cost



    In calculating the cost value of his products every

undertaker, in addition to the value of the capital consumed,

includes interest upon the whole capital sunk and bound up in the

production, even on that which remains unconsumed, for the period

during which the capital must remain sunk. It is a matter of

familiar observation that the exchange value of products, in so

far as it is influenced by costs, expresses also the interest

thus calculated. If the production of one article costs merely

labour and circulating capital, while that of another requires,

in addition to the same expenditure of labour and circulating

capital, a large outlay of fixed capital, the second product

(neglecting, of course, the quota for amortisation) will be

considered the more valuable by the interest on the whole fixed

capital. The question now arises whether we have, in this

circumstance also, a phenomenon of natural value; whether it is

in the interest of society generally, or merely in that of the

individual undertaker, that interest should be calculated among

costs, and whether this principle would require to be observed in

the communistic state also. 

    There is something that strikes one as peculiar in the idea

of including interest among costs. Torrens' objection is well

known. Interest, he says, is profit, and must first be earned

through production as the surplus of return over costs. Thus it

is impossible to reckon it among costs. 

    From the point of terminology Torrens' objection is certainly

justified. If we wish, on the one hand, to fix the net return, we

shall not impute interest to costs, but if, on the other hand, we

are seeking for the cost value of products, interest must be

included. In these two cases the term "costs" is used in an

entirely different sense. And this is an error in so far as the

double meaning remains unnoticed, and is, in any case, a

misfortune, whether noticed or not. It would be better to have a

second name for the second use of the term. 

    When we put the name on one side, and examine the actual

matter of Torrens' objection, we come to a different conclusion.

Here the objection entirely breaks down. It proves too much. It

is not only interest that is derived from the return and its

value, but the value of capital itself. Torrens' argument

expanded runs thus: -- the value of products is first; interest,

capital value, the value of production goods generally, second.

Right enough up to this point we have come to the same

conclusion, and argued from it that production goods have, as

against products, no independent power to create value. On the

other hand, we have acknowledged that they do possess the power

to equalise the value of products. In virtue of this power, and

of no higher one, do they influence cost value generally, and

this power cannot be denied to interest, on account of its origin

in the return, so far, that is to say, as the conditions in this

case are similar to those which hold as regards the elements of

costs hitherto considered. 

    This, as a matter of fact, is the case. As we know, there is

a constant tendency towards a uniform rate of increment for all

capital in one and the same market, and, on the whole, the rate

is realised. From this it follows, on the one hand, that nothing

can be produced whose use value does not at least yield the

universal increment on capital -- which is an indirect

determination of the value of products by interest, in the way of

determining the amounts produced. And it follows, on the other

hand, that every product whose use value, regarded by itself,

might yield a somewhat higher increment, can be valued only

according to the universal rate of interest, to the extent that

it can be reproduced at the price of the same which is a direct

determination of value. If things may not be produced under the

general rate of interest, and if they cannot be valued above the

general rate of interest, their final value must, along with the

other elements of costs, include the interest according to the

amount and duration of the capital employed. 

    The principle of including interest among costs follows from

a plan of production which aims at obtaining the highest rate of

increment from every employment of capital. And as it results

from this, so again has it a reflex influence in controlling the

plan and giving it definite limits. If interest were not

estimated among costs, or were not estimated on the whole amount

of capital expended, or for the entire length of time during

which the capital remains employed, the distribution of capital

goods among the individual branches of production could not be so

related as to attain the highest possible rate of increment. It

would then be permissible to employ capital where it only covered

its consumption, but brought no increment, or where it did not

obtain the highest increment, or the increment on the whole

amount of capital sunk, or the increment over the whole period of

time when it was sunk in the productive process. 

    Under certain circumstances it is necessary to include even

compound interest among costs; that is to say, when the period of

time during which the capital is sunk exceeds the period at the

end of which interest would usually be expected. Products are

themselves re-employed as interest bearing capital, and it is

therefore so far profitable to find productions which have a

shorter process. The products of longer processes of production

must receive an equivalent against this advantage of having

interest on interest at an earlier date, and they obtain it by a

corresponding increase in their use value. Only in this way is

the highest degree of utilisation in production as regards time

obtained and regulated.

    Connected with this is an exceedingly curious conclusion.

    In the cost value of products, undertakers include the

interest due to that portion of their money capital which they

must hold, for paying the wages of their labourers, until the

sale of the products takes place. In the communistic state this

money capital would not be required. It would, therefore, appear

that, in the communistic state, the interest expenditure in

production would be correspondingly lower, and that the present

manner of doing is so far opposed to the natural laws of

valuation. As a matter of fact this is not the case; in this

point also the interest of the undertaker is identical with that

of the community at large, and leads to the economic valuation of

goods. The undertaker, in including the interest on his wage

fund, simply estimates and expresses -- with reference to human

labour -- the differences in time of employment. It is not the

same thing to employ ten labourers during one year or to employ

one labourer during ten years, any more than it is the same thing

to employ a capital of ?00 for one year or a capital of ?0 for

ten years. In the former case as in the latter, the principles of

economic action require that, besides ordinary interest, compound

interest also be reckoned to the value of the product, if a

proper distribution of production is to be attained. 

    It needs no explanation that, in virtue of this, production

is the more limited the longer the period of the process, for the

reason that a corresponding increase in the value of the product

is required to make the longer process appear sufficiently

profitable. Productions of very long duration must yield a very

rich return if they are to bear the burden of the interest which

accumulates up till the time when they yield their first return. 



Chapter 12



The Cost Theories (continued). Land Rent as an Element in Cost



    Land -- understanding the word in that familiar theoretical

sense which refers to the indestructible part of land -- suffers

no loss of substance in production. Among the costs of

agricultural products, consequently, there is nothing to be

calculated for what we may call the "substance-value" of land.

Ricardo goes farther than this, and affirms that the rent of

land, like the value of land, cannot enter into costs. This

contention is entirely in harmony with his theory that rent is a

net differential rent, only ascribable to the better classes of

land employed, while the poorest classes, those which are

available in superfluity, yield no rent. If the classes of land

which are last employed are free and bear no rent, the

determining costs will, as a matter of fact, be made up without

consideration of rent, simply by the sum of costs in capital and

labour which are applied to the poorest classes of land. The rent

yielded by the better qualities of land originates, as we know,

from the surplus return of products which they assure to equal

costs of capital and labour and equal value of products. Rent is,

therefore, derived from the return, without finding expression in

the value of the products. 

    It is otherwise if rent is not merely a differential but a

general one. A general rent must enter into costs just as

interest does. It must be included in the calculation if the

determining amount of costs is to be obtained. Where all

qualities of lands and all powers of the land, even those of the

lowest class, are required to meet the demand, and all bear rent,

the circumstance that classes of land of the poorest quality are

devoted to a definite production, and so "tied up" throughout the

duration of that production, is not a matter of economic

indifference. For, so long as they remain tied up, their services

are withheld from other productions to which they might have been

devoted. In case of failure, their rent, which would otherwise

have been obtained, is lost. Their rent consequently belongs to

and must be included in the cost of the products. 

    For Ricardo it is of primary importance to persist in

maintaining the foregoing contention, that land rent is always

differential. His economic system cannot dispense with the

proposition depending upon it, that rent does not enter into the

value of products. He imagines it possible to bring the value of

products under a general law, and consider them simply as

multiples of units of capital and units of labour. The

intervention of interest already forms a disturbing element in

his law, but he believes himself able to prove that the

disturbing element thus introduced is of no great importance. But

if, besides, the element of rent plays a part in the value, the

whole laborious structure of his theory falls to the ground, and

his attempt to derive the value of products from labour, and to

unite empirical amounts of value with amounts philosophically

demanded, is completely overturned. 

    For the theory of value which we represent, on the other

hand, it is a matter of entire indifference whether the

circumstances are such that rent remains purely differential, and

thus does not enter into the value of products, or are such as

cause rent to become general, and thus to enter of necessity into

the value of products. The one case fits into our system as well

as the other. 

    Further, there are certain exceptions to the proposition that

a differential rent cannot enter into the value of products.

Alongside of those employments of land which may be regarded as

the principal ones, and of those forms of rent which might be

called the original ones, there exist others which are secondary

and derivative. The principal employment of fertile land is in

agriculture, but the building of a factory upon land suitable for

cultivation is an example of a secondary employment, -- of an

employment, to express it otherwise, for which land in general

will be less required, and which in itself would never exhaust

the available supply of lands, as the agricultural demand might

easily do. If a fertile field is employed as site for a factory

the agricultural rent which, in other circumstances, might be

expected from it, will have to be surrendered. The sacrifice of

this rent means an outlay of costs which cannot be neglected in

calculating the costs of the factory's products. Whatever the

amount of the rent, it must be deducted from the value of the

products made on that building ground, and it is not till the

remainder covers the costs of capital and labour that the

calculation is complete. 

    The case is similar with the ground-rents of dwelling-houses.

Ground-rent in a large town is never a simple differential rent.

At the periphery of the town, house-rent finds its measure in

agricultural rent, and rises towards the business centre,

according to desirability of situation. The more valuable for

cultivation the land round about the town is, the dearer will be

the houses in that town. To this extent agricultural rent acts as

a universal element of costs in the calculation of house-rents.

The differential rents received from favoured sites do not make

houses dearer, but are rather a result of the high valuation

placed upon houses in a favourable situation. And in so far as

the need for dwelling-houses and the need for business premises

compete with each other, does the one employment of land act upon

the other as an element of costs. 

    In following out this line of thought we see that Ricardo's

proposition gradually loses its applicability almost entirely, as

the cultivation of land becomes very artificial, and the uses of

land multiply. The various employments begin to compete with each

other, and one has always to make choice among several; thus the

differential rents which are surrendered take effect as costs.

Ricardo's proposition that the rent of land does not enter into

costs, can be legitimately applied only to land devoted of

necessity to one distinct use, such as mines, vineyards, and the

like. 



Chapter 13



The Service of Individual Economic Value in National Economy (1*)



    The supreme principle of economic action being utility, value

presents a means by which to grasp the utility of goods in a

simplified and comprehensive manner, and so to control the

employment of goods. Thus we have described the service of value

in economy generally, in doing which we have assumed that value

is estimated according to natural laws, and that we are concerned

with the valuation of goods in stocks, or marginal valuation.

    The return value of production goods and the cost value of

products are likewise phenomena of natural marginal value. They

afford us a simplified and widely comprehensive estimate of

utility in the most complicated circumstances of production. The

most heterogeneous kinds of production goods obtain a common

measure of valuation through their common products: their return

values are multiples of the value of the common marginal

products. The most heterogeneous products receive a common

measure of valuation through their common elements of cost; their

cost values are multiples of the value of the common cost goods.

Different return values, or different cost values, bear the same

relation to one another as amounts of goods which are multiples

of the same unit. In this way it becomes possible to estimate

these value relations in figures, although the value and the

amounts of value have their origin in the incalculable

intensities of want. 

    And yet, it is not this consideration that attracts our

attention at this point. Now when we have pursued the main

threads of the much-tangled web of productive combinations, first

from the return up to the co-operating production goods, and then

back again from the cost goods to the products, another

consideration forces itself to the front: namely, that in any

larger economy whatever, particularly in such a one as has the

compass of a national economy, and is based upon a complicated

system of production, it is quite impossible to dispense with

value if we wish to have any clear notion of the utility of

goods. A Robinson Crusoe does not require the aid of value; he

can arrive at a right decision in every instance by simply

testing what manner of treatment is likely to secure him the

greatest amount of utility on the whole. In a national economy,

on the other hand, with a complicated system of production, it is

impossible in any way to make the necessary economic decisions by

testing the utility of goods on the whole. No one can take in the

total result of a community's production at a glance. There are

too many goods, and too many possible employments of goods, to

permit of making one survey of the whole, and one comparison on

the whole. Things must be gone into individually; utility must be

divided up, and every good have measured out to it its share in

the total result; then only is it possible to recognise

individually which are the poorer, which the more profitable, and

which the best. But how otherwise is utility to be measured out

to individual goods than by applying to them the methods of

marginal valuation, the principle of which is, to give them that

utility which is dependent on the smallest quantity of goods that

is yet practically taken into consideration? 

    And, further, the economical employments of goods result from

the relations of supply and demand. It appears then that it would

be impossible to discover these economical employments if the

amounts of supply and demand were not known numerically. But who

knows the amounts of supply and demand in the widely-extended

economy of a nation, or, indeed, in the world economy, the

relations of which make themselves felt everywhere? Wholesale

merchants of course try to make themselves acquainted with them,

and do as a fact succeed in obtaining certain figures

representing what comes from production, which are tolerably

exact, especially as regards large production. But, on the other

hand, it is almost impossible for them to obtain, with any

measure of exactitude, the equally important figures of demand.

If, in spite of this, it can be maintained that economy on the

whole is capable of adjusting itself to the variations in supply

and demand, this is due solely to the aid afforded by marginal

valuation. Value, as marginal value, gives expression in the

marginal calculation to the effect produced by the existing

amounts of supply and demand, even if these amounts have not

hitherto been measured. No owner can attempt to get rid of a

good, no buyer can be eager to get one, without this circumstance

having an effect on the market, and influencing the sensitive

medium of value. Although no one is able, and even though no one

should attempt, to figure out the amounts of supply and demand,

value shows, with numerical exactitude and down to the finest

gradations that people usually make in practical life, the

relation between supply and demand in so far as these tend to

make themselves felt in exchange. Value shows the effect of

causes which in themselves are hidden. And through the fact that

we adapt ourselves to this effect, this value, it finally becomes

possible to adapt ourselves to the causes, the amounts of supply

and demand, and thus to regulate an economy with due regard to

economic laws. If at any given point of time the value of all

goods remains as it has hitherto been, we may be pretty sure of

acting economically and according to the standard of economical

insight already obtained, if we retain the disposition of all

goods in production and consumption unaltered. If value has

altered at any point, it is an indication that the present

disposition of goods must be changed, and changed in direct

accordance with the change of value. Where value has risen there

must new goods be directed, be it for production or for

consumption: where it has fallen these goods must be withdrawn.

and this transferring of goods from one point to another must be

continued until all values are brought once more into

equilibrium, and for every stock of goods the law of equal

valuation of all its units is re-established. 

    A knowledge of the values of goods, such as has existed in

every economy up till now, is consequently, in itself, one of the

most valuable of possessions. It is almost as valuable as the

possession of the goods themselves, inasmuch as it is the key to

their use. The sum of thousands of years of experience concerning

the sources of supply of goods, and the suitability or otherwise

of the conditions of their production, as well as concerning the

amount of demand for them, is represented in the figures of value

handed down to us. Were a nation to lose all remembrance of

these, it would be an enormous economic misfortune. An almost

incalculable period of time, an almost incalculable amount of

error and loss, would have to be gone through, before the nation

could again obtain mastery over the relations of goods formerly

expressed, with numerical clearness, for each individual good by

means of value. 

    By the socialist programme it is proposed to manage the

counting of stocks and calculation of demand, in the state of the

future, by means of government statistics. Could this plan be

sufficiently carried out it would be so far possible to dispense

with marginal value. On the other hand, it can never be dispensed

with where the finding of an expression for the utility in the

individual good is concerned. To dispense with it would be

equivalent to giving up the attempt to determine utility in the

individual case, and being content with making a general

determination as to the direction of production and consumption,

leaving out consideration of the quantities which it is desirable

to gain or consume. 

    Here I leave the sphere of conditions of value in private

economies. Clearly as I realise the imperfection of what I have

tried to do, I yet trust that the reader will have been convinced

that exchange value, as expressed in price, is not only governed

by price competition, but contains a deeper economic content;

that exchange value, although mixed with foreign elements, unites

in itself all the essential elements of the natural valuation of

goods, the valuation which is indispensable to economic action.

If the prices for all similar goods in one and the same market

are equal in amount, it is because, in the last resort, the

valuations of all similar goods in one and the same economy are

equal. If the prices for all goods in one stock are fixed at the

marginal point, it is because, in the last resort, the valuations

are so fixed. In so far as prices represent natural value, an

enormous and arduous mental labour of calculating the exchange

value of things is saved. By thousandfold weighing and

consideration of the productive and other economical relations,

each individual good gets measured out to it that amount of the

total return which must be directly imputed to it out of the

total amount of the total production, if the goods are to be

profitably dealt with. I have chosen the word "Imputation" after

much deliberation. It is not only to production goods that return

is imputed and distributed; all goods get imputed and distributed

out to them the utility which they give only when co-operating

with one another. There is no satisfaction that is not prepared

for and followed by others; all our satisfactions stand in mutual

action and reaction with each other. Every man's means are thus

linked together. Individual economic valuation succeeds,

nevertheless, in distributing this whole, and imputing to each

separate portion of wealth its share of return, in such a way

that, as a rule, every one is well advised who, within the sphere

of his own individual economy, takes the amount of value thus

ascertained as measure for his economic action. 

    Where exchange value diverges from natural value, something

else must of course obtain, but it is beyond our special task to

enter on this consideration. 

    It still remains to show how far natural laws require that

individual economic valuation be complemented by the economical

considerations of a community, or, more particularly, of a state.





NOTES:



1. See Ursprung des Werthes, p. 165.













Natural Value



	by Friedrich Wieser







Book 4: The Natural Value of Land, Capital, and Labour



Chapter 1



Introduction



    We have now to retrace our steps. Having made clear the

principles according to which the return, jointly obtained, may

be imputed to the separate productive factors, we have now to

return to the question as to the value of these factors. The

general law we are already acquainted with: the value of the

product determines the value of the production good. The point

which we must now take up is the application of this proposition

to the special circumstances of land, capital, and labour.

    In this by far the greatest difficulties meet us in the case

of capital. It seems as if our explanation of its value came into

direct collision with the facts of experience. Assume that a

capital, employed for one year and thereby completely used up,

yields, at the end of the year, a return of the value of 105;

experience tells us that the value of the capital will not be

estimated at 105, but at a somewhat less amount according to the

current rate of interest. At a 5% rate, e.g., the capital will be

estimated at 100. The remainder of the return will be regarded as

net return of interest. How does this go with our explanation? On

what ground is this deduction made? Ought not rather the full

value of the gross return to go into the capital value without

any deduction whatever? But if that were so, how should we

explain the contradiction of experience which interest presents?

How is the interest to be explained? Or does natural valuation

exclude interest? Is it, perhaps, merely a phenomenon of

present-day exchange and price, which would not re-emerge in the

communistic state?

    One of the most conclusive and brilliant among Bohm-Bawerk's

critical examinations is that directed towards the attempts to

deduce interest from the productivity of capital. Bohm-Bawerk

himself in fact arrives at the conclusion that the attempt is

hopeless. To quote his own words: "It was not simply an

unfortunate chance that no one found the Open Sesame which had

the power to discover the mysterious origination of interest in

the productivity of capital. It was rather that on the road to

the truth a wrong turning had been taken. From the first it was a

hopeless endeavour to explain interest wholly and entirely from a

productive power of capital. It would be different if there were

a power that could make value grow directly as wheat grows from

the field. But there is no such power. What the productive power

can do is only to create a quantity of products, and perhaps at

the same time to create a quantity of value, but never to create

surplus value. Interest is a surplus, a remainder left when

product of capital is the minuend and value of consumed capital

is the subtrahend. The productive power of capital may find its

result in increasing the minuend. But so far as that goes it

cannot increase the minuend without at the same tine increasing

the subtrahend in the same proportion. For the productive power

is undeniably the ground and measure of the value of the capital

in which it resides. If with a particular form of capital one can

produce nothing, that form of capital is worth nothing. If one

can produce little with it, it is worth little; if one can

produce much with it, it is worth much, and so on; -- always

increasing in value as the value that can be produced by its help

increases, i.e. as the value of its product increases. And so,

however great the productive power of capital may be, and however

greatly it may increase the minuend, yet so far as it does so,

the subtrahend is increased in the same proportion, and there is

no remainder, no surplus of value" (Capital and Interest,

translated by William Smart, page 179).

    When we turn to land we find also a striking contrast between

the apparent demands of our theory and experience. Land yields

returns that stretch away into the farthest future. The value of

land, then, should surely be not merely twenty or thirty times

the annual rent, as experience tells us it is, but rather an

indefinite and incalculable number of times the annual rent;

perhaps it should be estimated as an infinite amount (see also on

this point Capital and Interest, page 67). But the same line of

argument may be applied to capital. Capital also, when well

employed, promises to yield its net return on into the indefinite

future, so perhaps its value also ought to be estimated as an

infinite amount.

    It will be seen that the difficulties which meet us are not

trifling. If, nevertheless, I believe that they can be overcome,

it is because I trust to the support given by the results of our

investigation into the imputation of return. None of the writers

who tried to derive interest from the productivity of capital had

this support, and even in Bohm-Bawerk's critique it is not

foreseen. Have we not in fact found a productive power, which,

although not capable, as Bohm-Bawerk claims, of creating "more

value," can and does create what amounts to the same thing, "more

return"; in other words, a surplus?

    We shall begin with the most difficult, the theory of the

value of capital. After what has been said it is clear that it

cannot be taken up without taking up the theory of interest.

    Almost everything in this book will find its complement in

the discussion upon costs which is to follow.



Chapter 2



The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital. I --

Discounting



    Capital receives its value from its fruits. If, then, we are

calculating the final return of any production, and, for that

purpose, deduct from the value of these fruits the capital

consumed, with its value, the result will be zero, inasmuch as,

sooner or later, all capital is consumed in production. The

deduction made must always amount to the value of the fruits,  -- 

indeed, that value measures the deduction  --  and consequently

the value calculation leaves no net return whatever. Not only is

interest not explained; it is absolutely excluded. And, if we

consider that means of production renew themselves again and

again indefinitely, and yield results indefinitely, we come

across another contradiction of experience, for experience shows

that the value of capital is not infinite but always finite and

limited.

    These are the problems which lie before us for solution when

we now go on to examine the value of capital and the interest on

capital.

    For their solution we may avail ourselves of the results of

our analysis of the physical productivity of capital. All capital

transforms itself in the last resort into gross return. In this

gross return the capital reproduces itself with a physical

surplus, the net return. These two facts, which we have already

established, will suffice us to deduce the value-productivity of

capital, and to solve all the contradictions with experience.

    First: all capital transforms itself in the last resort into

gross return; it follows from this that the value of the capital

can never exceed the value of the gross return. The value of

capital is thus a limited finite amount, although the working of

the ever-renewed production extends away into an illimitable

future. The materials and apparatus out of which, and with whose

help, bread is produced, cannot possibly be worth more than the

bread itself. And those things from which the materials and

apparatus themselves are produced, and which, consequently, are

the producers of bread one stage removed, have, in the

prospective gross return -- the perishable bread -- a maximum

limit of value. So with all capitals, however far their primary

products may be removed from direct employment in the

satisfaction of want. To put it into figures,  -- if a capital

transforms itself sooner or later into a gross return of the

value of 105, its own value cannot be put at anything above 105.

    Second: in the gross return capital reproduces itself with a

physical surplus, the net return. It follows that the capital

value cannot be credited with the whole value of the gross

return. In the reproduction capital represents only a portion of

its own gross return, and can therefore absorb only a portion of

the value of that gross return. If, from the value of 105, 5 are

set aside as fruits which may be consumed without preventing the

full replacement of the capital, only the remainder of 100 can be

reckoned as capital value. The prospect of having this residual

value of 100 transformed once more, at the close of the next

period of production, into the gross return of 105  --  by again

employing it productively cannot make any change on this

valuation; since the expected return of 105 is always divided in

the same way, assuming the same conditions; viz. 100 goes to

capital and 5 to the increment on capital.

    Gross return and net return are thus the two given amounts

from which capital gets its value. The whole difficulty of the

problem lies essentially in the recognition of the fact that

those two amounts are given. For proof of this we refer to our

former disquisition upon imputation in general, and the

imputation in the case of capital in particular. If physical

productivity of capital involves, as we have maintained, the

imputation of gross return and the imputation of net return, we

have at once a clear and simple principle for the valuation of

capital.

    There is in common use a definite name for the method of

calculating value required by this principle. To fix the present

value of a money claim, carrying no interest, which falls due at

a future date, we make use, as every one knows, of the method

known as "discounting." That is, we deduct the usual interest

from the future sum. Now every capital value,  -- not alone the

value of a sum of money but of every perishable productive

instrument  -- is calculated by discounting; that is to say, from

the value of the future expected sum of products into which the

capital will be transformed, the corresponding net return is

deducted. Only that, practically, in discounting money claims, a

fixed rate of interest -- i.e. a definite relation between

capital value and net return -- is always assumed, and always

emerges, while we are explaining the formation of this relation

by first discovering the principle for estimating capital value.

    Bohm-Bawerk, arguing against Thunen's explanation of interest

-- which has much in common with that just given -- asks with

what right it can be assumed that the value of the gross return

never raises the value of capital to its level, or, inversely,

that capital value never depresses that of the gross return to

its level? If a return of 105 can be obtained with an outlay of

100, will there not be competition in production, or levelling of

the valuations, until either the outlay come to be valued at 105

or the return at 100, or both settle at some figure half-way

between the two? Bohm-Bawerk is right in raising the question,

seeing that he does not start, as we do, with a physical net

return to capital. But assuming this physical net return the

question is at once answered and settled. So long as the gross

return remains large enough to replace the capital and yield a

net return, the value of gross return and the value of capital

can never be assimilated: there will always be a difference --

viz. the value of the net return. This difference could only

disappear with the disappearance of physical productivity. So

long as it exists, so long does physical-productivity guarantee

value-productivity to capital, and so long does capital also

create more in value than itself;  -- to apply again the words of

Bohm-Bawerk, it creates "more value." And if, in order to

calculate the amount of capital consumed, the capital value be

deducted from the gross return, it is not the whole amount of

gross return that is deducted; the subtrahend is somewhat less

than the minuend, and the required residue of interest must be

the result.

    If this be so, then, in the communistic state also, capital

value must be estimated in such wise that it absorbs only a

portion of the gross return to capital; so long at least as

capital retains the same efficiency, as an auxiliary of

production, which general experience from time immemorial has

shown it to do. And for so long, consequently, must it, even in

the communistic state, bear interest. Calculation of the net

return to capital, and deduction or discount of the same from the

gross return, in order to find the value of capital; -- these are

natural economic calculations, indispensable in every economy so

long as the fundamental conditions of production known to general

experience remain in force.

    A capital which, in twelve months from the date of

possession. yields the same gross return (say 105) and the same

net return (say 5), is valued at the date of possession at the

same amount (say 100). It is, nevertheless, not a matter of

indifference whether the capital comes into our possession now or

only at the end of the twelve months, inasmuch as possession now

guarantees a return of interest besides. It would, therefore, be

incorrect if we were to take the equivalence of valuation put

upon capitals in the present and in the future, and argue from

that to the full economic equivalence of the present and the

future possession. A present sum is always worth more than the

same sum at a future date, or, as we may say, the future sum is

always worth less, and that in proportion to the futurity of the

time when it will come into our possession. If in the course of a

year I can make 105 out of 100, the sum of 100 which I shall

obtain only at the end of a year, is, to-day, worth only about

95. To reduce future capital values to present value, they must

be discounted, just as the values of future gross returns are.

    The reader will remember that, in chapter vi of Book I, we

defended the proposition that present and future wants, coming

into competition with each other, are, as a rule, to be regarded

as equal; that is to say, the difference in time does not

necessitate any difference in valuation. To this proposition we

have now to add a second: -- that, within the sphere of

production, the difference in time does necessitate a difference

in valuation of the goods employed in production. The two

propositions are in perfect accord, and mutually supplement one

another. If wants are continuously to find the same satisfaction,

equal amounts of return must continuously be produced. And if

equal amounts of return are continuously produced, capital must

remain continuously the same in substance. But if capital is

actually to remain the same in substance, and so is able to yield

continuously the same returns, this must find expression in a

valuation which ascribes to capital a higher value, the earlier

the point of time it comes into our possession. For the earlier

the point of time, the earlier, and consequently the greater, the

return that may be expected.

    The business man who takes note of his own calculations, who

tests his recollections and impressions, and asks himself why he

calculates interest, and on what principle he graduates the value

of his capital, will arrive substantially at the same conclusions

as those to which we have just come. The value of goods is

derived from their utility; the value of capital goods from their

useful returns; interest represents a net increment to or fruit

of capital: -- these are the axioms of practical life so much

contradicted, even libelled, by theorists. They are axioms which

every layman recognises, in his own way, as the motives by which

he believes himself guided in his economic operations. A theory

which should succeed in vindicating these axioms of ripened

experience, which should give a distinct form to the vague

impression, and a good and necessary content to opinions not

quite conscious of their own raison d'etre, could have no better

testimony to its correctness.



NOTES:



1. Compare Menger, p. 135.



Chapter 3



The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). II

-- The Rate of Interest



    Interest is the return to capital when that return, with its

value, is considered in relation to capital value. The relation

existing between capital value and interest, when considered in

the individual case, may be described as the percentage of

increment; it becomes the "rate of interest" only when it obtains

in a large number of connected cases. The rate of interest is the

general percentage of increment to all the capital in the market.

    The fact that, in one and the same sphere of production,

there emerges a general percentage of increment, or at least a

constant tendency toward it, arises from the many-sided

connections between various kinds of production. In consequence

of the comparatively great freedom of choice in the destination

of most capital, land, and labour, it is almost always possible

to extend any single production at the cost of some other, or to

limit it in favour of some other. Of this possibility people will

avail themselves whenever, and according as, any one production

shows a particularly favourable or particularly unfavourable

percentage of increment. In seeking for the most favourable

percentage of increment, and in striving towards the equalising

of all differences, a general percentage of increment will be

created, or at all events will be aimed at, so far as there is

competition between the various productions.

    The organisations which at present contribute most to the

equalisation of the interest rate are the money markets, where

the principal amounts of capital in the shape of money are lent.

In the money markets it is, of course, in the first instance only

interest on loans that is determined, but the state of the loan

market in the last instance affects also the return to

production, inasmuch as it influences the extending of industries

carried on with borrowed capital. Not only loan capital, however,

but also that capital which is the personal property of

undertakers, moves perpetually in the direction of the highest

percentage of increment. Under a communistic regime all capital

would belong to the one single undertaker, the state; capital

would no longer be lent for production; and the interest on loans

would cease to influence the percentage of increment in

production. But this would simply leave capital still more free

to shift from one production to another; it would no longer be

hindered by those barriers which the circumstances of private

ownership at present oppose.

    Every one knows that the rate of interest, in spite of the

tendencies to equalise it, is never really the same all over.

This is chiefly caused by the fact that the unity or organisation

of production is by no means perfect. There is no such thing as a

united money market, and much less is there any thing like a

united way of conducting productive business. The individualism

of the present economic order distributes production among

individual undertakings. These, of course, under the influence of

competition and the desire for gain, are built into one coherent

structure, which to some extent realises the economic order that

an ideal plan of production would present. Yet at how many points

do we find great gaps; how many dislocations through excessive

accumulation of means of production at the wrong places; how

often things go too quickly, how often not fast enough! And

mistakes like these are all the greater the more distant the

groups compared are from one another. The separate branches of

agricultural production may be, relatively speaking, more in

harmony with each other, than, for example, agriculture as a

whole with manufacture as a whole. The transferences from

agriculture to manufacturing, and vice versa, take place too

seldom to allow of the proper balance between them being

maintained.

    This results, as we have said, in differences of percentage

of increment among the individual productive groups. It is

scarcely necessary to emphasise the fact that every difference in

rate of interest, arising from this cause, is a misfortune. Every

such difference implies a violation of the very first principle

of employing goods; that they shall first be used in the most

favourable employments, and that the less favourable shall be

allowed only in so far as there is not enough of the more

favourable. In one group people are content with a less

percentage of increment, while in others they may be obtaining

higher percentages. The hurtful consequences of this are by no

means confined to the use of capital; they go further, and

misdirect the production of capital. Capitals which yield a

trifling interest are produced far more largely, and capitals

which might yield a high interest, to a much less extent than

they ought to be.

    On the other hand, uniformity in the percentages of

increment, and a uniform rate of interest, are, where they exist,

proofs, economically speaking, of a well-balanced distribution

and disposal of capital. They are proofs that the economically

indicated limits of the employment of capital are everywhere

equally respected; that nowhere is there any falling short, and

nowhere any overstepping of them. In the principle which demands

that the employment of capital shall be guided by the rate of

interest, and that all employments which fail to return the

customary interest be left alone, we find the marginal law

brought into one common expression as regards all the different

forms of capital. The net return is a definite quota of the gross

return, and where the quota of net return is controlled, the

direction of capital generally is controlled.

    In the communistic state, when production is directed from

one point and to one end, the differences in percentage of

increment, so far as these are occasioned by the inorganic nature

of our system of production, would disappear. Of course, even

there, certain differences would still remain; all those, namely,

which could not be further equalised by transferences from one

production to another. In the nature of things, by reason of the

variety in the properties of things, no production can be

increased at the cost of others beyond a certain point, and, on

similar grounds, no production can be limited in favour of others

below a certain point. Agricultural capital could never be

completely transferred to trade, nor trade capital all

transferred to agriculture. But what does observation here show?

It shows that those very differences, which it seems quite

impossible to remove, are always removed, and that through an

instrumentality which is permissible even where transferences of

capital are not permissible; by means, that is to say, of

calculation.

    How this happens and what it means, we shall now try to show.



Chapter 4



The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). III

-- The Law of the Uniform Calculation of the Interest Rate



    A capital which, in a one year's production period,

transforms itself into a gross return of ?05, will be valued at

?00 if the general rate of interest be 5%: the residue ? is net

return. If the gross return should rise suddenly and greatly,

say, e.g., to ?26, -- the general rate of interest remaining

unaltered -- it appears at first sight that the rise must affect

the net return, and cause it to be calculated at ?6 instead of

at ? as formerly. But, as a matter of fact, is the return so

calculated? It is in one particular case; that, namely, where the

rise is regarded as a solitary instance. But if it is regarded as

permanent the calculation will be different. The owner certainly

reckons the entire increase of ?6 as gain, but he distributes it

by putting ?0 to capital and ? to net return. From this time

onward he will reckon his capital, and consequently his

consumption of capital, at ?20, and his net return at ?; so

that he does not assume an increment of 26%, but only of 5%,

corresponding to the general rate of interest.(1*) In the same

way, should the gross return of a capital sink permanently, while

the rate of interest remains unaltered, a portion of the loss

will be written off the capital value, in such a manner that the

relation between capital value and net return shall again

correspond to the general rate of interest.

    In this way it comes about that, where transferences from

production to production are no longer permissible, the

individual percentages of increment on individual capitals are,

by calculation, regulated according to the general rate of

interest.

    The rate of interest which obtains in the particular

productive group, or in the particular market to which the

capital in question belongs, is the rate that decides.

    The meaning of this act of calculation is easy to understand.

A capital yielding 26% interest and one yielding 5%, are not

equivalent to one another, although both may be expressed in the

same figures. Only equal capitals bearing equal interest are

equivalent. Capitals, then, can be calculated off-hand -- i.e.

without consideration to the interest they bear -- only where the

rate of interest is the same. That is the reason why, when the

rate of interest cannot be made equal, it is at least calculated

as such, by means of shifting the differences to the capital

value, and giving them expression there.

    A 3% capital and a 6% capital of ?00 are not equivalent to

one another; they are put into terms fit for comparison by

calculating the 3% capital at 6%, and so reducing the capital to

?0, or by calculating the 6% capital at 3% and raising capital

value to ?00.

    As a means of simplifying calculation, it might be

exceedingly desirable that the rate of interest should be the

same in all markets, and in all productive groups. The rate,

however, is not the same, and the fact must be reckoned with. If

the rate of interest on bonds amount to 4% and the bank rate to

3%, it is a consequence of the fact that the two loan markets are

separated from one another, and that demand and supply in the one

do not approximate to demand and supply in the other, or, at all

events, approximate only in trifling degree. This want of touch,

however, which renders impossible the equalisation of rates of

interest, also renders it less necessary; it is only when capital

is transferred from one market to the other that the difference

in rates of interest has any practical importance for the

valuation of capital. It is different where one and the same

market is concerned. Here capitals are continually valued against

each other, and here, therefore, differences in percentage of

increment could not be put up with. They are overcome either by

regulation of production, or, where that is not practicable, by

calculation. In the communistic state, where all capitals would

be under a uniform administration, it would be an obvious

expedient of calculation to regulate all individual percentages

of increment according to the prevailing rate of interest.

    We now proceed to further applications of the fundamental

proposition that the rate of interest, when possible, should be

uniformly calculated.



NOTES:



1. In the above example I assume (1) circulating capital, and (2)

circulating capital whose value is not depressed to a lower level

by cheaper costs of production; -- say, a scarce raw material.

Suppose there is an increased demand for articles made from

amber, while amber cannot be obtained in greater quantities; it

will rise in value. Those undertakings which work with amber

certainly obtain thereby a rise in their gross returns; but there

is, on the other hand, a similar rise in the amount deducted for

consumption of capital, and this must be taken into consideration

in their estimate of gain. In the long run there remains a higher

net return, but it is only relatively to the increased outlay of

capital.

    A much more complicate calculation has to be made as regards

fixed capital, as also as regards capital whose value is

influenced by the costs of production. I must leave the reader to

think out for himself -- in the light of the principles now to be

discussed -- the corresponding modifications in the valuation of

fixed capital and in the influence of costs.



Chapter 5



The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). IV

-- Change in the Rate of Interest



    It has just been shown that, when the value of the service of

any individual form of capital -- e.g. a raw material, or a

machine -- rises or falls, the fact expresses itself in a

corresponding elevation or depreciation in its capital value. The

net return imputed is, of course, altered at the same time, but

only in so far as will bring it again into that relation with the

capital value which corresponds with the ordinary rate of

interest.

    In order that the general percentage of increment -- the rate

of interest -- may fall or rise, there must be changes of an

extensive kind in the return to the great mass of capitals --

brought about through changes in supply, in demand, in technique,

in a word, in any of the factors of imputation. A general rise in

the gross return to capital, brought about by a great and

universally effective invention, would cause a general rise in

the net return to capital, and its relation to capital value, --

that is to say, in the rate of interest. The capital value might

in this instance remain entirely unaltered. Only those capitals

which had no part in the effects of the invention, and were in

this respect individually separated from the general mass of

capital, must necessity be affected. Where the amount of their

services had remained unaltered in the midst of the general

increase, in estimating the value of those capitals a greater

discount from that amount would require to be made, corresponding

to the increased rate of interest. Suppose the rate of interest

to rise suddenly from 3% to 6%, the value of all capital whose

interest remains unaltered at 3% must be appraised at a

correspondingly lower rate.

    We have discussed the effect which the individual factors of

imputation produce upon the contributions of capital, in

sufficient detail to make the derivation of the rules which

govern the change in the rate of interest a matter of no

difficulty.

    One single remark may be added. It is quite a hackneyed

proposition that the increase of capital causes a decline in the

rate of interest. This proposition is true only with a certain

limitation; it holds only when, by increase of capital, is

understood increase in amount, without a simultaneous increase in

the variety of the forms of capital. Increased variety in capital

is synonymous with an advance in technique; it is one of those

facts of economic history to which special attention must be

drawn, when it is desired to show clearly the difference between

primitive and developed production. Thus to it is due what we

know to be the effect of every technical advance; namely, a rise

in the value of the services of capital, as regards individual

businesses, and, when comprehensive enough, a rise in the rate of

interest. Not until the qualitative advance has been

quantitatively used up, and the stocks of the new varieties of

capital been multiplied, without other new varieties coming to

the front -- that is, not until production expands and fills out

the newly-set limits, -- can the increase of wealth have power,

first, to depress the value of the services of capital

individually, and, in the long run, should its compass be

sufficiently extensive, -- to cause a fall in the rate of

interest.

    If we look back over the changes in the rate of interest on

production over the whole course of economic history, we shall

notice an unceasing upward and downward movement, according as

advances in production are made, or as the marginal values of the

newly-acquired wealth are again depressed by the increment of

capital which follows. But through these unceasing fluctuations

run great fundamental tendencies, which are, of course, subject

to disturbance from opposing tendencies of the rate of interest

on consumption loans. Economic history begins at a period when

there is almost no capital, -- the zero of property in capital as

well as the zero of return from capital. From that time onwards

property and return, measured absolutely, go on growing so long

as the economic world thrives, and has not yet reached the down

grade of the movement of value. And the relation between these

two -- i.e. the rate of interest -- rises similarly from the

beginning, and only begins to fall when the down grade in the

movement of value begins to come in sight.



Chapter 6



The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). V

-- The Valuation of Fixed Capital



    Up to this point we have disregarded the circumstance that

many capitals -- all those called "fixed capitals" -- do not

exhaust themselves in yielding one single return, but co-operate

in several processes of production, and yield several returns

before they are finally used up. We were justified in hitherto

neglecting this circumstance, as it is of no importance to the

principle of the valuation of capital which we had first to

establish. Now, however, that the principle has been established,

we must go on to this next question. We shall find that the

circumstance alluded to does not essentially alter matters,

although it certainly renders them much more complicated.

    In the case of fixed capital, instead of one single future

return there are several returns, and the present value of these

several returns must be determined by discounting. If a machine

remains capable of work over ten years, the services of all the

ten years which are to be imputed to it must be discounted and

added up, at their present value, in order to obtain the capital

value of the machine. It need scarcely be said that every later

service must be estimated at so much less in present value, as

the discount must be relative to the terminal point. Further

complications are caused by the fact that repairs, and

reconstructions, and extensive replacements, frequently take

place in fixed capital during the period in which it is wearing

out. The outlay which this occasions must be discounted -- taking

into account of course the period of time at which this outlay

may be anticipated. Still further complications, finally, arise

from the uncertainty -- which increases as the period of wear and

tear lengthens -- whether the returns expected will actually be

received at all. And this also necessitates peculiar deductions,

which will be most simply made where people can insure against

the danger.

    In the case of such fixed capitals as are consumed

exceedingly slowly, and, consequently, yield exceptionally many

returns, the process of capitalisation frequently takes the place

of discounting. Before speaking of this, however, it will be

necessary to touch at least upon another somewhat difficult

question.

    This is the method of calculating the individual percentages

of gross return assignable respectively to interest and to wear

and tear. If a machine remains serviceable for five years, and

yields every year ?000, this yearly income must be divided out

between interest and wear and tear (Amortisation) in accordance

with a certain law. In order to find this law, it is best to

represent the individual rates of return as annuities. The first

instalment must yield interest for the first year upon the total

capital value, all return beyond that is repayment of capital;

the second instalment has to yield interest on the capital value

remaining after deduction of this repayment, and the residue,

which must now be a larger one, serves toward further repayment;

and so on, until finally the entire capital is replaced, and

interest obtained upon all the portions of capital according to

the period of their employment. The reason for this kind of

calculation lies, in the last resort, in the law of the uniform

calculation of the interest rate.(1*)



NOTES:



1. Calculated on the figures give above, and assuming a 5% rate

of interest, the value of the machine, on putting into present

value the five expected annual returns of 1000, with interest and

compound interest, may be reckoned at 4329.48. The first return

of 1000 pays 216.47, as 5% interest on the capital, while the

residue of 783.53 goes to repayment of capital, thus leaving a

remaining capital sum of 3545.95. From the second return 117.30

falls to interest, and 822.70 to the sinking fund; from the

third, in the same manner, to interest 136.16, and, to

replacement, 863.84; from the fourth, 92.97 to interest, 907.03

to capital; and finally, from the fifth, 47.62 to interest, and

952.38 to repayment, whereby the entire capital is replaced.



Chapter 7



The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). VI

-- Capitalization



    Interest is always an aliquot part of capital value, and

capital value is always a multiple of interest. Where interest is

5%, for example, the interest is 1/20 of the capital value, and

the capital value is equal to 20 times the interest. It is this

fact which renders it possible to determine the value of capital,

not by deducting interest from gross return, but by another

method which leads to precisely the same result -- namely, by

means of a corresponding multiplication of interest, or, to use

the ordinary term, by capitalisation. Whether discounting or

capitalisation is preferred will depend upon circumstances. With

circulating capital discounting is the usual method, as the gross

return in this case forms the nearest and clearest basis. With

fixed capital, if the wearing out is comparatively rapid, and the

gross returns are few in number, discounting will be the

preferable method in this case also; but if a long series of

gross returns is to be taken into account, capitalisation will be

preferred.

    Capitalisation is easiest where the gross return contains no

quota for wear and tear, and is therefore entirely net return.

This would be the case with a capital which never wore out, which

promised rent to all eternity, and a rent, moreover, absolutely

secure. To carry through the process of discounting here would be

laborious in the highest degree; the rent of each separate year

would have to be separately calculated, until that rent was

reached whose present value was zero; and not till then could the

calculation be finished. How much simpler in such a case to

multiply the year's rent in accordance with the rate of interest!

The result obtained in this fashion agrees with that given by the

former and more laborious method, not merely approximately, but

with mathematical exactitude, as any text-book of mathematics

will confirm. The mathematical formula for the discounting of an

eternal rent is simply the formula of capitalisation.

    The calculation is a little more complicated when the gross

returns contain quotas for wear and tear, and when repairs and

the like must be covered and insurance premiums or premiums

against risk retained out of these gross returns. In such cases

all necessary deductions must first be made from the gross return

before we get the net return which is to be capitalised, and this

is very often exceedingly difficult in the individual case. The

premiums just mentioned are frequently not deducted, but the

amount of risk finds instead its expression simply in the rate of

interest. The return, for example, of a business regarded as of

doubtful solidity will be capitalised at a higher rate of

interest, i.e. as a smaller multiple.(1*)



NOTES:



1. All the separate principles here deduced for the calculating

of capital value and interest are followed in practical life and

are practically familiar to us. The theory of them, too, is often

given. But they are always followed and taught under the

assumption that the fact of interest and a fixed ratio of

interest are given. Nothing is simpler, under such an assumption,

than to capitalise a rent, or to show the method of

capitalisation. But the duty of the theorist is to discover these

laws, and, at the same time, to explain why such assumptions may

be made. Whence comes interest? whence the rate of interest?

These are our fundamental questions. All the single laws which we

have laid down are confirmed theoretically only if we have

succeeded in explaining also the assumption on which they are

based, i.e. the existence of interest and the rate of interest.

    The analysis of the value of land which follows will once

more give the reader occasion to notice how difficult it is with

the matter in hand to escape arguing in a circle, and to prevent

the entrance of any assumption which is itself in need of

explanation.



Chapter 8



Interest on the Consumption Loan. House Rent



    The natural principles hitherto laid down for estimating

capital value and interest refer only to production. It must now

be asked whether there is also a natural interest which

corresponds to the interest given on a loan for consumption

purposes, or interest derived from letting of dwelling-houses and

the like.(1*)

    The motives of a debtor who borrows with the view of spending

the loan on himself are different from those of an undertaker who

borrows to increase his business capital. The undertaker hopes to

obtain both repayment of capital and interest out of the return

on the borrowed sum. The mere debtor cannot hope for this, but

must trust that it will be possible for him to repay his debt of

capital and interest out of some other income. He borrows because

he needs goods now, and has not got them, while he expects in the

future to have them and not to need them to the same degree -- at

least he deludes himself with some such hope. Thus in a certain

sense interest on production and interest on consumption have a

common source. Both of them relate to a difference in the

valuation of present and of future goods, only that the causes

which produce this difference are distinct. In the case of the

productive outlay of capital it is the productivity of capital

which causes the difference between present and future; in the

case of the consumption loan, it is accidental and personal

circumstances, -- accidental accumulation of present wants and

expenditure, accidental disturbance of income, and so forth. One

who finds himself in a situation of urgent necessity is acting

quite rationally when he promises -- at some future time when he

hopes to be more favourably situated -- to pay to the person who

assists him by an advance of money out of his present difficulty,

not only the amount advanced, but an extra, an interest. A sum of

l05 at the end of a year may be worth less to him than ?00 is

at the present moment; he might even promise ?50, ?00, or more,

and yet not be acting irrationally. But if he is to find a person

willing to lend him the money, it is essential that every one

should not be in the same circumstances of present need and

future affluence as himself. It is essential that there should be

people who, at the moment, have means which they can do without.

And thus it follows that, in an entirely organic economy, such as

would exist in the communistic state, the necessary conditions

for consumption interest are wanting, inasmuch as all the

citizens together would form only one economic subject, and would

participate continually, either in the same condition of want, or

in the same improved condition of economic well-being.

    The interest obtained from the letting of dwelling-houses,

and such like objects of consumption wealth, amounts, on an

average, to a sum which allows the owner to enjoy -- during the

period for which the building lasts -- interest upon the capital

expended in building, and, besides, to provide what the Germans

conveniently call "amortisation" of the same; so that, when the

dwelling is worn out, he is in a position to replace it. In

short, there is assured him, on the average, a permanent net

return corresponding in amount to the general rate of interest

upon property of this kind. During all the long period of time

when contract interest on Loans was forbidden by law, and

violently combated by all theorists, no one thought of objecting

to the interest on consumption-wealth. This was always held

equitable; and an owner who made over his property to another in

perpetuity was regarded as having a right to claim in return a

permanent remuneration. If, however, we look carefully, it will

be seen that the theoretical arguments employed against interest

on loans apply equally to interest on house property, in so far

as it brings in more than enough to repay the costs of building.

If money be "unfruitful," so are buildings; and to this extent it

is impossible to see why they should bring to their owners a net

income lasting beyond the physical duration of the house. Were

the owner to retain the house for his own use he would, by the

time it tumbled to ruins, possess nothing more of it than,

possibly, the value of the materials; -- is it not rather a hard

condition that the person who hires the house must rebuild it for

him?

    To justify the usual amount of rent on house property, we

must go somewhat further back, viz. to the fact that the objects

of use which are let must be produced. But if they are to be

produced, there must be the prospect that their value will

include the full and permanent maintenance of the undertaker's

capital, along with the customary return to capital, whether this

value be realised through selling or through letting the

property. No houses would be built for letting if the prospects

of this kind of undertaking were poorer than those of any other;

the interest of hire or let must, therefore, stand at the usual

amount of interest on capital. It is an application of the law of

costs (see below, Book V), according to which the customary

interest on capital is reckoned among costs. As in all cases, so

in this, does the calculation of costs assure the fullest

economic distribution of the employments of goods. The more

exactly the net income received from the letting of

dwelling-houses corresponds with the rate of interest general

over the country, the more exactly will the building of houses,

and the satisfaction of the need which this meets, correspond

with the general condition of production and of the satisfaction

of wants. If people were to be contented, e.g., with an

exceptionally low return from houses, it would imply a

disproportionately ample satisfaction of the want for dwellings.

This would stand out from the general economic plane; and would

necessarily be balanced and compensated by limitations in some

other direction.

    Even in an entirely organic economy, in which the opposition

between owner and tenant was abolished, it would be as needful as

it now is to take care that building of houses corresponded with

the general position of production and of satisfaction. And to

this extent we might draw analogies between the interest of house

rent and a calculation, in terms of value, of the satisfaction

given by houses, which would result in a control of expenditure

quite as complete as that given by house rent.(2*)



NOTES:



1. A further form of interest will be discussed in Book V. chap.

ii.



2. That is to say: -- In the present state the due provision of

houses for the people is guaranteed by the consideration that

capitalists, investing their money in house property, will get

the ordinary return of interest on capital generally. Rent must

cover replacement as well as interest. In a communistic state,

where the government provided everything, the building of houses

would be controlled by considerations of wants and satisfactions

which placed the demand for houses very much in the same relative

position to other satisfactions as now. No socialist state, for

instance, could provide houses in such quantities that their

value was reduced to the mere expenses of building, without

disturbing the marginal plane, and diminishing the total sum of

satisfaction obtainable by the employment of the national

capital. -- W.S.



Chapter 9



The Value of Land



    The value of land is calculated -- according to the same

principles as the value of a permanent rent -- by capitalising

the rent of land. This is a proposition which is held nowadays as

self-evident. It was not always so, however, and, indeed could

not always be so. In order to capitalise, a given rate of

interest is necessary; and that an interest rate may be given, we

need capital. To capitalise rent means to multiply it according

to principles which are derived, as the name itself shows, from

the valuation of capital.

    Imagine an ideal condition of agriculture where no capital

whatever is employed. The land yields produce of all kinds and in

great quantity. In these circumstances the value of each product

can be estimated exactly; the value of each harvest can be

estimated exactly; rent can be fixed exactly; -- but there is no

means by which to determine with certainty how many rents would

be required to give the value of the land.

    Why is there no such means in the case of land as there is in

the case of capital? The answer is simple. Capital reproduces

itself in the gross return as a part of that gross return. Thus

there is a fixed relation between the two "known" quantities,

gross return and net return, and the "unknown" quantity, capital

value; and this relation gives the measure for capitalisation.

Land has not the same double position as productive factor and as

product. It produces without being reproduced; and thus, to

determine the value of land, it becomes necessary to bring to our

aid the standard for capitalisation which we find in capital.

    From this consideration it follows that, so long as capital

was scarce, it was impossible to obtain a fixed valuation of

land. Every owner of land might estimate its value differently,

inasmuch as he might take, as basis of calculation either a

greater or smaller number of yearly rentals, according to varying

external circumstances, and according as his judgment was

influenced by recklessness or by forethought. An egoist pure and

simple, who calculated only with regard to his own lifetime, and

to whom his land was of importance only because it secured him a

rent for life, would estimate its value according to the probable

duration of his life, and would thereby obtain a kind of fixed

valuation; at all events, his land would represent to him a

finite sum of value and not an infinite one. But one who thought

of his children, and of succeeding generations, and took their

interests into consideration in estimating the value of his land

would of necessity regard it as an infinite amount. As

inconsiderate egoism may be counted exceptional, the value of

land must, as a rule, have been estimated as infinite, or, at all

events, as an amount incapable of being measured.

    As a matter of fact, this probably was the case with

primitive economy. In the beginning, where land had any value at

all ascribed to it -- as, e.g., the pasture lands of nomadic

tribes when there was no superfluous amount of such lands, the

opinion must have arisen that here man had to do with an

indispensable condition of existence; a condition which required

to be kept up permanently; and a condition whose importance could

not in any way be compared with that of rapidly changing, coming

and going, movable goods. The possession of pasture land was a

matter of life and death, and the tribe, recognising that its

continued existence depended upon the possession, would risk its

uttermost to retain it. Even in present times a similar mode of

thought may be met with in distant mountainous regions, where the

peasant farms his solitary patch of land. His croft is

inalienable from him, and its value indeterminable as against

other goods. What should the peasant do if he ceased to be a

peasant? No sum of money that a buyer might offer could be any

temptation to him, unless just then an occasion presented itself

to exchange it for another and better piece of land -- an

unlikely possibility in the circumstances. The peasant's croft is

and remains for him a good by itself, the value of it impossible

of expression in goods of any other kind, -- in fact,

indeterminable.

    This conception alters only when capital has become more

plentiful, and when the landowner has become more familiar with

its use and its value. There are two circumstances which bring

this about. The one is that land and capital begin to be

exchanged for each other, according to the amount of the rents

they yield, and thus people use the value of capital to express

the value of land. The other, and more important, is that the

land becomes more intensively cultivated, and itself employs,

much capital. Consequently, in every act of cultivation, the

question has to be considered, how land and capital should be

employed relatively to each other, so as to give the best returns

of rent. The same return in crops may be produced by taking more

or less land into cultivation, or by employing more or fewer

doses of capital, and agriculturists have to decide on these

points. Thus land and capital become commensurable in their

products; and, when ever civilisation has got this length, it is

impossible longer to avoid valuing land according to the

fundamental laws of valuing capital. To do otherwise would be to

renounce the only possible measure for calculation and economic

decisions. Just as capitals can be rightly compared with each

other only when calculated at the same rate of interest, so can

land and capital be rightly compared only when the valuation of

land assumes the rate of interest on capital.

    In the communistic state, it is true, the connection between

land and capital, brought about by exchange of the one for the

other, disappears, but the connection arising from their common

co-operation in production remains. The capitalising of land

value, accordingly, would remain as now.



Chapter 10



The Value of Labour



    To his master the slave is a capital, and his value, like

that of an animal, a machine, or any piece of fixed capital, is

determined by summing up and discounting all the services which

may be expected from him, or, as we may say, by capitalising his

net return.

    The capital value of free labour, the value of the free

labourer, is no object for valuation, any more than his person is

an object of economical disposal, or a "good." On the other hand,

the individual acts of labour are always objects of economical

disposal, and so objects of value, even in the freest community,

-- even in a community where the labourer himself governs and

makes, the laws. No economy could be conducted without men

recognising not only which labour, in general, is the best and

which the worst, but which, in the circumstances, is the more and

which the less important, which must be used sparingly and which

may be used with most freedom.

    The method by which labour is valued is exceedingly simple.

The ordinary principles of imputation decide what share of the

return may be ascribed to each individual service, and the value

of this share obtains directly as the value of the service which

produces it. Thus every kind and quality of labour shows a

different result according to the available supply, the demand,

the support revived from complementary goods, and the technical

possibilities. At the top of the tree stand the "monopoly"

services, when the general economic conditions of the time aid

them with technical support and general demand at the bottom

stand the over-congested branches of labour, particularly

unskilled manual labour. Wherever labour power is available in

great quantity it is valued as a "cost-good," and suffers from

all the disadvantages of this valuation. The marginal employment

is always the decisive one, -- that employment of the labour in

question which brings the smallest result economically

permissible.

    The socialists would have us believe that the value of every

kind of labour should be estimated simply according to time; that

is to say, the duration of the service should alone decide its

value relative to other labour, -- which assumes, of course, that

slovenly labour is reduced to earnest labour, unskilled to

skilled labour. This is the extent to which the quality of the

labour would be taken into consideration, but no further. Those

differences of quality which reside in the task set before the

labourer are left quite out of consideration. Common manual

labour, higher artisan labour, superior mental labour, are all to

be regarded as equal. Does it require any special proof that this

is contrary to the natural laws of valuation, and that no economy

could last which treated its division of labour in this way?

    The socialists continually overlook the fact -- although,

indeed, they only follow in the footsteps of most of the

economists -- that value, in our present condition of society,

has two services to perform. The one is to act as title to

personal income. In the great round game of income-winning, every

one is to receive in the end as much as the value of his stake

amounts to; and in the game the stakes may be wealth as well as

personal labour. The man who has much wealth to stake receives,

as a rule, much income, even without personal labour, and the man

who has little wealth to stake, as a rule receives little, even

with the most strenuous expenditure of labour.

    The other service of value, -- and one usually quite

overlooked, -- concerns the economical balancing or weighing of

goods against goods, and of employment of goods against

employment, without regard to distribution among persons, and

simply with a view to reach the greatest possible economic

results. To this service of value belong e.g, those principles

which are absolutely indispensable to any economy; -- that every

production should be directed so as to obtain the greatest

possible return, that no more be spent upon any product than can

be made good by its value, that in consumption the good suited to

satisfy urgent wants, and therefore the more valuable, should not

be spent on a trifling satisfaction, that, generally speaking,

the limits of supply and demand, as given in marginal value,

should be observed, and so on.

    What would the socialists have? They wish a related economy,

in no way worse, and possibly better regulated than that of

to-day; but with this peculiarity that labour shall be the only

source of personal income. The value of land and capital -- or

the value of the rents of land and capital -- shall no longer be

imputed to any individual as his outlay or stake; shall no longer

serve any one individual as a title to personal income. Is there

in this claim -- the justice of which we shall not here discuss

-- any force which can abrogate the economical service of value

as well as the personal service? Because land and capital are no

longer to belong to individuals but to the state, must they

therefore be regarded by the state as valueless, and be employed

in production without regard to the principles of value? Because

labour is to be the only basis of personal income -- measured

possibly by the length of time which each man has worked -- is

labour alone to be considered in production, and is the only

measure of its value to be its duration? Because there is to be a

new order in the distribution of goods among persons, must there

be a complete disorganisation in the whole industrial conduct of

goods?

    Of course socialists are very far from desiring such a

result. They wish to have a related economy, but they expect at

the same time to secure that goods are used and employed

according to their usefulness. Does this mean that the usefulness

of goods is really the only thing to be considered -- not

quantity and its changes, not demand with its rise and fall, not

the mutual connection of means of production, with all the

vicissitudes of favourable and unfavourable coincidence? But if

usefulness, supply, demand, complementarity are combined, what is

this but to value goods according to the utility imputable to

them in the given case, instead of according to their general

usefulness -- in other words, to estimate them according to their

value?

    The natural principles of valuation are indispensable,

because they serve indispensable economic purposes. Consequently

where these principles are observed, they serve these purposes,

and are, in so far, good. In so far as exchange value corresponds

with natural value, it is right that it should regulate the

economic conduct and disposal of goods, and that in every

department, whether as regards land, capital, or even labour. And

although the labourer may suffer severely under this law of

value, although society generally may suffer with him, although

the recompense of the labourer may require to be adjusted, in his

own interest and that of society, by a different law; -- still

labour cannot be valued according to any other law where its

employment is concerned. When it comes to employ labour, the

communistic state must retain the same law in force, or its

economy will become chaos.

    Not only the question of payment, but, beyond that, the

question of labour in the future, must be kept distinct from its

employment. Wherever common labour power is disproportionally

abundant, it can, and must, be employed only in producing returns

of very trifling value. None the less will it be regarded as an

evil that there should be available labour power of such trifling

productive capacity, and all efforts towards increasing the

services of labour and thus securing it a higher value, are

worthy of praise; all the more so if the small capacity brings a

small payment, and thus results, over wide circles of workers, in

insufficient satisfactions of wants and wretched conditions.



Chapter 11



The Value of Production Goods, With Reference to the Competition

Between Present and Future Interests



    To distribute a supply of means of subsistence, or other

consumption goods, over a considerable period of time, and to

value it with regard to the competition between present and

future wants, is, at bottom, a very simple task. One would select

the highest satisfactions which can be reached on the whole, and

these would form the basis for the valuation of the goods, the

marginal satisfaction deciding the value of the unit. At what

point of time the marginal satisfaction will occur cannot be

stated generally. It may be at the beginning that the highest

satisfactions are possible, as in the case of stocks which are

large and liable to spoil, and cannot well be preserved for any

length of time. It may be that the greatest amount of

satisfaction can be attained only at the end of the period; as

when forethought demands that a certain restraint be observed at

the earlier dates in case of possible accidents.

    Not infrequently this task is complicated by the fact that

there is a question between the productive employment of goods,

and their direct employment in the satisfaction of wants. Coal,

for instance, exerts its power of heating equally well in the

dwelling and in the factory, and so with many other material

goods which may be employed either for consumption or as capital.

The same will be observed in the case of land; a field may either

be employed in producing a return, or be laid out as a park. And,

finally, it is the same with labour. It may either be employed as

personal service -- domestic service in a house for instance --

or used for productive ends. As all production provides for

consumption sooner or later, the choice between immediate

consumption and productive employment is always a choice between

present or proximate consumption and future or more distant

consumption. The principle which governs this choice is the one

just given; that employment which, in a consideration of the

whole ground, is found to be the marginal one, decides the value.

And here again it is impossible to state generally at what point

of time the marginal employment will occur. It may occur in the

present, the period of immediate consumption; it may occur in the

future, the period of productive employment. The marginal value

of coal might be decided equally well, either by its service in

heating the dwelling or by its service in the factory.

    This consideration may be carried further within the sphere

of production. Production may be made to yield its fruits to

consumption sooner or later, according to the manner in which it

is directed. It is possible either to limit production

principally to objects of direct consumption, -- by which means

the end that is nearest in point of desire is more speedily

reached, -- or to direct it on and on, devoting it to the making

of production goods themselves, and to ensuring the conditions of

great and lasting "rentability" -- by which present enjoyment is

postponed for the sake of a greater degree of enjoyment in the

future. Not only does the choice of objects of production come

into consideration, but many other circumstances also. Almost

every kind of production -- with the exception possibly of those

strictly dependent upon seasons of the year -- permits of a

shorter or longer process; almost every production -- with still

more trifling exceptions -- may be carried out "extensively" or

"intensively," with slighter means and more temporary results, or

with stronger means and more durable results. In all such cases

it has to be decided whether the present, the nearer enjoyment,

or the future, the more distant, be preferable. And finally there

is still another peculiar circumstance, which contributes to the

competition between present and future interests. The

accomplishment of almost every undertaking demands personal

exertion; it thus demands the overcoming of the resistance

offered by the natural desire for rest and comfort. In this

connection also the considerations of present and future welfare

come into collision.

    The principle which must guide one's choice in this respect

is in all cases the same, although the difficulty of applying it

increases with the complication of the case. That scheme for the

employment of goods which promises the greatest advance on the

whole, must be the one chosen, and valuation -- so far as is

practicable, marginal valuation -- must be adapted to this

scheme.

    In general, indeed, labour and capital are more concerned in

what has just been said than is land. The motives which make for

labour always, or almost always, encounter in the pleasure of the

moment a certain resistance which must be overcome. And capital,

as it must continually be reproduced, continually raises the

question whether the means necessary for its re-creation could

not be employed elsewhere to more advantage. In this have

originated two celebrated theories, intimately related to one

another, although they have emerged separately: the one relating

to the value of labour, the other to the value of capital. The

former derives the value of labour from the "sacrifices" of

labour; this theory we shall discuss later. The other derives the

value of capital, or, rather, interest, from the "sacrifice"

which, as it asserts, is made by the capitalist in devoting his

capital to production instead of directly consuming it. This is

the well-known Abstinence Theory, which regards interest as a

wage for the abstinence of the capitalist. A few words upon this

theory may not be out of place here. After what has just been

said there should be no difficulty in forming an opinion upon it.

    It is true that, in all cases of the formation of capital,

capital might have had another destination than the one actually

chosen, -- for production is a very Proteus in its capability of

taking various shapes; but it is not true -- as will now be

generally acknowledged -- that every capital permits also of

being immediately consumed. Since Lassalle's criticism it is

unnecessary to waste another word on this point. But even

supposing it were true, supposing that every concrete form of

capital might be immediately consumed, the abstinence theory

would none the less be false. In no way is it possible that a

consumption, from which it is economical to refrain, can serve as

a measure of value. What kind of sense would there be in this?

Goods are of value to us because of what we can obtain from them,

and those destinations of goods which are chosen as the

economically permissible ones, furnish the basis of value. The

consumable nature of capital goods can influence their value only

in so far as capital goods are actually devoted to consumption;

if capital be consumed the productive stock will be diminished;

if much capital be consumed it will be sensibly diminished, and

productive value will rise. But even this effect must not be

regarded as a one-sided one. The productive employment of capital

and the personal consumption of it mutually determine one

another. Moreover they determine one another only in

consideration of the amount of value employed at the time. On the

other hand, neither of them can be basis for the other. The

circumstance that capital is consumable can no more give value to

a foolish employment of it in production, than the circumstance

that capital is capable of productive employment can make it

consumable, if it be not so in its own nature. The value of an

employment must be founded on itself: productive value can be

derived only from production, and consumption value only from

consumption. The amounts of value gained in the various

employments of capital are, of course, compared with each other,

so far as is practicable, in the effort to attain to the greatest

possible result on the whole: and, moreover, even where they are

not compared, they are still put at an equal value with one

another in virtue of the particular form of valuation which the

marginal law bring with it. As a matter of fact abstinence from

consumption is nothing more than a symptom of productive value,

-- occasionally of so much productive value that the sacrifice of

abstinence is at least counterbalanced.

    The abstinence theory in its essence bears a striking

resemblance to that theory which derives the value of products

from their costs. As we shall see immediately, the law of costs

does indeed exist as a very good working law of valuation. But

costs do not form the foundation of value; they only equalise it:

and, moreover, the circumstance that costs are expended makes us

conclude for the existence of value. The cost theory, like the

abstinence theory -- except that it is confined to a narrower

sphere -- confuses a law of the more or less of value, or more

exactly, a law of the equalisation of values, with the

fundamental law of valuation. In the one theory as in the other,

a symptom, which allows us to conclude for the existence of

value, is taken to be its cause and explanation.



