<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <META NAME="AUTHOR" CONTENT="Anthony Brewer">

   <TITLE>Economics 3LL3 - Principles </TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<CENTER>

<H2>

<B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>&nbsp;</FONT></I></B></H2></CENTER>



<CENTER>

<H2>

<B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>The Principles of Economics</FONT></I></B></H2></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>by Alfred Marshall</FONT></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>&nbsp;</FONT></B></CENTER>



<HR>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="book01.txt">Book One&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

Preliminary Survey</A></FONT>



<P><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="book02.txt">Book Two&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

Some Fundamental Notions</A></FONT>



<P><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="book03.txt">Book Three&nbsp;&nbsp; On Wants and

their Satisfaction</A></FONT>



<P><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="book04.txt">Book Four&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

The Agents of Production</A></FONT></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>



<CENTER>

<HR WIDTH="100%"></CENTER>



</BODY>

</HTML>













Principles of Economics: An introductory volume





by Alfred Marshall





1890













Book One: Preliminary Survey







Chapter 1







Introduction











    1. Political economy or economics is a study of mankind in



the ordinary business of life; it examines that part of



individual and social action which is most closely connected with



the attainment and with the use of the material requisites of



wellbeing.



    Thus it is on the one side a study of wealth; and on the



other, and more important side, a part of the study of man. For



man's character has been moulded by his every-day work, and the



material resources which he thereby procures, more than by any



other influence unless it be that of his religious ideals; and



the two great forming agencies of the world's history have been



the religious and the economic. Here and there the ardour of the



military or the artistic spirit has been for a while predominant:



but religious and economic influences have nowhere been displaced



from the front rank even for a time; and they have nearly always



been more important than all others put together. Religious



motives are more intense than economic, but their direct action



seldom extends over so large a part of life. For the business by



which a person earns his livelihood generally fills his thoughts



during by far the greater part of those hours in which his mind



is at its best; during them his character is being formed by the



way in which he uses his faculties in his work, by the thoughts



and the feelings which it suggests, and by his relations to his



associates in work, his employers or his employees.



    And very often the influence exerted on a person's character



by the amount of his income is hardly less, if it is less, than



that exerted by the way in which it is earned. It may make little



difference to the fulness of life of a family whether its yearly



income is ?000 or ?000; but it makes a very great difference



whether the income is ?0 or ?50: for with ?50 the family has,



with ?0 it has not, the material conditions of a complete life.



It is true that in religion, in the family affections and in



friendship, even the poor may find scope for many of those



faculties which are the source of the highest happiness. But the



conditions which surround extreme poverty, especially in densely



crowded places, tend to deaden the higher faculties. Those who



have been called the Residuum of our large towns have little



opportunity for friendship; they know nothing of the decencies



and the quiet, and very little even of the unity of family life;



and religion often fails to reach them. No doubt their physical,



mental, and moral ill-health is partly due to other causes than



poverty: but this is the chief cause.



    And, in addition to the Residuum, there are vast numbers of



people both in town and country who are brought up with



insufficient food, clothing, and house-room; whose education is



broken off early in order that they may go to work for wages; who



thenceforth are engaged during long hours in exhausting toil with



imperfectly nourished bodies, and have therefore no chance of



developing their higher mental faculties. Their life is not



necessarily unhealthy or unhappy. Rejoicing in their affections



towards God and man, and perhaps even possessing some natural



refinement of feeling, they may lead lives that are far less



incomplete than those of many, who have more material wealth.



But, for all that, their poverty is a great and almost unmixed



evil to them. Even when they are well, their weariness often



amounts to pain, while their pleasures are few; and when sickness



comes, the suffering caused by poverty increases tenfold. And,



though a contented spirit may go far towards reconciling them to



these evils, there are others to which it ought not to reconcile



them. Overworked and undertaught, weary and careworn, without



quiet and without leisure, they have no chance of making the best



of their mental faculties.



    Although then some of the evils which commonly go with



poverty are not its necessary consequences; yet, broadly



speaking, "the destruction of the poor is their poverty," and the



study of the causes of poverty is the study of the causes of the



degradation of a large part of mankind.



    2. Slavery was regarded by Aristotle as an ordinance of



nature, and so probably was it by the slaves themselves in olden



time. The dignity of man was proclaimed by the Christian



religion: it has been asserted with increasing vehemence during



the last hundred years: but, only through the spread of education



during quite recent times, are we beginning to feel the full



import of the phrase. Now at last we are setting ourselves



seriously to inquire whether it is necessary that there should be



any so-called "lower classes" at all: that is, whether there need



be large numbers of people doomed from their birth to hard work



in order to provide for others the requisites of a refined and



cultured life; while they themselves are prevented by their



poverty and toil from having any share or part in that life.



    The hope that poverty and ignorance may gradually be



extinguished, derives indeed much support from the steady



progress of the working classes during the nineteenth century.



The steam-engine has relieved them of much exhausting and



degrading toil; wages have risen; education has been improved and



become more general; the railway and the printing-press have



enabled members of the same trade in different parts of the



country to communicate easily with one another, and to undertake



and carry out broad and far-seeing lines of policy; while the



growing demand for intelligent work has caused the artisan



classes to increase so rapidly that they now outnumber those



whose labour is entirely unskilled. A great part of the artisans



have ceased to belong to the "lower classes" in the sense in



which the term was originally used; and some of them already lead



a more refined and noble life than did the majority of the upper



classes even a century ago.



    This progress has done more than anything else to give



practical interest to the question whether it is really



impossible that all should start in the world with a fair chance



of leading a cultured life, free from the pains of poverty and



the stagnating influences of excessive mechanical toil; and this



question is being pressed to the front by the growing earnestness



of the age. The question cannot be fully answered by economic



science. For the answer depends partly on the moral and political



capabilities of human nature, and on these matters the economist



has no special means of information: he must do as others do, and



guess as best he can. But the answer depends in a great measure



upon facts and inferences, which are within the province of



economics; and this it is which gives to economic studies their



chief and their highest interest.



    3. It might have been expected that a science, which deals



with questions so vital for the wellbeing of mankind, would have



engaged the attention of many of the ablest thinkers of every



age, and be now well advanced towards maturity. But the fact is



that the number of scientific economists has always been small



relatively to the difficulty of the work to be done; so that the



science is still almost in its infancy. One cause of this is that



the bearing of economics on the higher wellbeing of man has been



overlooked. Indeed, a science which has wealth for its



subject-matter, is often repugnant at first sight to many



students; for those who do most to advance the boundaries of



knowledge, seldom care much about the possession of wealth for



its own sake.



    But a more important cause is that many of those conditions



of industrial life, and of those methods of production,



distribution and consumption, with which modern economic science



is concerned, are themselves only of recent date. It is indeed



true that the change in substance is in some respects not so



great as the change in outward form; and much more of modern



economic theory, than at first appears, can be adapted to the



conditions of backward races. But unity in substance, underlying



many varieties of form, is not easy to detect; and changes in



form have had the effect of making writers in all ages profit



less than they otherwise might have done by the work of their



predecessors.



    The economic conditions of modern life, though more complex,



are in many ways more definite than those of earlier times.



Business is more clearly marked off from other concerns; the



rights of individuals as against others and as against the



community are more sharply defined; and above all the



emancipation from custom, and the growth of free activity, of



constant forethought and restless enterprise, have given a new



precision and a new prominence to the causes that govern the



relative values of different things and different kinds of



labour.



    4. It is often said that the modern forms of industrial life



are distinguished from the earlier by being more competitive. But



this account is not quite satisfactory. The strict meaning of



competition seems to be the racing of one person against another,



with special reference to bidding for the sale or purchase of



anything. This kind of racing is no doubt both more intense and



more widely extended than it used to be: but it is only a



secondary, and one might almost say, an accidental consequence



from the fundamental characteristics of modern industrial life.



    There is no one term that will express these characteristics



adequately. They are, as we shall presently see, a certain



independence and habit of choosing one's own course for oneself,



a self-reliance; a deliberation and yet a promptness of choice



and judgment, and a habit of forecasting the future and of



shaping one's course with reference to distant aims. They may and



often do cause people to compete with one another; but on the



other hand they may tend, and just now indeed they are tending,



in the direction of co-operation and Combination of all kinds



good and evil. But these tendencies towards collective ownership



and collective action are quite different from those of earlier



times, because they are the result not of custom, not of any



passive drifting into association with one's neighbours, but of



free choice by each individual of that line of conduct which



after careful deliberation seems to him the best suited for



attaining his ends, whether they are selfish or unselfish.



    The term "competition" has gathered about it evil savour, and



has come to imply a certain selfishness and indifference to the



wellbeing of others. Now it is true that there is less deliberate



selfishness in early than in modern forms of industry; but there



is also less deliberate unselfishness. It is deliberateness, and



not selfishness, that is the characteristic of the modern age.



    For instance, while custom in a primitive society extends the



limits of the family, and prescribes certain duties to one's



neighbours which fall into disuse in a later civilization, it



also prescribes an attitude of hostility to strangers. In a



modern society the obligations of family kindness become more



intense, though they are concentrated on a narrower area; and



neighbours are put more nearly on the same footing with



strangers. In ordinary dealings with both of them the standard of



fairness and honesty is lower than in some of the dealings of a



primitive people with their neighbours: but it is much higher



than in their dealings with strangers. Thus it is the ties of



neighbourhood alone that have been relaxed: the ties of family



are in many ways stronger than before, family affection leads to



much more self-sacrifice and devotion than it used to do; and



sympathy with those who are strangers to us is a growing source



of a kind of deliberate unselfishness, that never existed before



the modern age. That country which is the birthplace of modern



competition devotes a larger part of its income than any other to



charitable uses, and spent twenty millions on purchasing the



freedom of the slaves in the West Indies.



    In every age poets and social reformers have tried to



stimulate the people of their own time to a nobler life by



enchanting stories of the virtues of the heroes of old. But



neither the records of history nor the contemporary observation



of backward races, when carefully studied, give any support to



the doctrine that man is on the whole harder and harsher than he



was; or that he was ever more willing than he is now to sacrifice



his own happiness for the benefit of others in cases where custom



and law have left him free to choose his own course. Among races,



whose intellectual capacity seems not to have developed in any



other direction, and who have none of the originating power of



the modern business man, there will be found many who show an



evil sagacity in driving a hard bargain in a market even with



their neighbours. No traders are more unscrupulous in taking



advantage of the necessities of the unfortunate than are the



corn-dealers and money-lenders of the East.



    Again, the modern era has undoubtedly given new openings for



dishonesty in trade. The advance of knowledge has discovered new



ways of making things appear other than they are, and has



rendered possible many new forms of adulteration. The producer is



now far removed from the ultimate consumer; and his wrong-doings



are not visited with the prompt and sharp punishment which falls



on the head of a person who, being bound to live and die in his



native village, plays a dishonest trick on one of his neighbours.



The opportunities for knavery are certainly more numerous than



they were; but there is no reason for thinking that people avail



themselves of a larger proportion of such opportunities than they



used to do. On the contrary, modern methods of trade imply habits



of trustfulness on the one side and a power of resisting



temptation to dishonesty on the other, which do not exist among a



backward people. Instances of simple truth and personal fidelity



are met with under all social conditions: but those who have



tried to establish a business of modern type in a backward



country find that they can scarcely ever depend on the native



population for filling posts of trust. It is even more difficult



to dispense with imported assistance for work, which calls for a



strong moral character, than for that which requires great skill



and mental ability. Adulteration and fraud in trade were rampant



in the middle ages to an extent that is very astonishing, when we



consider the difficulties of wrong-doing without detection at



that time.



    In every stage of civilization, in which the power of money



has been prominent, poets in verse and prose have delighted to



depict a past truly "Golden Age," before the pressure of mere



material gold had been felt. Their idyllic pictures have been



beautiful, and have stimulated noble imaginations and resolves;



but they have had very little historical truth. Small communities



with simple wants for which the bounty of nature has made



abundant provision, have indeed sometimes been nearly free from



care about their material needs, and have not been tempted to



sordid ambitions. But whenever we can penetrate to the inner life



of a crowded population under primitive conditions in our own



time, we find more want, more narrowness, and more hardness than



was manifest at a distance: and we never find a more widely



diffused comfort alloyed by less suffering than exists in the



western world to-day. We ought therefore not to brand the forces,



which have made modern civilization, by a name which suggests



evil.



    It is perhaps not reasonable that such a suggestion should



attach to the term "competition"; but in fact it does. In fact,



when competition is arraigned, its anti-social forms are made



prominent; and care is seldom taken to inquire whether there are



not other forms of it, which are so essential to the maintenance



of energy and spontaneity, that their cessation might probably be



injurious on the balance to social wellbeing. The traders or



producers, who find that a rival is offering goods at a lower



price than will yield them a good profit, are angered at his



intrusion, and complain of being wronged; even though it may be



true that those who buy the cheaper goods are in greater need



than themselves, and that the energy and resourcefulness of their



rival is a social gain. In many cases the "regulation of



competition" is a misleading term, that veils the formation of a



privileged class of producers, who often use their combined force



to frustrate the attempts of an able man to rise from a lower



class than their own. Under the pretext of repressing antisocial



competition, they deprive him of the liberty of carving out for



himself a new career, where the services rendered by him to the



consumers of the commodity would be greater than the injuries,



that he inflicts on the relatively small group which objects to



his competition.



    If competition is contrasted with energetic co-operation in



unselfish work for the public good, then even the best forms of



competition are relatively evil; while its harsher and meaner



forms are hateful. And in a world in which all men were perfectly



virtuous, competition would be out of place; but so also would be



private property and every form of private right. Men would think



only of their duties; and no one would desire to have a larger



share of the comforts and luxuries of life than his neighbours.



Strong producers could easily bear a touch of hardship; so they



would wish that their weaker neighbours, while producing less



should consume more. Happy in this thought, they would work for



the general good with all the energy, the inventiveness, and the



eager initiative that belonged to them; and mankind would be



victorious in contests with nature at every turn. Such is the



Golden Age to which poets and dreamers may look forward. But in



the responsible conduct of affairs, it is worse than folly to



ignore the imperfections which still cling to human nature.



    History in general, and especially the history of socialistic



ventures, shows that ordinary men are seldom capable of pure



ideal altruism for any considerable time together; and that the



exceptions are to be found only when the masterful fervour of a



small band of religious enthusiasts makes material concerns to



count for nothing in comparison with the higher faith.



    No doubt men, even now, are capable of much more unselfish



service than they generally render: and the supreme aim of the



economist is to discover how this latent social asset can be



developed most quickly, and turned to account most wisely. But he



must not decry competition in general, without analysis: he is



bound to retain a neutral attitude towards any particular



manifestation of it until he is sure that, human nature being



what it is, the restraint of competition would not be more



anti-social in its working than the competition itself.



    We may conclude then that the term "competition" is not well



suited to describe the special characteristics of industrial life



in the modern age. We need a term that does not imply any moral



qualities, whether good or evil, but which indicates the



undisputed fact that modern business and industry are



characterized by more self-reliant habits, more forethought, more



deliberate and free choice. There is not any one term adequate



for this purpose: but Freedom of Industry and Enterprise, or more



shortly, Economic Freedom, points in the right direction; and it



may be used in the absence of a better. Of course this deliberate



and free choice may lead to a certain departure from individual



freedom when co-operation or combination seems to offer the best



route to the desired end. The questions how far these deliberate



forms of association are likely to destroy the freedom in which



they had their origin and how far they are likely to be conducive



to the public weal, lie beyond the scope of the present



volume.(1*)



    5. This introductory chapter was followed in earlier editions



by two short sketches: the one related to the growth of free



enterprise and generally of economic freedom, and the other to



the growth of economic science. They have no claim to be



systematic histories, however compressed; they aim only at



indicating some landmarks on the routes by which economic



structure and economic thought have travelled to their present



position. They are now transferred to Appendices A and B at the



end of this volume, partly because their full drift can best be



seen after some acquaintance has been made with the



subject-matter of economics; and partly because in the twenty



years, which have elapsed since they were first written, public



opinion as to the position which the study of economic and social



science should hold in a liberal education has greatly developed.



There is less need now than formerly to insist that the economic



problems of the present generation derive much of their



subject-matter from technical and social changes that are of



recent date, and that their form as well as their urgency assume



throughout the effective economic freedom of the mass of the



people.



    The relations of many ancient Greeks and Romans with the



slaves of their households were genial and humane. But even in



Attica the physical and moral wellbeing of the great body of the



inhabitants was not accepted as a chief aim of the citizen.



Ideals of life were high, but they concerned only a. few. and the



doctrine of value, which is full of complexities in the modern



age, could then have been worked out on a plan; such as could be



conceived to-day, only if nearly all manual work were superseded



by automatic machines which required merely a definite allowance



of steam-power and materials, and had no concern with the



requirements of a full citizen's life. Much of modern economics



might indeed have been anticipated in the towns of the Middle



Ages, in which an intelligent and daring spirit was for the first



time combined with patient industry. But they were not left to



work out their career in peace; and the world had to wait for the



dawn of the new economic era till a whole nation was ready for



the ordeal of economic freedom.



    England especially was gradually prepared for the task; but



towards the end of the eighteenth century, the changes, which had



so far been slow and gradual, suddenly became rapid and violent.



Mechanical inventions, the concentration of industries, and a



system of manufacturing on a large scale for distant markets



broke up the old traditions of industry, and left everyone to



bargain for himself as best he might; and at the same time they



stimulated an increase of population for which no provision had



been made beyond standing-room in factories and workshops. Thus



free competition, or rather, freedom of industry and enterprise,



was set loose to run, like a huge untrained monster, its wayward



course. The abuse of their new power by able but uncultured



business men led to evils on every side; it unfitted mothers for



their duties, it weighed down children with overwork and disease;



and in many places it degraded the race. Meanwhile the kindly



meant recklessness of the poor law did even more to lower the



moral and physical energy of Englishmen than the hardhearted



recklessness of the manufacturing discipline: for by depriving



the people of those qualities which would fit them for the new



order of things, it increased the evil and diminished the good



caused by the advent of free enterprise.



    And yet the time at which free enterprise was showing itself



in an unnaturally harsh form, was the very time in which



economists were most lavish in their praises of it. This was



partly because they saw clearly, what we of this generation have



in a great measure forgotten, the cruelty of the yoke of custom



and rigid ordinance which it had displaced; and partly because



the general tendency of Englishmen at the time was to hold that



freedom in all matters, political and social, was worth having at



every cost except the loss of security. But partly also it was



that the productive forces which free enterprise was giving o the



nation were the only means by which it could offer a successful



resistance to Napoleon. Economists therefore treated free



enterprise not indeed as an unmixed good, but as a less evil than



such regulation as was practicable at the time.



    Adhering to the lines of thought that had been started



chiefly by medieval traders, and continued by French and English



philosophers in the latter half of the eighteenth century,



Ricardo and his followers developed a theory of the action of



free enterprise (or, as they said, free competition), which



contained many truths, that will be probably important so long as



the world exists. Their work was wonderfully complete within the



narrow area which it covered. But much of the best of it consists



of problems relating to rent and the value of corn: - problems on



the solution of which the fate of England just then seemed to



depend; but many of which, in the particular form in which they



were worked out by Ricardo, have very little direct bearing on



the present state of things.



    A good deal of the rest of their work was narrowed by its



regarding too exclusively the peculiar condition of England at



that time; and this narrowness has caused a reaction. So that



now, when more experience, more leisure, and greater material



resources have enabled us to bring free enterprise somewhat under



control, to diminish its power of doing evil and increase its



power of doing good, there is growing up among many economists a



sort of spite against it. Some even incline to exaggerate its



evils, and attribute to it the ignorance and suffering, which are



the results either of tyranny and oppression in past ages, or of



the misunderstanding and mismanagement of economic freedom.



    Intermediate between these two extremes are the great body of



economists who, working on parallel lines in many different



countries, are bringing to their studies an unbiassed desire to



ascertain the truth, and a willingness to go through with the



long and heavy work by which alone scientific results of any



value can be obtained. Varieties of mind, of temper, of training



and of opportunities lead them to work in different ways, and to



give their chief attention to different parts of the problem. All



are bound more or less to collect and arrange facts and



statistics relating to past and present times; and all are bound



to occupy themselves more or less with analysis and reasoning on



the basis of those facts which are ready at hand: but some find



the former task the more attractive and absorbing, and others the



latter. This division of labour, however, implies not opposition,



but harmony of purpose. The work of all adds something or other



to that knowledge, which enables us to understand the influences



exerted on the quality and tone of man's life by the manner in



which he earns his livelihood, and by the character of that



livelihood.







NOTES:







1. They occupy a considerable place in the forthcoming volume on



Industry and Trade.







Chapter 2







The Substance of Economics







    1. Economics is a study of men as they live and move and



think in the ordinary business of life. But it concerns itself



chiefly with those motives which affect, most powerfully and most



steadily, man's conduct in the business part of his life.



Everyone who is worth anything carries his higher nature with him



into business; and, there as elsewhere, he is influenced by his



personal affections, by his conceptions of duty and his reverence



for high ideals. And it is true that the best energies of the



ablest inventors and organizers of improved methods and



appliances are stimulated by a noble emulation more than by any



love of wealth for its own sake. But, for all that, the steadiest



motive to ordinary business work is the desire for the pay which



is the material reward of work. The pay may be on its way to be



spent selfishly or unselfishly, for noble or base ends; and here



the variety of human nature comes into play. But the motive is



supplied by a definite amount of money: and it is this definite



and exact money measurement of the steadiest motives in business



life, which has enabled economics far to outrun every other



branch of the study of man. Just as the chemist's fine balance



has made chemistry more exact than most other physical sciences;



so this economist's balance, rough and imperfect as it is, has



made economics more exact than any other branch of social



science. But of course economics cannot be compared with the



exact physical sciences: for it deals with the ever changing and



subtle forces of human nature.(1*)



    The advantage which economics has over other branches of



social science appears then to arise from the fact that its



special field of work gives rather larger opportunities for exact



methods than any other branch. It concerns itself chiefly with



those desires, aspirations and other affections of human nature,



the outward manifestations of which appear as incentives to



action in such a form that the force or quantity of the



incentives can be estimated and measured with some approach to



accuracy., and which therefore are in some degree amenable to



treatment by scientific machinery. An opening is made for the



methods and the tests of science as soon as the force of a



person's motives - not the motives themselves - can be



approximately measured by the sum of money, which he will just



give up in order to secure a desired satisfaction; or again by



the sum which is just required to induce him to undergo a certain



fatigue.



    It is essential to note that the economist does not claim to



measure any affection of the mind in itself, or directly; but



only indirectly through its effect. No one can compare and



measure accurately against one another even his own mental states



at different times: and no one can measure the mental states of



another at all except indirectly and conjecturally by their



effects. Of course various affections belong to man's higher



nature and others to his lower, and are thus different in kind.



But, even if we confine our attention to mere physical pleasures



and pains of the same kind, we find that they can only be



compared indirectly by their effects. In fact, even this



comparison is necessarily to some extent conjectural, unless they



occur to the same person at the same time.



    For instance the pleasures which two persons derive from



smoking cannot be directly compared: nor can even those which the



same person derives from it at different times. But if we find a



man in doubt whether to spend a few pence on a cigar, or a cup of



tea, or on riding home instead of walking home, then we may



follow ordinary usage, and say that he expects from them equal



pleasures.



    If then we wish to compare even physical gratifications, we



must do it not directly, but indirectly by the incentives which



they afford to action. If the desires to secure either of two



pleasures will induce people in similar circumstances each to do



just an hour's extra work, or will induce men in the same rank of



life and with the same means each to pay a shilling for it; we



then may say that those pleasures are equal for our purposes,



because the desires for them are equally strong incentives to



action for persons under similar conditions.



    Thus measuring a mental state, as men do in ordinary life, by



its motor-force or the incentive which it affords to action, no



new difficulty is introduced by the fact that some of the motives



of which we have to take account belong to man's higher nature,



and others to his lower.



    For suppose that the person, whom we saw doubting between



several little gratifications for himself, had thought after a



while of a poor invalid whom he would pass on his way home; and



had spent some time in making up his mind whether he would choose



a physical gratification for himself, or would do a kindly act



and rejoice in another's joy. As his desires turned now towards



the one, now the other, there would be change in the quality of



his mental states; and the philosopher is bound to study the



nature of the change.



    But the economist studies mental states rather through their



manifestations than in themselves; and if he finds they afford



evenly balanced incentives to action, he treats them prima facie



as for his purpose equal. He follows indeed in a more patient and



thoughtful way, and with greater precautions, what everybody is



always doing every day in ordinary life. He does not attempt to



weigh the real value of the higher affections of our nature



against those of our lower: he does not balance the love for



virtue against the desire for agreeable food. He estimates the



incentives to action by their effects just in the same way as



people do in common life. He follows the course of ordinary



conversation, differing from it only in taking more precautions



to make clear the limits of his knowledge as he goes. He reaches



his provisional conclusions by observations of men in general



under given conditions without attempting to fathom the mental



and spiritual characteristics of individuals. But he does not



ignore the mental and spiritual side of life. On the contrary,



even for the narrower uses of economic studies, it is important



to know whether the desires which prevail are such as will help



to build up a strong and righteous character. And in the broader



uses of those studies, when they are being applied to practical



problems, the economist, like every one else, must concern



himself with the ultimate aims of man, and take account of



differences in real value between gratifications that are equally



powerful incentives to action and have therefore equal economic



measures. A study of these measures is only the starting-point of



economics: but it is the starting-point.(2*)



    2. There are several other limitations of the measurement of



motive by money to be discussed. The first of these arises from



the necessity of taking account of the variations in the amount



of pleasure, or other satisfaction, represented by the same sum



of money to different persons and under different circumstances.



    A shilling may measure a greater pleasure (or other



satisfaction) at one time than at another even for the same



person; because money may be more plentiful with him, or because



his sensibility may vary.(3*) And persons whose antecedents are



similar, and who are outwardly like one another, are often



affected in very different ways by similar events. When, for



instance, a band of city school children are sent out for a day's



holiday in the country, it is probable that no two of them derive



from it enjoyment exactly the same in kind, or equal in



intensity. The same surgical operation causes different amounts



of pain to different people. Of two parents who are, so far as we



can tell, equally affectionate, one will suffer much more than



the other from the loss of a favourite son. Some who are not very



sensitive generally are yet specially susceptible to particular



kinds of pleasure and pain; while differences in nature and



education make one man's total capacity for pleasure or pain much



greater than another's.



    It would therefore not be safe to say that any two men with



the same income derive equal benefit from its use; or that they



would suffer equal pain from the same diminution of it. Although



when a tax of ? is taken from each of two persons having an



income of ?00 a year, each will give up that ? worth of



pleasure (or other satisfaction) which he can most easily part



with, i.e. each will give up what is measured to him by just ?;



yet the intensities of the satisfaction given up may not be



nearly equal.



    Nevertheless, if we take averages sufficiently broad to cause



the personal peculiarities of individuals to counterbalance one



another, the money which people of equal incomes will give to



obtain a benefit or avoid an injury is a good measure of the



benefit or injury. If there are a thousand persons living in



Sheffield, and another thousand in Leeds, each with about ?00



a-year, and a tax of ? is levied on all of them; we may be sure



that the loss of pleasure or other injury which the tax will



cause in Sheffield is of about equal importance with that which



it will cause in Leeds: and anything that increased all the



incomes by ? would give command over equivalent pleasures and



other benefits in the two towns. This probability becomes greater



still if all of them are adult males engaged in the same trade;



and therefore presumably somewhat similar in sensibility and



temperament, in taste and education. Nor is the probability much



diminished, if we take the family as our unit, and compare the



loss of pleasure that results from diminishing by ? the income



of each of a thousand families with incomes of ?00 a-year in the



two places.



    Next we must take account of the fact that a stronger



incentive will be required to induce a person to pay a given



price for anything if he is poor than if he is rich. A shilling



is the measure of less pleasure, or satisfaction of any kind, to



a rich man than to a poor one. A rich man in doubt whether to



spend a shilling on a single cigar, is weighing against one



another smaller pleasures than a poor man, who is doubting



whether to spend a shilling on a supply of tobacco that will last



him for a month. The clerk with ?00 a-year will walk to business



in a much heavier rain than the clerk with ?00 a-year; for the



cost of a ride by tram or omnibus measures a greater benefit to



the poorer man than to the richer. If the poorer man spends the



money, he will suffer more from the want of it afterwards than



the richer would. The benefit that is measured in the poorer



man's mind by the cost is greater than that measured by it in the



richer man's mind.



    But this source of error also is lessened when we are able to



consider the actions and the motives of large groups of people.



If we know, for instance, that a bank failure has taken ?00,000



from the people of Leeds and ?00,000 from those of Sheffield, we



may fairly assume that the suffering caused in Leeds has been



about twice as great as in Sheffield; unless indeed we have some



special reason for believing that the shareholders of the bank in



the one town were a richer class than those in the other; or that



the loss of employment caused by it pressed in uneven proportions



on the working classes in the two towns.



    By far the greater number of the events with which economics



deals affect in about equal proportions all the different classes



of society; so that if the money measures of the happiness caused



by two events are equal, it is reasonable and in accordance with



common usage to regard the amounts of the happiness in the two



cases as equivalent. And, further, as money is likely to be



turned to the higher uses of life in about equal proportions, by



any two large groups of people taken without special bias from



any two parts of the western world, there is even some prima



facie probability that equal additions to their material



resources will make about equal additions to the fulness of life,



and true progress of the human race.



    3. To pass to another point. When we speak of the measurement



of desire by the action to which it forms the incentive, it is



not to be supposed that we assume every action to be deliberate,



and the outcome of calculation. For in this, as in every other



respect, economics takes man just as he is in ordinary life: and



in ordinary life people do not weigh beforehand the results of



every action, whether the impulses to it come from their higher



nature or their lower.(4*)



    Now the side of life with which economics is specially



concerned is that in which man's conduct is most deliberate, and



in which he most often reckons up the advantages and



disadvantages of any particular action before he enters on it.



And further it is that side of his life in which, when he does



follow habit and custom, and proceeds for the moment without



calculation, the habits and customs themselves are most nearly



sure to have arisen from a close and careful watching the



advantages and disadvantages of different courses of conduct.



There will not in general have been any formal reckoning up of



two sides of a balance-sheet: but men going home from their day's



work, or in their social meetings, will have said to one another,



"It did not answer to do this, it would have been better to do



that," and so on. What makes one course answer better than



another, will not necessarily be a selfish gain, nor any material



gain; and it will often have been argued that." though this or



that plan saved a little trouble or a little money, yet it was



not fair to others," and "it made one look mean," or "it made one



feel mean." It is true that when a habit or a custom, which has



grown up under one set of conditions, influences action under



other conditions, there is so far no exact relation between the



effort and the end which is attained by it. In backward countries



there are still many habits and customs similar to those that



lead a beaver in confinement to build himself a dam; they are



full of suggestiveness to the historian, and must be reckoned



with by the legislator. But in business matters in the modern



world such habits quickly die away.



    Thus then the most systematic part of people's lives is



generally that by which they earn their living. The work of all



those engaged in any one occupation can be carefully observed;



general statements can be made about it, and tested by comparison



with the results of other observations; and numerical estimates



can be framed as to the amount of money or general purchasing



power that is required to supply a sufficient motive for them.



    The unwillingness to postpone enjoyment, and thus to save for



future use, is measured by the interest on accumulated wealth



which just affords a sufficient incentive to save for the future.



This measurement presents however some special difficulties, the



study of which must be postponed.



    4. Here, as elsewhere, we must bear in mind that the desire



to make money does not itself necessarily proceed from motives of



a low order, even when it is to be spent on oneself. Money is a



means towards ends, and if the ends are noble, the desire for the



means is not ignoble. The lad who works hard and saves all he



can, in order to be able to pay his way afterwards at a



University, is eager for money; but his eagerness is not ignoble.



In short, money is general purchasing power, and is sought as a



means to all kinds of ends, high as well as low, spiritual as



well as material.(5*)



    Thus though it is true that "money" or "general purchasing



power" or "command over material wealth", is the centre around



which economic science clusters; this is so, not because money or



material wealth is regarded as the main aim of human effort, nor



even as affording the main subject-matter for the study of the



economist, but because in this world of ours it is the one



convenient means of measuring human motive on a large scale. If



the older economists had made this clear, they would have escaped



many grievous misrepresentations; and the splendid teachings of



Carlyle and Ruskin as to the right aims of human endeavour and



the right uses of wealth, would not then have been marred by



bitter attacks on economics, based on the mistaken belief that



that science had no concern with any motive except the selfish



desire for wealth, or even that it inculcated a policy of sordid



selfishness.(6*)



    Again, when the motive to a man's action is spoken of as



supplied by the money which he will earn, it is not meant that



his mind is closed to all other considerations save those of



gain. For even the most purely business relations of life assume



honesty and good faith; while many of them take for granted, if



not generosity, yet at least the absence of meanness, and the



pride which every honest man takes in acquitting himself well.



Again, much of the work by which people earn their living is



pleasurable in itself; and there is truth in the contention of



socialists that more of it might be made so. Indeed even business



work, that seems at first sight unattractive, often yields a



great pleasure by offering scope for the exercise of men's



faculties, and for their instincts of emulation and of power. For



just as a racehorse or an athlete strains every nerve to get in



advance of his competitors, and delights in the strain; so a



manufacturer or a trader is often stimulated much more by the



hope of victory over his rivals than by the desire to add



something to his fortune.(7*)



    5. It has indeed always been the practice of economists to



take careful account of all the advantages which attract people



generally towards an occupation, whether they appear in a money



form or not. Other things being equal, people will prefer an



occupation in which they do not need to soil their hands, in



which they enjoy a good social position, and so on; and since



these advantages affect, not indeed every one exactly in the same



way, but most people in nearly the same way, their attractive



force can be estimated and measured by the money wages to which



they are regarded as equivalent.



    Again, the desire to earn the approval, to avoid the contempt



of those around one is a stimulus to action which often works



with some sort of uniformity in any class of persons at a given



time and place; though local and temporary conditions influence



greatly not only the intensity of the desire for approval, but



also the range of persons whose approval is desired. A



professional man, for instance, or an artisan will be very



sensitive to the approval or disapproval of those in the same



occupation, and care little for that of other people; and there



are many economic problems, the discussion of which would be



altogether unreal, if care were not taken to watch the direction



and to estimate pretty closely the force of motives such as



these.



    As there may be a taint of selfishness in a man's desire to



do what seems likely to benefit his fellow-workers, so there may



be an element of personal pride in his desire that his family



should prosper during his life and after it. But still the family



affections generally are so pure a form of altruism, that their



action might have shown little semblance of regularity, had it



not been for the uniformity in the family relations themselves.



As it is, their action is fairly regular; and it has always been



fully reckoned with by economists, especially in relation to the



distribution of the family income between its various members,



the expenses of preparing children for their future career, and



the accumulation of wealth to be enjoyed after the death of him



by whom it has been earned.



    It is then not the want of will but the want of power, that



prevents economists from reckoning in the action of motives such



as these; and they welcome the fact that some kinds of



philanthropic action can be described in statistical returns, and



can to a certain extent be reduced to law, if sufficiently broad



averages are taken. For indeed there is scarcely any motive so



fitful and irregular, but that some law with regard to it can be



detected by the aid of wide and patient observation. It would



perhaps be possible even now to predict with tolerable closeness



the subscriptions that a population of a hundred thousand



Englishmen of average wealth will give to support hospitals and



chapels and missions; and, in so far as this can be done, there



is a basis for an economic discussion of supply and demand with



reference to the services of hospital nurses, missionaries and



other religious ministers. It will however probably be always



true that the greater part of those actions, which are due to a



feeling of duty and love of one's neighbour, cannot be classed,



reduced to law and measured; and it is for this reason, and not



because they are not based on self-interest, that the machinery



of economics cannot be brought to bear on them.



    6. Perhaps the earlier English economists confined their



attention too much to the motives of individual action. But in



fact economists, like all other students of social science, are



concerned with individuals chiefly as members of the social



organism. As a cathedral is something more than the stones of



which it is made, as a person is something more than a series of



thoughts and feelings, so the life of society is something more



than the sum of the lives of its individual members. It is true



that the action of the whole is made up of that of its



constituent parts; and that in most economic problems the best



starting-point is to be found in the motives that affect the



individual, regarded not indeed as an isolated atom, but as a



member of some particular trade or industrial group; but it is



also true, as German writers have well urged, that economics has



a great and an increasing concern in motives connected with the



collective ownership of property, and the collective pursuit of



important aims. The growing earnestness of the age, the growing



intelligence of the mass of the people, and the growing power of



the telegraph, the press, and other means of communication are



ever widening the scope of collective action for the public good;



and these changes, together with the spread of the co-operative



movement, and other kinds of voluntary association are growing up



under the influence of various motives besides that of pecuniary



gain: they are ever opening to the economist new opportunities of



measuring motives whose action it had seemed impossible to reduce



to any sort of law.   But in fact the variety of motives, the



difficulties of measuring them, and the manner of overcoming



those difficulties are among the chief subjects with which we



shall be occupied in this treatise. Almost every point touched in



the present chapter will need to be discussed in fuller detail



with reference to some one or more of the leading problems of



economics.



    7. To conclude provisionally: economists study the actions of



individuals, but study them in relation to social rather than



individual life; and therefore concern themselves but little with



personal peculiarities of temper and character. They watch



carefully the conduct of a whole class of people, sometimes the



whole of a nation, sometimes only those living in a certain



district, more often those engaged in some particular trade at



some time and place: and by the aid of statistics, or in other



ways, they ascertain how much money on the average the members of



the particular group, they are watching, are just willing to pay



as the price of a certain thing which they desire, or how much



must be offered to them to induce them to undergo a certain



effort or abstinence that they dislike. The measurement of motive



thus obtained is not indeed perfectly accurate; for if it were,



economics would rank with the most advanced of the physical



sciences; and not, as it actually does, with the least advanced.



    But yet the measurement is accurate enough to enable



experienced persons to forecast fairly well the extent of the



results that will follow from changes in which motives of this



kind are chiefly concerned. Thus, for instance, they can estimate



very closely the payment that will be required to produce an



adequate supply of labour of any grade, from the lowest to the



highest, for a new trade which it is proposed to start in any



place. When they visit a factory of a kind that they have never



seen before, they can tell within a shilling or two a week what



any particular worker is earning, by merely observing how far his



is a skilled occupation and what strain it involves on his



physical, mental and moral faculties. And they can predict with



tolerable certainty what rise of price will result from a given



diminution of the supply of a certain thing, and how that



increased price will react on the supply.



    And, starting from simple considerations of this kind, is



economists go on to analyse the causes which govern the local



distribution of different kinds of industry, the terms on which



people living in distant places exchange their goods with one



another, and so on: and they can explain and predict the ways in



which fluctuations of credit will affect foreign trade; or again



the extent to which the burden of a tax will be shifted from



those on whom it is levied, on to those for whose wants they



cater; and so on.



    In all this they deal with man as he is: not with an abstract



or "economic" man; but a man of flesh and blood. They deal with a



man who is largely influenced by egoistic motives in his business



life to a great extent with reference to them; but who is also



neither above vanity and recklessness, nor below delight in doing



his work well for its own sake, or in sacrificing himself for the



good of his family, his neighbours, or his country; a man who is



not below the love of a virtuous life for its own sake. They deal



with man as he is: but being concerned chiefly with those aspects



of life in which the action of motive is so regular that it can



be predicted, and the estimate of the motor-forces can be



verified by results, they have established their work on a



scientific basis.



    For in the first place, they deal with facts which can be



observed, and quantities which can be measured and recorded; so



that when differences of opinion arise with regard to them, the



differences can be brought to the test of public and



well-established records; and thus science obtains a solid basis



on which to work. In the second place, the problems, which are



grouped as economic, because they relate specially to man's



conduct under the influence of motives that are measurable by a



money price, are found to make a fairly homogeneous group. Of



course they have a great deal of subject-matter in common: that



is obvious from the nature of the case. But, though not so



obvious a priori, it will also be found to be true that there is



a fundamental unity of form underlying all the chief of them; and



that in consequence, by studying them together, the same kind of



economy is gained, as by sending a single postman to deliver all



the letters in a certain street, instead of each one entrusting



his letters to a separate messenger. For the analyses and



organized processes of reasoning that are wanted for any one



group of them, will be found generally useful for other groups.



    The less then we trouble ourselves with scholastic inquiries



as to whether a certain consideration comes within the scope of



economics, the better. If the matter is important let us take



account of it as far as we can. If it is one as to which there



exist divergent opinions, such as cannot be brought to the test



of exact and well-ascertained knowledge; if it is one on which



the general machinery of economic analysis and reasoning cannot



get any grip, then let us leave it aside in our purely economic



studies. But let us do so simply because the attempt to include



it would lessen the certainty and the exactness of our economic



knowledge without any commensurate gain; and remembering always



that some sort of account of it must be taken by our ethical



instincts and our common sense, when they as ultimate arbiters



come to apply to practical issues the knowledge obtained and



arranged by economics and other sciences.







NOTES:







1. Some remarks on the relation of economics to the sum total of



social science will be found in Appendix C, sections 1, 2.







2. The objections raised by some philosophers to speaking of two



pleasures as equal, under any circumstances, seem to apply only



to uses of the phrase other than those with which the economist



is concerned. It has however unfortunately happened that the



customary uses of economic terms have sometimes suggested the



belief that economists are adherents of the philosophical system



of Hedonism or of Utilitarianism. For, while they have generally



taken for granted that the greatest pleasures are those which



come with the endeavour to do one's duty, they have spoken of



"pleasures" and "pains" as supplying the motives to all action;



and they have thus brought themselves under the censure of those



philosophers, with whom it is a matter of principle to insist



that the desire to do one's duty is a different thing from a



desire for the pleasure which, if one happens to think of the



matter at all, one may expect from doing it; though perhaps it



may be not incorrectly described as a desire for



"self-satisfaction" or "the satisfaction of the permanent self."



(See for instance T.H. Green, Prolegomena to Ethics, pp. 165-6)



    It is clearly not the part of economics to appear to take a



side in ethical controversy: and since there is a general



agreement that all incentives to action, in so far as they are



conscious desires at all, may without impropriety be spoken of



shortly as desires for "satisfaction," it may perhaps be well to



use this word instead of "pleasure," when occasion arises for



referring to the aims of all desires, whether appertaining to



man's higher or lower nature. The simple antithesis to



satisfaction is "dissatisfaction": but perhaps it may be well to



use the shorter and equally colourless word "detriment". in its



place.



    It may however be noted that some followers of Bentham



(though perhaps not Bentham himself) made this large use of "pain



and pleasure" serve as a bridge by which to pass from



individualistic Hedonism to a complete ethical creed, without



recognizing the necessity for the introduction of an independent



major premiss; and for such a premiss the necessity would appear



to be absolute, although opinions will perhaps always differ as



to its form. Some will regard it as the Categorical Imperative;



while others will regard it as a simple belief that, whatever be



the origin of our moral instincts, their indications are borne



out by a Verdict of the experience of mankind to the effect that



true happiness is not to be had without self-respect, and that



self-respect is to be had only on the condition of endeavouring



so to live as to promote the progress of the human race.







3. Compare Edgeworth's Mathematical Psychics.







4. This is specially true of that group of gratifications, which



is sometimes named "the pleasures of the chase." They include not



only the light-hearted emulation of games and pastimes, of hunts



and steeplechases, but the more serious contests of professional



and business life: and they will occupy a good deal of our



attention in discussions of the causes that govern wages and



profits, and forms of industrial organization.



    Some people are of wayward temperament, and could give no



good account even to themselves of the motives of their action.



But if a man is steadfast and thoughtful, even his impulses are



the products of habits which he has adopted more or less



deliberately. And, whether these impulses are an expression of



his higher nature or not; whether they spring from mandates of



his conscience, the pressure of social connection, or the claims



of his bodily wants, he yields a certain relative precedence to



them without reflection now, because on previous occasions he has



decided deliberately to yield that relative precedence. The



predominant attractiveness of one course of action over others,



even when not the result of calculation at the time, is the



product of more or less deliberate decisions made by him before



in somewhat similar cases.







5. See an admirable essay by Cliffe Leslie on The Love of Money.



We do indeed hear of people who pursue money for its own sake



without caring for what it will purchase, especially at the end



of a long life spent in business: but in this as in other cases



the habit of doing a thing is kept up after the purpose for which



it was originally done has ceased to exist. The possession of



wealth gives such people a feeling of power over their



fellow-creatures, and insures them a sort of envious respect in



which they find a bitter but strong pleasure.







6. In fact a world can be conceived in which there is a science



of economics very much like our own, but in it there is no money



of any sort. See Appendices B, sec. 8 and D, sec. 2.







7. Some remarks on the large scope of economics as conceived in



Germany will be found in Appendix D, sec. 3.







Chapter 3







Economic Generalization or Laws







    1. It is the business of economics, as of almost every other



science, to collect facts, to arrange and interpret them, and to



draw inferences from them. "Observation and description,



definition and classification are the preparatory activities. But



what we desire to reach thereby is a knowledge of the



interdependence of economic phenomena.... Induction and deduction



are both needed for scientific thought as the right and left foot



are both needed for walking."(1*) The methods required for this



twofold work are not peculiar to economics; they are the common



property of all sciences. All the devices for the discovery of



the relations between cause and effect, which are described in



treatises on scientific method, have to be used in their turn by



the economist: there is not any one method of investigation which



can properly be called the method of economics; but every method



must be made serviceable in its proper place, either singly or in



combination with others. And as the number of combinations that



can be made on the chess-board, is so great that probably no two



games exactly alike were ever played; so no two games which the



student plays with nature to wrest from her her hidden truths,



which were worth playing at all, ever made use of quite the same



methods in quite the same way.



    But in some branches of economic inquiry and for some



purposes, it is more urgent to ascertain new facts, than to



trouble ourselves with the mutual relations and explanations of



those which we already have. While in other branches there is



still so much uncertainty as to whether those causes of any event



which lie on the surface and suggest themselves at first are both



true causes of it and the only causes of it, that it is even more



urgently needed to scrutinize our reasoning about facts which we



already know, than to seek for more facts.



    For this and other reasons, there always has been and there



probably always will be a need for the existence side by side of



workers with different aptitudes and different aims, some of whom



give their chief attention to the ascertainment of facts, while



others give their chief attention to scientific analysis; that is



taking to pieces complex facts, and studying the relations of the



several parts to one another and to cognate facts. It is to be



hoped that these two schools will always exist; each doing its



own work thoroughly, and each making use of the work of the



other. Thus best may we obtain sound generalizations as to the



past and trustworthy guidance from it for the future.



    2. Those physical sciences, which have progressed most beyond



the points to which they were brought by the brilliant genius of



the Greeks, are not all of them strictly speaking "exact



sciences." But they all aim at exactness. That is they all aim at



precipitating the result of a multitude of observations into



provisional statements, which are sufficiently definite to be



brought under test by other observations of nature. These



statements, when first put forth, seldom claim a high authority.



But after they have been tested by many independent observations,



and especially after they have been applied successfully in the



prediction of coming events, or of the results of new



experiments, they graduate as laws. A science progresses by



increasing the number and exactness of its laws; by submitting



them to tests of ever increasing severity; and by enlarging their



scope till a single broad law contains and supersedes a number of



narrower laws, which have been shown to be special instances of



it.



    In so far as this is done by any science, a student of it can



in certain cases say with authority greater than his own (greater



perhaps than that of any thinker, however able, who relies on his



own resources and neglects the results obtained by previous



workers), what results are to be expected from certain



conditions, or what are the true causes of a certain known event.



    Although the subject-matter of some progressive physical



sciences is not, at present at least, capable of perfectly exact



measurement; yet their progress depends on the multitudinous



co-operation of armies of workers. They measure their facts and



define their statements as closely as they can: so that each



investigator may start as nearly as possible where those before



him left off. Economics aspires to a place in this group of



sciences: because though its measurements are seldom exact, and



are never final; yet it is ever working to make them more exact,



and thus to enlarge the range of matters on which the individual



student may speak with the authority of his science.



    3. Let us then consider more closely the nature of economic



laws, and their limitations. Every cause has a tendency to



produce some definite result if nothing occurs to hinder it. Thus



gravitation tends to make things fall to the ground: but when a



balloon is full of gas lighter than air, the pressure of the air



will make it rise in spite of the tendency of gravitation to make



it fall. The law of gravitation states how any two things attract



one another. how they tend to move towards one another, and will



'move towards one another if nothing interferes to prevent them.



The law of gravitation is therefore a statement of tendencies.



    It is a very exact statement - so exact that mathematicians



can calculate a Nautical Almanac, which will show the moments at



which each satellite of Jupiter will hide itself behind Jupiter.



They make this calculation for many years beforehand; and



navigators take it to sea, and use it in finding out where they



are. Now there are no economic tendencies which act as steadily



and can be measured as exactly as gravitation can: and



consequently there are no laws of economics which can be compared



for precision with the law of gravitation.



    But let us look at a science less exact than astronomy. The



science of the tides explains how the tide rises and falls twice



a day under the action of the sun and the moon: how there are



strong tides at new and full moon, and weak tides at the moon's



first and third quarter; and how the tide running up into a



closed channel, like that of the Severn, will be very high; and



so on. Thus, having studied the lie of the land and the water all



round the British isles, people can calculate beforehand when the



tide will probably be at its highest on any day at London Bridge



or at Gloucester; and how high it will be there. They have to use



the word probably, which the astronomers do not need to use when



talking about the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites. For, though



many forces act upon Jupiter and his satellites, each one of them



acts in a definite manner which can be predicted beforehand: but



no one knows enough about the weather to be able to say



beforehand how it will act. A heavy downpour of rain in the upper



Thames valley, or a strong north-east wind in the German Ocean,



may make the tides at London Bridge differ a good deal from what



had been expected.



    The laws of economics are to be compared with the laws of the



tides, rather than with the simple and exact law of gravitation.



For the actions of men are so various and uncertain, that the



best statement of tendencies, which we can make in a science of



human conduct, must needs be inexact and faulty. This might be



urged as a reason against making any statements at all on the



subject; but that would be almost to abandon life. Life is human



conduct, and the thoughts and emotions that grow up around it. By



the fundamental impulses of our nature we all-high and low,



learned and unlearned-are in our several degrees constantly



striving to understand the courses of human action, and to shape



them for our purposes, whether selfish or unselfish, whether



noble or ignoble. And since we must form to ourselves some



notions of the tendencies of human action, our choice is between



forming those notions carelessly and forming them carefully. The



harder the task, the greater the need for steady patient inquiry;



for turning to account the experience, that has been reaped by



the more advanced physical sciences; and for framing as best we



can well thought-out estimates, or provisional laws, of the



tendencies of human action.



    4. The term "law" means then nothing more than a general



proposition or statement of tendencies, more or less certain,



more or less definite. Many such statements are made in every



science: but we do not, indeed we can not, give to all of them a



formal character and name them as laws. We must select; and the



selection is directed less by purely scientific considerations



than by practical convenience. If there is any general statement



which we want to bring to bear so often, that the trouble of



quoting it at length, when needed, is greater than that of



burdening the discussion with an additional formal statement and



an additional technical name, then it receives a special name,



otherwise not.(2*)



    Thus a law of social science, or a Social Law, is a statement



of social tendencies; that is, a statement that a certain course



of action may be expected under certain conditions from the



members of a social group.



    Economic laws, or statements of economic tendencies, are



those social laws which relate to branches of conduct in which



the strength of the motives chiefly concerned can be measured by



a money price.



    There is thus no hard and sharp line of division between



those social laws which are, and those which are not, to be



regarded also as economic laws. For there is a continuous



gradation from social laws concerned almost exclusively with



motives that can be measured by price, to social laws in which



such motives have little place; and which are therefore generally



as much less precise and exact than economic laws, as those are



than the laws of the more exact physical sciences.



    Corresponding to the substantive "law" is the adjective



"legal". But this term is used only in connection with "law" in



the sense of an ordinance of government; not in connection with



"law" the sense of a statement of relation between cause and



effect. The adjective used for this purpose is derived from



"norma", a term which is nearly equivalent to "law", and might



perhaps with advantage be substituted for it in scientific



discussions. And following our definition of an economic law, we



may say that the course of action which may be expected under



certain conditions from the members of an industrial group is the



normal action of the members of that group relatively to those



conditions.



    This use of the term Normal has been misunderstood; and it



may be well to say something as to the unity in difference which



underlies various uses of the term. When we talk of a Good man or



a Strong man, we refer to excellence or strength of those



particular physical mental or moral qualities which are indicated



in the context. A strong judge has seldom the same qualities as a



strong rower; a good jockey is not always of exceptional virtue.



In the same way every use of the term normal implies the



predominance of certain tendencies which appear likely to be more



or less steadfast and persistent in their action over those which



are relatively exceptional and intermittent. Illness is an



abnormal condition of man: but a long life passed without any



illness is abnormal. During the melting of the snows, the Rhine



rises above its normal level: but in a cold dry spring when it is



less than usual above that normal level, it may be said to be



abnormally low (for that time of year). In all these cases normal



results are those which may be expected as the outcome of those



tendencies which the context suggests; or, in other words, which



are in accordance with those "statements of tendency", those Laws



or Norms, which are appropriate to the context.



    This is the point of view from which it is said that normal



economic action is that which may be expected in the long run



under certain conditions (provided those conditions are



persistent) from the members of an industrial group. It is normal



that bricklayers in most parts of England are willing to work for



10d. an hour, but refuse to work for 7 d. In Johannesburg it may



be normal that a bricklayer should refuse work at much less than



? a day. The normal price of bona fide fresh laid eggs may be



taken to be a penny when nothing is said as to the time of the



year: and yet threepence may be the normal price in town during



January; and twopence may be an abnormally low price then, caused



by "unseasonable" warmth.



    Another misunderstanding to be guarded against arises from



the notion that only those economic results are normal, which are



due to the undisturbed action of free competition. But the term



has often to be applied to conditions in which perfectly free



competition does not exist, and can hardly even be supposed to



exist; and even where free competition is most dominant, the



normal conditions of every facet and tendency will include vital



elements that are not a part of competition nor even akin to it.



Thus, for instance, the normal arrangement of many transactions



in retail and wholesale trade, and on Stock and Cotton Exchanges,



rests on the assumption that verbal contracts, made without



witnesses, will be honourably discharged; and in countries in



which this assumption cannot legitimately be made, some parts of



the Western doctrine of normal value are inapplicable. Again, the



prices of various Stock Exchange securities are affected



"normally" by the patriotic feelings not only of the ordinary



purchasers, but of the brokers themselves: and so on.



    Lastly it is sometimes erroneously supposed that normal



action in economics is that which is right morally. But that is



to be understood only when the context implies that the action is



being judged from the ethical point of view. When we are



considering the facts of the world, as they are, and not as they



ought to be, we shall have to regard as "normal" to the



circumstances in view, much action which we should use our utmost



efforts to stop. For instance, the normal condition of many of



the very poorest inhabitants of a large town is to be devoid of



enterprise, and unwilling to avail themselves of the



opportunities that may offer for a healthier and less squalid



life elsewhere; they have not the strength, physical, mental and



moral, required for working their way out of their miserable



surroundings. The existence of a considerable supply of labour



ready to make match-boxes at a very low rate is normal in the



same way that a contortion of the limbs is a normal result of



taking strychnine. It is one result, a deplorable result, of



those tendencies the laws of which we have to study. This



illustrates one peculiarity which economics shares with a few



other sciences, the nature of the material of which can be



modified by human effort. Science may suggest a moral or



practical precept to modify that nature and thus modify the



action of laws of nature. For instance, economics may suggest



practical means of substituting capable workers for those who can



only do such work as match-box making; as physiology may suggest



measures for so modifying the breeds of cattle that they mature



early, and carry much flesh on light frames. The laws of the



fluctuation of credit and prices have been much altered by



increased powers of prediction.



    Again when "normal" prices are contrasted with temporary or



market prices, the term refers to the dominance in the long run



of certain tendencies under given conditions. But this raises



some difficult questions which may be postponed.(3*)



    5. It is sometimes said that the laws of economics are



"hypothetical". Of course, like every other science, it



undertakes to study the effects which will be produced by certain



causes, not absolutely, but subject to the condition that other



things are equal, and that the causes are able to work out their



effects undisturbed. Almost every scientific doctrine, when



carefully and formally stated, will be found to contain some



proviso to the effect that other things are equal: the action of



the causes in question is supposed to be isolated; certain



effects are attributed to them, but only on the hypothesis that



no cause is permitted to enter except those distinctly allowed



for. It is true however that the condition that time must be



allowed for causes to produce their effects is a source of great



difficulty in economics. For meanwhile the material on which they



work, and perhaps even the causes themselves, may have changed;



and the tendencies which are being described will not have a



sufficiently "long run" in which to work themselves out fully.



This difficulty will occupy our attention later on.



    The conditioning clauses implied in a law are not continually



repeated, but the common sense of the reader supplies them for



himself. In economics it is necessary to repeat them oftener than



elsewhere, because its doctrines are more apt than those of any



other science to be quoted by persons who have had no scientific



training, and who perhaps have heard them only at second hand,



and without their context. One reason why ordinary conversation



is simpler in form than a scientific treatise, is that in



conversation we can safely omit conditioning clauses; because, if



the hearer does not supply them for himself, we quickly detect



the misunderstanding, and set it right. Adam Smith and many of



the earlier writers on economics attained seeming simplicity by



following the usages of conversation, and omitting conditioning



clauses. But this has caused them to be constantly misunderstood,



and has led to much waste of time and trouble in profitless



controversy; they purchased apparent ease at too great a cost



even for that gain.(4*)



    Though economic analysis and general reasoning are of wide



application, yet every age and every country has its own



problems; and every change in social conditions is likely to



require a new development of economic doctrines.(5*)







NOTES:







1. Schmoller in the article on Folkswirschaft in Conrad's



Handworterbuch.







2. The relation of "natural and economic laws", is exhaustively



discussed by Neumann (Zeitschrift fur die gesamte



Staatswissenschaft, 1892) who concludes (p. 464) that there is no



other word than Law (Gesetz) to express those statements of



tendency, which play so important a part in natural as well as



economic science. See also Wagner (Grundlegung, 86-91).







3. They are discussed in Book V, especially chapters III and V.







4. Compare Book II, chapter I.







5. Some parts of economics are relatively abstract or pure,



because they are concerned mainly with broad general



propositions: for, in order that a proposition may be of broad



application it must necessarily contain few details: it cannot



adapt itself to particular cases; and if it points to any



prediction, that must be governed by a strong conditioning clause



in which a very large meaning is given to the phrase "other



things being equal." Other parts are relatively applied, because



they deal with narrower questions more in detail; they take more



account of local and temporary elements; and they consider



economic conditions in fuller and closer relation to other



conditions of life. Thus there is but a short step from the



applied science of banking in its more general sense, to broad



rules or precepts of the general Art of banking: while the step



from a particular local problem of the applied science of banking



to the corresponding rule of practice or precept of Art may be



shorter still.







Chapter 4







The Order and Aims of Economic Studies







    1. We have seen that the economist must be greedy of facts;



but that facts by themselves teach nothing. History tells of



sequences and coincidences; but reason alone can interpret and



draw lessons from them. The work to be done is so various that



much of it must be left to be dealt with by trained common sense,



which is the ultimate arbiter in every practical problem.



Economic science is but the working of common sense aided by



appliances of organized analysis and general reasoning, which



facilitate the task of collecting, arranging, and drawing



inferences from particular facts. Though its scope is always



limited, though its work without the aid of common sense is vain,



yet it enables common sense to go further in difficult problems



than would otherwise be possible.



    Economic laws are statements with regard to the tendencies of



man's action under certain conditions. They are hypothetical only



in the same sense as are the laws of the physical sciences: for



those laws also contain or imply conditions. But there is more



difficulty in making the conditions clear, and more danger in any



failure to do so, in economics than in physics. The laws of human



action are not indeed as simple, as definite or as clearly



ascertainable as the law of gravitation; but many of them may



rank with the laws of those natural sciences which deal with



complex subject-matter.



    The raison d'etre of economics as a separate science is that



it deals chiefly with that part of man's action which is most



under the control of measurable motives; and which therefore



lends itself better than any other to systematic reasoning and



analysis. We cannot indeed measure motives of any kind, whether



high or low, as they are in themselves: we can measure only their



moving force. Money is never a perfect measure of that force; and



it is not even a tolerably good measure unless careful account is



taken of the general conditions under which it works, and



especially of the riches or poverty of those whose action is



under discussion. But with careful precautions money affords a



fairly good measure of the moving force of a great part of the



motives by which men's lives are fashioned.



    The study of theory must go hand in hand with that of facts:



and for dealing with most modern problems it is modern facts that



are of the greatest use. For the economic records of the distant



past are in some respects slight and untrustworthy; and the



economic conditions of early times are wholly unlike those of the



modern age of free enterprise, of general education, of true



democracy, of steam, of the cheap press and the telegraph.



    2. Economics has then as its purpose firstly to acquire



knowledge for its own sake, and secondly to throw light on



practical issues. But though we are bound, before entering on any



study, to consider carefully what are its uses, we should not



plan out our work with direct reference to them. For by so doing



we are tempted to break off each line of thought as soon as it



ceases to have an immediate bearing on that particular aim which



we have in view at the time: the direct pursuit of practical aims



leads us to group together bits of all sorts of knowledge, which



have no connection with one another except for the immediate



purposes of the moment; and which throw but little light on one



another. Our mental energy is spent in going from one to another;



nothing is thoroughly thought out; no real progress is made.



    The best grouping, therefore, for the purposes of science is



that which collects together all those facts and reasonings which



are similar to one another in nature: so that the study of each



may throw light on its neighbour. By working thus for a long time



at one set of considerations, we get gradually nearer to those



fundamental unities which are called nature's laws: we trace



their action first singly, and then in combination; and thus make



progress slowly but surely. The practical uses of economic



studies should never be out of the mind of the economist, but his



special business is to study and interpret facts and to find out



what are the effects of different causes acting singly and in



combination.



    3. This may be illustrated by enumerating some of the chief



questions to which the economist addresses himself. He inquires:



    What are the causes which, especially in the modern world,



affect the consumption and production, the distribution and



exchange of wealth; the organization of industry and trade; the



money market; wholesale and retail dealing; foreign trade, and



the relations between employers and employed? How do all these



movements act and react upon one another? How do their ultimate



differ from their immediate tendencies?



    Subject to what limitations is the price of anything a



measure of its desirability? What increase of wellbeing is prima



facie likely to result from a given increase in the wealth of any



class of society? How far is the industrial efficiency of any



class impaired by the insufficiency of its income? How far would



an increase of the income of any class, if once effected, be



likely to sustain itself through its effects in increasing their



efficiency and earning power?



    How far does, as a matter of fact, the influence of economic



freedom reach (or how far has it reached at any particular time)



in any place, in any rank of society, or in any particular branch



of industry? What other influences are most powerful there; and



how is the action of all these influences combined? In



particular, how far does economic freedom tend of its own action



to build up combinations and monopolies, and what are their



effects? How are the various classes of society likely to be



affected by its action in the long run; what will be the



intermediate effects while its ultimate results are being worked



out; and, account being taken of the time over which they will



spread, what is the relative importance of these two classes of



ultimate and intermediate effects? What will be the incidence of



any system of taxes? What burdens will it impose on the



community, and what revenue will it afford to the State?



    4. The above are the main questions with which economic



science has to deal directly, and with reference to which its



main work of collecting facts, of analysing them and reasoning



about them should be arranged. The practical issues which, though



lying for the greater part outside the range of economic science,



yet supply a chief motive in the background to the work of the



economist, vary from time to time, and from place to place, even



more than do the economic facts and conditions which form the



material of his studies. The following problems seem to be of



special urgency now in our own country. --



    How should we act so as to increase the good and diminish the



evil influences of economic freedom, both in its ultimate results



and in the course of its progress? If the first are good and the



latter evil, but those who suffer the evil, do not reap the good;



how far is it right that they should suffer for the benefit of



others?



    Taking it for granted that a more equal distribution of



wealth is to be desired, how far would this justify changes in



the institutions of property, or limitations of free enterprise



even when they would be likely to diminish the aggregate of



wealth? In other words, how far should an increase in the income



of the poorer classes and a diminution of their work be aimed at,



even if it involved some lessening of national material wealth?



How far could this be done without injustice, and without



slackening the energies of the leaders of progress? How ought the



burdens of taxation to be distributed among the different classes



of society?



    Ought we to rest content with the existing forms of division



of labour? Is it necessary that large numbers of the people



should be exclusively occupied with work that has no elevating



character? Is it possible to educate gradually among the great



mass of workers a new capacity for the higher kinds of work; and



in particular for undertaking co-operatively the management of



the business in which they are themselves employed?



    What are the proper relations of individual and collective



action in a stage of civilization such as ours? How far ought



voluntary association in its various forms, old and new, to be



left to supply collective action for those purposes for which



such action has special advantages? What business affairs should



be undertaken by society itself acting through its government,



imperial or local? Have we, for instance, carried as far as we



should the plan of collective ownership and use of open spaces,



of works of art, of the means of instruction and amusement, as



well as of those material requisites of a civilized life, the



supply of which requires united action, such as gas and water,



and railways?



    When government does not itself directly intervene, how far



should it allow individuals and corporations to conduct their own



affairs as they please? How far should it regulate the management



of railways and other concerns which are to some extent in a



position of monopoly, and again of land and other things the



quantity of which cannot be increased by man? Is it necessary to



retain in their full force all the existing rights of property;



or have the original necessities for which they were meant to



provide, in some measure passed away?



    Are the prevailing methods of using wealth entirely



justifiable? What scope is there for the moral pressure of social



opinion in constraining and directing individual action in those



economic relations in which the rigidity and violence of



government interference would be likely to do more harm than



good? In what respect do the duties of one nation to another in



economic matters differ from those of members of the same nation



to one another?







    Economics is thus taken to mean a study of the economic



aspects and conditions of man's political, social and private



life; but more especially of his social life. The aims of the



study are to gain knowledge for its own sake, and to obtain



guidance in the practical conduct of life, and especially of



social life. The need for such guidance was never so urgent as



now; a later generation may have more abundant leisure than we



for researches that throw light on obscure points in abstract



speculation, or in the history of past times, but do not afford



immediate aid in present difficulties.



    But though thus largely directed by practical needs,



economics avoids as far as possible the discussion of those



exigencies of party organization, and those diplomacies of home



and foreign politics of which the statesman is bound to take



account in deciding what measures that he can propose will bring



him nearest to the end that he desires to secure for his country.



It aims indeed at helping him to determine not only what that end



should be, but also what are the best methods of a broad policy



devoted to that end. But it shuns many political issues, which



the practical man cannot ignore: and it is therefore a science,



pure and applied, rather than a science and an art. And it is



better described by the broad term " Economics ', than by the



narrower term " Political Economy ".



    5. The economist needs the three great intellectual



faculties, perception, imaginAtion and reason: and most of all he



needs imagination, to put him on the track of those causes of



visible events which are remote or lie below the surface, and of



those effects of visible causes which are remote or lie below the



surface.



    The natural sciences and especially the physical group of



them have this great advantage as a discipline over all studies



of man's action, that in them the investigator is called on for



exact conclusions which can be verified by subsequent observation



or experiment. His fault is soon detected if he contents himself



with such causes and such effects as lie on the surface; or again



if he ignores the mutual interaction of the forces of nature,



wherein every movement modifies and is modified by all that



surround it. Nor does the thorough student of physics rest



satisfied with a mere general analysis; he is ever striving to



make it quantitative; and to assign its proper proportion to each



element in his problem.



    In sciences that relate to man exactness is less attainable.



The path of least resistance is sometimes the only one open: it



is always alluring; and though it is also always treacherous, the



temptation is great to follow it even when a more through way can



be fought out by resolute work. The scientific student of history



is hampered by his inability to experiment and even more by the



absence of any objective standard to which his estimates of



relative proportion can be referred. Such estimates are latent in



almost every stage of his argument: he cannot conclude that one



cause or group of causes has been overridden by another without



making some implicit estimate of their relative weights. And yet



it is only by a great effort that he perceives how dependent he



is on his own subjective impressions. The economist also is



hampered by this difficulty, but in a less degree than other



students of man's action; for indeed he has some share in those



advantages which give precision and objectivity to the work of



the physicist. So long, at all events, as he is concerned with



current and recent events, many of his facts group themselves



under classes as to which statements can be made that are



definite, and often were approximately accurate numerically: and



thus he is at some advantage in seeking for causes and for



results which lie below the surface, and are not easily seen; and



in analyzing complex conditions into their elements and in



reconstructing a whole out of many elements.



    In smaller matters, indeed, simple experience will suggest



the unseen. It will, for instance, put people in the way of



looking for the harm to strength of character and to family life



that comes from ill-considered aid to the thriftless; even though



what is seen on the surface is almost sheer gain. But greater



effort, a larger range of view, a more powerful exercise of the



imagination are needed in tracking the true results of, for



instance, many plausible schemes for increasing steadiness of



employment. For that purpose it is necessary to have learnt how



closely connected are changes in credit, in domestic trade, in



foreign trade competition, in harvests, in prices; and how all of



these affect steadiness of employment for good and for evil. It



is necessary to watch how almost every considerable economic



event in any part of the Western world affects employment in some



trades at least in almost every other part. If we deal only with



those causes of unemployment which are near at hand, we are



likely to make no good cure of the evils we see; and we are



likely to cause evils, that we do not see. And if we are to look



for those which are far off and weigh them in the balance, then



the work before us is a high discipline for the mind.



    Again, when by a "standard rule" or any other device wages



are kept specially high in any trade, imagination set a-going



will try to track the lives of those who are prevented by the



standard rule from doing work, of which they are capable, at a



price that people are willing to pay for it. Are they pushed up,



or are they pushed down? If some are pushed up and some pushed



down, as commonly happens, is it the many that are pushed up and



the few that are pushed down, or the other way about? If we look



at surface results, we may suppose that it is the many who are



pushed up. But if, by the scientific use of the imagination, we



think out all the ways in which prohibitions, whether on Trade



Union authority or any other, prevent people from doing their



best and earning their best, we shall often conclude that it is



the many who have been pushed down, and the few who have been



pushed up. Partly under English influence, some Australasian



colonies are making bold ventures, which hold out specious



promise of greater immediate comfort and ease to the workers.



Australasia has indeed a great reserve of borrowing power in her



vast landed property: and should the proposed short cuts issue in



some industrial decadence, the fall may be slight and temporary.



But it is already being urged that England should move on similar



lines: and a fall for her would be more serious. What is needed,



and what we may hope is coming in the near future, is a larger



study of such schemes of the same kind and by the same order of



minds as are applied to judging a new design for a battleship



with reference to her stability in bad weather.



    In such problems as this it is the purely intellectual, and



sometimes even the critical faculties, which are most in demand.



But economic studies call for and develop the faculty of



sympathy, and especially that rare sympathy which enables people



to put themselves in the place, not only of their comrades, but



also of other classes. This class sympathy is, for instance,



strongly developed by inquiries, which are becoming every day



more urgent, of the reciprocal influences which character and



earnings, methods of employment and habits of expenditure exert



on one another; of the ways in which the efficiency of a nation



is strengthened by and strengthens the confidences and affections



which hold together the members of each economic group - the



family, employers and employees in the same business, citizens of



the same country; of the good and evil that are mingled in the



individual unselfishness and the class selfishness of



professional etiquette and of trade union customs; and of



movements by which our growing wealth and opportunities may best



be turned to account for the wellbeing of the present and coming



generations.(1*)



    6. The economist needs imagination especially in order that



he may develop his ideals. But most of all he needs caution and



reserve in order that his advocacy of ideals may not outrun his



grasp of the future.



    After many more generations have passed, our present ideals



and methods may seem to belong to the infancy, rather than to the



maturity of man. One definite advance has already been made. We



have learnt that every one until proved to be hopelessly weak or



base is worthy of full economic freedom: but we are not in a



position to guess confidently to what goal the advance thus begun



will ultimately lead. In the later Middle Ages a rough beginning



was made of the study of the industrial organism, regarded as



embracing all humanity. Each successive generation has seen



further growths of that organism; but none has seen so large a



growth as our own. The eagerness with which it has been studied



has grown with its growth; and no parallel can be found in



earlier times to the breadth and variety of the efforts that have



been made to comprehend it. But the chief outcome of recent



studies is to make us recognize more fully, than could be done by



any previous generation, how little we know of the causes by



which progress is being fashioned, and how little we can forecast



the ultimate destiny of the industrial organism.



    Some harsh employers and politicians, defending exclusive



class privileges early in last century, found it convenient to



claim the authority of political economy on their side; and they



often spoke of themselves as "economists." And even in our own



time, that title has been assumed by opponents of generous



expenditure on the education of the masses of the people, in



spite of the fact that living economists with one consent



maintain that such expenditure is a true economy, and that to



refuse it is both wrong and bad business from a national point of



view. But Carlyle and Ruskin, followed by many other writers who



had no part in their brilliant and ennobling poetical visions,



have without examination held the great economists responsible



for sayings and deeds to which they were really averse; and in



consequence there has grown up a popular misconception of their



thoughts and character.



    The fact is that nearly all the founders of modern economics



were men of gentle and sympathetic temper, touched with the



enthusiasm of humanity. They cared little for wealth for



themselves; they cared much for its wide diffusion among the



masses of the people. They opposed antisocial monopolies however



powerful. In their several generations they supported the



movement against the class legislation which denied to trade



unions privileges that were open to associations of employers; or



they worked for a remedy against the poison which the old Poor



Law was instilling into the hearts and homes of the agricultural



and other labourers; or they supported the factory acts, in spite



of the strenuous opposition of some politicians and employers who



claimed to speak in their name. They were without exception



devoted to the doctrine that the wellbeing of the whole people



should be the ultimate goal of all private effort and all public



policy. But they were strong in courage and caution; they



appeared cold, because they would not assume the responsibility



of advocating rapid advances on untried paths, for the safety of



which the only guarantees offered were the confident hopes of men



whose imaginations were eager, but not steadied by knowledge nor



disciplined by hard thought.



    Their caution was perhaps a little greater than necessary:



for the range of vision even of the great seers of that age was



in some respects narrower than is that of most educated men in



the present time; when, partly through the suggestions of



biological study, the influence of circumstances in fashioning



character is generally recognized as the dominant fact in social



science. Economists have accordingly now learnt to take a larger



and more hopeful view of the possibilities of human progress.



They have learnt to trust that the human will, guided by careful



thought, can so modify circumstances as largely to modify



character; and thus to bring about new conditions of life still



more favourable to character; and therefore to the economic, as



well as the moral, wellbeing of the masses of the people. Now as



ever it is their duty to oppose all plausible short cuts to that



great end, which would sap the springs of energy and initiative.



    The rights of property, as such, have not been venerated by



those master minds who have built up economic science; but the



authority of the science has been wrongly assumed: by some who



have pushed the claims of vested rights to extreme and antisocial



uses. It may be well therefore to note that the tendency of



careful economic study is to base the rights of private property



not on any abstract principle, but on the observation that in the



past they have been inseparable from solid progress; and that



therefore it is the part of responsible men to proceed cautiously



and tentatively in abrogating or modifying even such rights as



may seem to be inappropriate to the ideal conditions of social



life.







NOTES:







1. This Section is reproduced from a Plea for the creation of a



curriculum in economics and associated branches of political



science addressed to the University of Cambridge in 1902, and



conceded in the following year.

















The Principles of Economics





by Alfred Marshall











Book III







On Wants and Their Satisfaction











Chapter 1







Introductory







    1. The older definitions of economics described it as the



science which is concerned with the production, the distribution,



the exchange, and the consumption of wealth. Later experience has



shown that the problems of distribution and exchange are so



closely connected, that it is doubtful whether anything is to be



gained by the attempt to keep them separate. There is however a



good deal of general reasoning with regard to the relation of



demand and supply which is required as a basis for the practical



problems of value, and which acts as an underlying backbone,



giving unity and consistency to the main body of economic



reasoning. Its very breadth and generality mark it off from the



more concrete problems of distribution and exchange to which it



is subservient; and therefore it is put together in Book V on



"The General Theory of Demand and Supply" which prepares the way



for "Distribution and Exchange, or Value."



    But first comes the present Book III, a study of Wants and



their satisfaction, i.e. of demand and consumption: and then Book



IV, a study of the agents of production, that is, the agents by



whose means wants are satisfied, including man himself, the chief



agent and the sole aim of production. Book IV corresponds in



general character to that discussion of production to which a



large place has been given in nearly all English treatises on



general economics during the last two generations; although its



relation to the problems of demand and supply has not been made



sufficiently clear.



    2. Until recently the subject of demand or consumption has



been somewhat neglected. For important as is the inquiry how to



turn our resources to the best account, it is not one which lends



itself, so far as the expenditure of private individuals is



concerned, to the methods of economics. The common sense of a



person who has had a large experience of life will give him more



guidance in such a matter than he can gain from subtle economic



analyses; and until recently economists said little on the



subject, because they really had not much to say that was not the



common property of all sensible people. But recently several



causes have combined to give the subject a greater prominence in



economic discussions.



    The first of these is the growing belief that harm was done



by Ricardo's habit of laying disproportionate stress on the side



of cost of production, when analysing the causes that determine



exchange value. For although he and his chief followers were



aware that the conditions of demand played as important a part as



those of supply in determining value, yet they did not express



their meaning with sufficient clearness, and they have been



misunderstood by all but the most careful readers.



    Secondly, the growth of exact habits of thought in economics



is making people more careful to state distinctly the premises on



which they reason. This increased care is partly due to the



application by some writers of mathematical language and



mathematical habits of thought. It is indeed doubtful whether



much has been gained by the use of complex mathematical formulae.



But the application of mathematical habits of thought has been of



great service; for it has led people to refuse to consider a



problem until they are quite sure what the problem is; and to



insist on knowing what is, and what is not intended to be assumed



before proceeding further.



    This has in its turn compelled a more careful analysis of all



the leading conceptions of economics, and especially of demand;



for the mere attempt to state clearly how the demand for a thing



is to be measured opens up new aspects of the main problems of



economics. And though the theory of demand is yet in its infancy,



we can already see that it may be possible to collect and arrange



statistics of consumption in such a way as to throw light on



difficult questions of great importance to public wellbeing.



    Lastly, the spirit of the age induces a closer attention to



the question whether our increasing wealth may not be made to go



further than it does in promoting the general wellbeing; and this



again compels us to examine how far the exchange value of any



element of wealth, whether in collective or individual use,



represents accurately the addition which it makes to happiness



and wellbeing.



    We will begin this Book with a short study of the variety of



human wants, considered in their relation to human efforts and



activities. For the progressive nature of man is one whole. It is



only temporarily and provisionally that we can with profit



isolate for study the economic side of his life; and we ought to



be careful to take together in one view the whole of that side.



There is a special need to insist on this just now, because the



reaction against the comparative neglect of the study of wants by



Ricardo and his followers shows signs of being carried to the



opposite extreme. It is important still to assert the great truth



on which they dwelt somewhat too exclusively; viz. that while



wants are the rulers of life among the lower animals, it is to



changes in the forms of efforts and activities that we must turn



when in search for the keynotes of the history of mankind.







Chapter 2







Wants in Relation to Activities







    1. Human wants and desires are countless in number and very



various in kind: but they are generally limited and capable of



being satisfied. The uncivilized man indeed has not many more



than the brute animal; but every step in his progress upwards



increases the variety of his needs together with the variety in



his methods of satisfying them. He desires not merely larger



quantities of the things he has been accustomed to consume, but



better qualities of those things; he desires a greater choice of



things, and things that will satisfy new wants growing up in him.



    Thus though the brute and the savage alike have their



preferences for choice morsels, neither of them cares much for



variety for its own sake. As, however, man rises in civilization,



as his mind becomes developed, and even his animal passions begin



to associate themselves with mental activities, his wants become



rapidly more subtle and more various; and in the minor details of



life he begins to desire change for the sake of change, long



before he has consciously escaped from the yoke of custom. The



first great step in this direction comes with the art of making a



fire: gradually he gets to accustom himself to many different



kinds of food and drink cooked in many different ways; and before



long monotony begins to become irksome to him, and he finds it a



great hardship when accident compels him to live for a long time



exclusively on one or two kinds of food.



    As a man's riches increase, his food and drink become more



various and costly; but his appetite is limited by nature, and



when his expenditure on food is extravagant it is more often to



gratify the desires of hospitality and display than to indulge



his own senses.



    This brings us to remark with Senior that "Strong as is the



desire for variety, it is weak compared with the desire for



distinction: a feeling which if we consider its universality, and



its constancy, that it affects all men and at all times, that it



comes with us from the cradle and never leaves us till we go into



the grave, may be pronounced to be the most powerful of human



passions." This great half-truth is well illustrated by a



comparison of the desire for choice and various food with that



for choice and various dress.



    2. That need for dress which is the result of natural causes



varies with the climate and the season of year, and a little with



the nature of a person's occupations. But in dress conventional



wants overshadow those which are natural. Thus in many of the



earlier stages of civilization the sumptuary mandates of Law and



Custom have rigidly prescribed to the members of each caste or



industrial grade, the style and the standard of expense up to



which their dress must reach and beyond which they may not go;



and part of the substance of these mandates remains now, though



subject to rapid change. In Scotland, for instance, in Adam



Smith's time many persons were allowed by custom to go abroad



without shoes and stockings who may not do so now; and many may



still do it in Scotland who might not in England. Again, in



England now a well-to-do labourer is expected to appear on Sunday



in a black coat and, in some places, in a silk hat; though these



would have subjected him to ridicule but a short time ago. There



is a constant increase both in that variety and expensiveness



which custom requires as a minimum, and in that which it



tolerates as a maximum; and the efforts to obtain distinction by



dress are extending themselves throughout the lower grades of



English society.



    But in the upper grades, though the dress of women is still



various and costly, that of men is simple and inexpensive as



compared with what it was in Europe not long ago, and is to-day



in the East. For those men who are most truly distinguished on



their own account, have a natural dislike to seem to claim



attention by their dress; and they have set the fashion.(1*)



    3. House room satisfies the imperative need for shelter from



the weather: but that need plays very little part in the



effective demand for house room. For though a small but



well-built cabin gives excellent shelter, its stifling



atmosphere, its necessary uncleanliness, and its want of the



decencies and the quiet of life are great evils. It is not so



much that they cause physical discomfort as that they tend to



stunt the faculties, and limit people's higher activities. With



every increase in these activities the demand for larger house



room becomes more urgent.(2*)



    And therefore relatively large and well-appointed house room



is, even in the lowest social ranks, at once a "necessary for



efficiency,"(3*) and the most convenient and obvious way of



advancing a material claim to social distinction. And even in



those grades in which everyone has house room sufficient for the



higher activities of himself and his family, a yet further and



almost unlimited increase is desired as a requisite for the



exercise of many of the higher social activities.



    4. It is, again, the desire for the exercise and development



of activities, spreading through every rank of society, which



leads not only to the pursuit of science, literature and art for



their own sake, but to the rapidly increasing demand for the work



of those who pursue them as professions. Leisure is used less and



less as an opportunity for mere stagnation; and there is a



growing desire for those amusements, such as athletic games and



travelling, which develop activities rather than indulge any



sensuous craving.(4*)



    For indeed the desire for excellence for its own sake, is



almost as wide in its range as the lower desire for distinction.



Just as the desire for distinction graduates down from the



ambition of those who may hope that their names will be in men's



mouths in distant lands and in distant times, to the hope of the



country lass that the new ribbon she puts on for Easter may not



pass unnoticed by her neighbours; so the desire for excellence



for its own sake graduates down from that of a Newton, or a



Stradivarius, to that of the fisherman who, even when no one is



looking and he is not in a hurry, delights in handling his craft



well, and in the fact that she is well built and responds



promptly to his guidance. Desires of this kind exert a great



influence on the supply of the highest faculties and the greatest



inventions; and they are not unimportant on the side of demand.



For a large part of the demand for the most highly skilled



professional services and the best work of the mechanical



artisan, arises from the delight that people have in the training



of their own faculties, and in exercising them by aid of the most



delicately adjusted and responsive implements.



    Speaking broadly therefore, although it is man's wants in the



earliest stages of his development that give rise to his



activities, yet afterwards each new step upwards is to be



regarded as the development of new activities giving rise to new



wants, rather than of new wants giving rise to new activities.



    We see this clearly if we look away from healthy conditions



of life, where new activities are constantly being developed; and



watch the West Indian negro, using his new freedom and wealth not



to get the means of satisfying new wants, but in idle stagnation



that is not rest; or again look at that rapidly lessening part of



the English working classes, who have no ambition and no pride or



delight in the growth of their faculties and activities, and



spend on drink whatever surplus their wages afford over the bare



necessaries of a squalid life.



    It is not true therefore that "the Theory of Consumption is



the scientific basis of economics."(5*) For much that is of chief



interest in the science of wants, is borrowed from the science of



efforts and activities. These two supplement one another; either



is incomplete without the other. But if either, more than the



other, may claim to be the interpreter of the history of man,



whether on the economic side or any other, it is the science of



activities and not that of wants; and McCulloch indicated their



true relations when, discussing "the progressive nature of



man"(6*) he said: - "The gratification of a want or a desire is



merely a step to some new pursuit. In every stage of his progress



he is destined to contrive and invent, to engage in new



undertakings; and when these are accomplished to enter with fresh



energy upon others."



    From this it follows that such a discussion of demand as is



possible at this stage of our work, must be confined to an



elementary analysis of an almost purely formal kind. The higher



study of consumption must come after, and not before, the main



body of economic analysis; and, though it may have its beginning



within the proper domain of economics, it cannot find its



conclusion there, but must extend far beyond.(7*)







NOTES:







1. A woman may display wealth, but she may not display only her



wealth, by her dress; or else she defeats her ends. She must also



suggest some distinction of character as well as of wealth; for



though her dress may owe more to her dressmaker than to herself,



yet there is a traditional assumption that, being less busy than



man with external affairs, she can give more time to taking



thought as to her dress. Even under the sway of modern fashions,



to be "well dressed" - not "expensively dressed" is a reasonable



minor aim for those who desire to be distinguished for their



faculties and abilities; and this will be still more the case if



the evil dominion of the wanton vagaries of fashion should pass



away. For to arrange costumes beautiful in themselves, various



and well-adapted to their purposes, is an object worthy of high



endeavour; it belongs to the same class, though not to the same



rank in that class, as the painting of a good picture.







2. It is true that many active-minded working men prefer cramped



lodgings in a town to a roomy cottage in the country; but that is



because they have a strong taste for those activities for which a



country life offers little scope.







3. See Book II, ch. III, sec. 3.







4. As a minor point it may be noticed that those drinks which



stimulate the mental activities are largely displacing those



which merely gratify the senses. The consumption of tea is



increasing very fast, while that of alcohol is stationary; and



there is in all ranks of society a diminishing demand for the



grosser and more immediately stupefying forms of alcohol.







5. This doctrine is laid down by Banfield, and adopted by Jevons



as the key of his position. It is unfortunate that here as



elsewhere Jevons' delight in stating his case strongly has led



him to a conclusion, which not only is inaccurate, but does



mischief by implying that the older economists were more at fault



than they really were. Banfield says "the first proposition of



the theory of consumption is that the satisfaction of every lower



want in the scale creates a desire of a higher character." And if



this were true, the above doctrine, which he bases on it, would



be true also. But, as Jevons points out (Theory, 2nd Ed. p. 59),



it is not true: and he substitutes for it the statement that the



satisfaction of a lower want permits a higher want to manifest



itself. That is a true and indeed an identical proposition: but



it affords no support to the claims of the Theory of Consumption



to supremacy.







6. Political Economy, ch. II.







7. The formal classification of Wants is a task not without



interest; but it is not needed for our purposes. The basis of



most modern work in this direction is to be found in Hermann's



Staatswirtschaftliche Untersuchungen, Ch. II, where wants are



classified as "absolute and relative, higher and lower, urgent



and capable of postponement, positive and negative, direct and



indirect, general and particular, constant and interrupted,



permanent and temporary, ordinary and extraordinary, present and



future, individual and collective, private and public." Some



analysis of wants and desires is to be found in the great



majority of French and other Continental treatises on economics



even of the last generation; but the rigid boundary which English



writers have ascribed to their science has excluded such



discussions. And it is a characteristic fact that there is no



allusion to them in Bentham's Manual of Political Economy,



although his profound analysis of them in the Principles of



Morals and legislation and in the Table of the Springs of Human



Action has exercised a wide-spread influence. Hermann had studied



Bentham; and on the other hand Banfield, whose lectures were



perhaps the first ever given in an English University that owed



much directly to German economic thought, acknowledges special



obligations to Hermann. In England the way was prepared for



Jevons' excellent work on the theory of wants, by Bentham



himself; by Senior, whose short remarks on the subject are



pregnant with far-reaching hints; by Banfield, and by the



Australian Hearn. Hearn's Plutology or Theory of the Efforts to



satisfy Human Wants is at once simple and profound: it affords an



admirable example of the way in which detailed analysis may be



applied to afford a training of a very high order for the young,



and to give them an intelligent acquaintance with the economic



conditions of life, without forcing upon them any particular



solution of those more difficult problems on which they are not



yet able to form an independent judgment. At about the same time



as Jevons' Theory appeared, Carl Menger gave a great impetus to



the subtle and interesting studies of wants and utilities by the



Austrian school of economists: they had already been initiated by



von Thunen, as is indicated in the Preface to this Volume.







Chapter 3







Gradations of Consumers' Demand







    1. When a trader or a manufacturer buys anything to be used



in production, or be sold again, his demand is based on his



anticipations of the profits which he can derive from it. These



profits depend at any time on speculative risks and on other



causes, which will need to be considered later on. But in the



long run the price which a trader or manufacturer can afford to



pay for a thing depends on the prices which consumers will pay



for it, or for the things made by aid of it. The ultimate



regulator of all demands is therefore consumers' demand. And it



is with that almost exclusively that we shall be concerned in the



present Book.



    Utility is taken to be correlative to Desire or Want. It has



been already argued that desires cannot be measured directly, but



only indirectly by the outward phenomena to which they give rise:



and that in those cases with which economics is chiefly concerned



the measure is found in the price which a person is willing to



pay for the fulfilment or satisfaction of his desire. He may have



desires and aspirations which are not consciously set for any



satisfaction: but for the present we are concerned chiefly with



those which do so aim; and we assume that the resulting



satisfaction corresponds in general fairly well to that which was



anticipated when the purchase was made.(1*)



    There is an endless variety of wants, but there is a limit to



each separate want. This familiar and fundamental tendency of



human nature may be stated in the law of satiable wants or of



diminishing utility thus:-The total utility of a thing to anyone



(that is, the total pleasure or other benefit it yields him)



increases with every increase in his stock of it, but not as fast



as his stock increases. If his stock of it increases at a uniform



rate the benefit derived from it increases at a diminishing rate.



In other words, the additional benefit which a person derives



from a given increase of his stock of a thing, diminishes with



every increase in the stock that he already has.



    That part of the thing which he is only just induced to



purchase may be called his marginal purchase, because he is on



the margin of doubt whether it is worth his while to incur the



outlay required to obtain it. And the utility of his marginal



purchase may be called the marginal utility of the thing to him.



Or, if instead of buying it, he makes the thing himself, then its



marginal utility is the utility of that part which he thinks it



only just worth his while to make. And thus the law just given



may be worded:-



    The marginal utility of a thing to anyone diminishes with



every increase in the amount of it he already has.(2*)



    There is however an implicit condition in this law which



should be made clear. It is that we do not suppose time to be



allowed for any alteration in the character or tastes of the man



himself. It is therefore no exception to the law that the more



good music a man hears, the stronger is his taste for it likely



to become; that avarice and ambition are often insatiable; or



that the virtue of cleanliness and the vice of drunkenness alike



grow on what they feed upon. For in such cases our observations



range over some period of time; and the man is not the same at



the beginning as at the end of it. If we take a man as he is,



without allowing time for any change in his character, the



marginal utility of a thing to him diminishes steadily with every



increase in his supply of it.(3*)



    2. Now let us translate this law of diminishing utility into



terms of price. Let us take an illustration from the case of a



commodity such as tea, which is in constant demand and which can



be purchased in small quantities. Suppose, for instance, that tea



of a certain quality is to be had at 2s. per lb. A person might



be willing to give 10s. for a single pound once a year rather



than go without it altogether; while if he could have any amount



of it for nothing he would perhaps not care to use more than 30



lbs. in the year. But as it is, he buys perhaps 10 lbs. in the



year; that is to say, the difference between the satisfaction



which he gets from buying 9 lbs. and I 0 lbs. is enough for him



to be willing to pay 2s. for it: while the fact that he does not



buy an eleventh pound, shows that he does not think that it would



be worth an extra 2s. to him. That is, 2s. a pound measures the



utility to him of the tea which lies at the margin or terminus or



end of his purchases; it measures the marginal utility to him. If



the price which he is just willing to pay for any pound be called



his demand price, then 2s. is his marginal demand price. And our



law may be worded:-



    The larger the amount of a thing that a person has the less,



other things being equal (i.e. the purchasing power of money, and



the amount of money at his command being equal), will be the



price which he will pay for a little more of it: or in other



words his marginal demand price for it diminishes.



    His demand becomes efficient, only when the price which he is



willing to offer reaches that at which others are willing to



sell.



    This last sentence reminds us that we have as yet taken no



account of changes in the marginal utility of money, or general



purchasing power. At one and the same time, a person's material



resources being unchanged, the marginal utility of money to him



is a fixed quantity, so that the prices he is just willing to pay



for two commodities are to one another in the same ratio as the



utility of those two commodities.



    3. A greater utility will be required to induce him to buy a



thing if he is poor than if he is rich. We have seen how the



clerk with ?00 a year will walk to business in a heavier rain



than the clerk with ?00 a year.(4*) But although the utility, or



the benefit, that is measured in the poorer man's mind by



twopence is greater than that measured by it in the richer man's



mind; yet if the richer man rides a hundred times in the year and



the poorer man twenty times, then the utility of the hundredth



ride which the richer man is only just induced to take is



measured to him by twopence; and the utility of the twentieth



ride which the poorer man is only just induced to take is



measured to him by twopence. For each of them the marginal



utility is measured by twopence; but this marginal utility is



greater in the case of the poorer man than in that of the richer.



    In other words, the richer a man becomes the less is the



marginal utility of money to him; every increase in his resources



increases the price which he is willing to pay for any given



benefit. And in the same way every diminution of his resources



increases the marginal utility of money to him, and diminishes



the price that he is willing to pay for any benefit.(5*)



    4. To obtain complete knowledge of demand for anything, we



should have to ascertain how much of it he would be willing to



purchase at each of the prices at which it is likely to be



offered; and the circumstance of his demand for, say, tea can be



best expressed by a list of the prices which he is willing to



pay; that is, by his several demand prices for different amounts



of it. (This list may be called his demand schedule.)



    Thus for instance we may find that he would buy







 6 lbs. at 50d. per lb.         10 lbs. at 24d. per lb.



 7 "       40 "                 11 "       21 "



 8 "       33 "                 12 "       19 "



 9 "       28 "                 13 "       17 "







    If corresponding prices were filled in for all intermediate



amounts we should have an exact statement of his demand.(6*) We



cannot express a person's demand for a thing by the "amount he is



willing to buy" or by the "intensity of his eagerness to buy a



certain amount," without reference to the prices at which he



would buy that amount and other amounts. We can represent it



exactly only by lists of the prices at which he is willing to buy



different amounts.(7*)



    When we say that a person's demand for anything increases, we



mean that he will buy more of it than he would before at the same



price, and that he will buy as much of it as before at a higher



price. A general increase in his demand is an increase throughout



the whole list of prices at which he is willing to purchase



different amounts of it, and not merely that he is willing to buy



more of it at the current prices.(8*)



    5. So far we have looked at the demand of a single



individual. And in the particular case of such a thing as tea,



the demand of a single person is fairly representative of the



general demand of a whole market: for the demand for tea is a



constant one; and, since it can be purchased in small quantities,



every variation in its price is likely to affect the amount which



he will buy. But even among those things which are in constant



use, there are many for which the demand on the part of any



single individual cannot vary continuously with every small



change in price, but can move only by great leaps. For instance,



a small fall in the price of hats or watches will not affect the



action of every one; but it will induce a few persons, who were



in doubt whether or not to get a new hat or a new watch, to



decide in favour of doing so.



    There are many classes of things the need for which on the



part of any individual is inconstant, fitful, and irregular.



There can be no list of individual demand prices for



wedding-cakes, or the services of an expert surgeon. But the



economist has little concern with particular incidents in the



lives of individuals. He studies rather "the course of action



that may be expected under certain conditions from the members of



an industrial group," in so far as the motives of that action are



measurable by a money price; and in these broad results the



variety and the fickleness of individual action are merged in the



comparatively regular aggregate of the action of many.



    In large markets, then-where rich and poor, old and young,



men and women, persons of all varieties of tastes, temperaments



and occupations are mingled together,-the peculiarities in the



wants of individuals will compensate one another in a



comparatively regular gradation of total demand. Every fall,



however slight in the price of a commodity in general use, will,



other things being equal, increase the total sales of it; just as



an unhealthy autumn increases the mortality of a large town,



though many persons are uninjured by it. And therefore if we had



the requisite knowledge, we could make a list of prices at which



each amount of it could find purchasers in a given place during,



say, a year.



    The total demand in the place for, say, tea, is the sum of



the demands of all the individuals there. Some will be richer and



some poorer than the individual consumer whose demand we have



just written down; some will have a greater and others a smaller



liking for tea than he has. Let us suppose that there are in the



place a million purchasers of tea, and that their average



consumption is equal to his at each several price. Then the



demand of that place is represented by the same list of prices as



before, if we write a million pounds of tea instead of one



pound.(9*)



    There is then one general law of demand: -The greater the



amount to be sold, the smaller must be the price at which it is



offered in order that it may find purchasers; or, in other words,



the amount demanded increases with a fall in price, and



diminishes with a rise in price. There will not be any uniform



relation between the fall in price and the increase of demand. A



fall of one-tenth in the price may increase the sales by a



twentieth or by a quarter, or it may double them. But as the



numbers in the left-hand column of the demand schedule increase,



those in the right-hand column will always diminish.(10*)



    The price will measure the marginal utility of the commodity



to each purchaser individually: we cannot speak of price as



measuring marginal utility in general, because the wants and



circumstances of different people are different.



    6. The demand prices in our list are those at which various



quantities of a thing can be sold in a market during a given time



and under given conditions. If the conditions vary in any respect



the prices will probably require to be changed; and this has



constantly to be done when the desire for anything is materially



altered by a variation of custom, or by a cheapening of the



supply of a rival commodity, or by the invention of a new one.



For instance, the list of demand prices for tea is drawn out on



the assumption that the price of coffee is known; but a failure



of the coffee harvest would raise the prices for tea. The demand



for gas is liable to be reduced by an improvement in electric



lighting; and in the same way a fall in the price of a particular



kind of tea may cause it to be substituted for an inferior but



cheaper variety.(11*)



    Our next step will be to consider the general character of



demand in the cases of some important commodities ready for



immediate consumption. We shall thus be continuing the inquiry



made in the preceding chapter as to the variety and satiability



of wants; but we shall be treating it from a rather different



point of view, viz. that of price statistics.(12*)







NOTES:







1. It cannot be too much insisted that to measure directly, or



per se, either desires or the satisfaction which results from



their fulfilment is impossible, if not inconceivable. If we



could, we should have two accounts to make up, one of desires,



and the other of realized satisfactions. And the two might differ



considerably. For, to say nothing of higher aspirations, some of



those desires with which economics is chiefly concerned, and



especially those connected with emulation, are impulsive; many



result from the force of habit; some are morbid and lead only to



hurt; and many are based on expectations that are never



fulfilled. (See above I, II, sections 3, 4) Of course many



satisfactions are not common pleasures, but belong to the



development of man's higher nature, or to use a good old word, to



his beatification; and some may even partly result from self



abnegation. (See I, II, sec. 1) The two direct measurements then



might differ. But as neither of them is possible, we fall back on



the measurement which economics supplies, of the motive or moving



force to action: and we make it serve, with all its faults, both



for the desires which prompt activities and for the satisfactions



that result from them. (Compare "Some remarks on Utility" by



Prof. Pigou in the Economic Journal for March, 1903.)







2. See Note I in the Mathematical Appendix at the end of the



Volume. This law holds a priority of position to the law of



diminishing return from land; which however has the priority in



time; since it was the first to be subjected to a rigid analysis



of a semi-mathematical character. And if by anticipation we



borrow some of its terms, we may say that the return of pleasure



which a person gets from each additional dose of a commodity



diminishes till at last a margin is reached at which it is no



longer worth his while to acquire any more of it.



    The term marginal utility (Grenz-nutz) was first used in this



connection by the Austrian Wieser. It has been adopted by Prof.



Wicksteed. It corresponds to the term Final used by Jevons, to



whom Wieser makes his acknowledgments in the Preface (p. xxiii of



the English edition). His list of anticipators of his doctrine is



headed by Gossen, 1854.







3. It may be noticed here, though the fact is of but little



practical importance, that a small quantity of a commodity may be



insufficient to meet a certain special want; and then there will



be a more than proportionate increase of pleasure when the



consumer gets enough of it to enable him to attain the desired



end. Thus, for instance, anyone would derive less pleasure in



proportion from ten pieces of wall paper than from twelve, if the



latter would, and the former would not, cover the whole of the



walls of his room. Or again a very short concert or a holiday may



fail of its purpose of soothing and recreating: and one of double



length might be of more than double total utility. This case



corresponds to the fact, which we shall have to study in



connection with the tendency to diminishing return, that the



capital and labour already applied to any piece of land may be so



inadequate for the development of its full powers, that some



further expenditure on it even with the existing arts of



agriculture would give a more than proportionate return; and in



the fact that an improvement in the arts of agriculture may



resist that tendency, we shall find an analogy to the condition



just mentioned in the text as implied in the law of diminishing



utility.







4. See I, II, sec. 2.







5. See Note II in the Mathematical Appendix.







6. Such a demand schedule may be translated, on a plan now coming



into familiar use, into a curve that may be called his demand



curve. Let Ox and Oy be drawn the one horizontally, the other



vertically. Let an inch measured along Ox represent 1o lbs. of



tea, and an inch measured along Oy represent 40d.







        tenths of       fortieths of



        an inch.        an inch.







 take   Om1 = 6, and draw m1p1 = 50



        Om2 = 7   "    "  m2p2 = 40



        Om3 = 8   "    "  m3p3 = 33



        Om4 = 9   "    "  m4p4 = 28



        Om5 = 10  "    "  m5p5 = 24



        Om6 = 11  "    "  m6p6 = 21



        Om7 = 12  "    "  m7p7 = 19



        Om8 = 13  "    "  m8p8 = 17











m1 being on Ox and m1p1 being drawn vertically from m1; and so



for the others. Then p1 p2... p8 are points on his demand curve



for tea; or as we may say demand points. If we could find demand



points in the same manner for every possible quantity of tea, we



should get the whole continuous curve DD' as shown in the figure.



This account of the demand schedule and curve is provisional;



several difficulties connected with it are deferred to chapter v.







7. Thus Mill says that we must " mean by the word demand, the



quantity demanded, and remember that this is not a fixed



quantity, but in general varies according to the value."



(Principles, III, II, sec. 4) This account is scientific in



substance; but it is not clearly expressed and it has been much



misunderstood. Cairnes prefers to represent "demand as the desire



for commodities and services, seeking its end by an offer of



general purchasing power, and supply as the desire for general



purchasing power, seeking its end by an offer of specific



commodities or services." He does this in order that he may be



able to speak of a ratio, or equality, of demand and supply. But



the quantities of two desires on the part of two different



persons cannot be compared directly; their measures may be



compared, but not they themselves. And in fact Cairnes is himself



driven to speak of supply as "limited by the quantity of specific



commodities offered for sale, and demand by the quantity of



purchasing power offered for their purchase." But sellers have



not a fixed quantity of commodities which they offer for sale



unconditionally at whatever price they can get: buyers have not a



fixed quantity of purchasing power which they are ready to spend



on the specific commodities, however much they pay for them.



Account must then be taken in either case of the relation between



quantity and price, in order to complete Cairnes' account, and



when this is done it is brought back to the lines followed by



Mill. He says, indeed, that "Demand, as defined by Mill, is to be



understood as measured, not, as my definition would require, by



the quantity of purchasing power offered in support of the desire



for commodities, but by the quantity of commodities for which



such purchasing power is offered." It is true that there is a



great difference between the statements, "I will buy twelve



eggs," and "I will buy a shilling's Worth of eggs." But there is



no substantive difference between the statement, "I will buy



twelve eggs at a penny each, but only six at three halfpence



each," and the statement, "I will spend a shilling on eggs at a



penny each, but if they cost three halfpence each I will spend



ninepence on them." But while Cairnes' account when completed



becomes substantially the same as Mill's, its present form is



even more misleading. (See an article by the present writer on



Mill's Theory of Value in the Fortnightly Review for April, 1876)







8. We may sometimes find it convenient to speak of this as a



raising of his demand schedule. Geometrically it is represented



by raising his demand curve, or, what comes to the same thing,



moving it to the right, with perhaps some modification of its



shape.







9. The demand is represented by the same curve as before, only an



inch measured along Ox now represents ten million pounds instead



of ten pounds. And a formal definition of the demand curve for a



market may be given thus:-The demand curve for any commodity in a



market during any given unit of time is the locus of demand



points for it. That is to say, it is a curve such that if from



any point P on it, a straight line PM be drawn perpendicular to



Ox, PM represents the price at which purchasers will be



forthcoming for an amount of the commodity represented by OM.







10. That is, if a point moves along the curve away from Oy it



will constantly approach Ox. Therefore if a straight line PT be



drawn touching the curve at P and meeting Ox in T, the angle PTx



is an obtuse angle. It will be found convenient to have a short



way of expressing this fact; which may be done by saying that PT



is inclined negatively. Thus the one universal rule to which the



demand curve conforms is that it is inclined negatively



throughout the whole of its length.



    It will of course be understood that "the law of demand" does



not apply to the demand in a campaign between groups of



speculators. A group, which desires to unload a great quantity of



a thing on to the market, often begins by buying some of it



openly. When it has thus raised the price of the thing, it



arranges to sell a great deal quietly, and through unaccustomed



channels. See an article by Professor Taussig in the Quarterly



Journal of Economics (May, 1921, p. 402).







11. It is even conceivable, though not probable, that a



simultaneous and proportionate fall in the price of all teas may



diminish the demand for some particular kind of it; if it happens



that those whom the increased cheapness of tea leads to



substitute a superior kind for it are more numerous than those



who are led to take it in the place of an inferior kind. The



question where the lines of division between different



commodities should be drawn must be settled by convenience of the



particular discussion. For some purposes it may be best to regard



Chinese and Indian teas, or even Souchong and Pekoe teas, as



different commodities; and to have a separate demand schedule for



each of them. While for other purposes it may be best to group



together commodities as distinct as beef and mutton, or even as



tea and coffee, and to have a single list to represent the demand



for the two combined; but in such a case of course some



convention must be made as to the number of ounces of tea which



are taken as equivalent to a pound of coffee.



    Again, a commodity may be simultaneously demanded for several



uses (for instance there may be a "composite demand" for leather



for making shoes and portmanteaus); the demand for a thing may be



conditional on there being a supply of some other thing without



which it would not be of much service (thus there may be a "joint



demand" for raw cotton and cotton-spinners' labour). Again, the



demand for a commodity on the part of dealers who buy it only



with the purpose of selling it again, though governed by the



demand of the ultimate consumers in the background, has some



peculiarities of its own. But all such points may best be



discussed at a later stage.







12. A great change in the manner of economic thought has been



brought about during the present generation by the general



adoption of semi-mathematical language for expressing the



relation between small increments of a commodity on the one hand,



and on the other hand small increments in the aggregate price



that will be paid for it: and by formally describing these small



increments of price as measuring corresponding small increments



of pleasure. The former, and by far the more important, step was



taken by Cournot (Recherches sur les Principes Mathematiques de



la Theorie des Richesses, 1838); the latter by Dupuit (De la



Mesure d'utiiite des travaux publics in the Annales des Ponts et



Chaussees, 1844), and by Gossen (Entwickelung der Gesetze des



menschlichen Verkehrs, 1854). But their work was forgotten; part



of it was done over again, developed and published almost



simultaneously by Jevons and by Carl Menger in 1871, and by



Walras a little later. Jevons almost at once arrested public



attention by his brilliant lucidity and interesting style. He



applied the new name final utility so ingeniously as to enable



people who knew nothing of mathematical science to get clear



ideas of the general relations between the small increments of



two things that are gradually changing in causal connection with



one another. His success was aided even by his faults. For under



the honest belief that Ricardo and his followers had rendered



their account of the causes that determine value hopelessly wrong



by omitting to lay stress on the law of satiable wants, he led



many to think he was correcting great errors; whereas he was



really only adding very important explanations. He did excellent



work in insisting on a fact which is none the less important,



because his predecessors, and even Cournot, thought it too



obvious to be explicitly mentioned, viz. that the diminution in



the amount of a thing demanded in a market indicates a diminution



in the intensity of the desire for it on the part of individual



consumers, whose wants are becoming satiated. But he has led many



of his readers into a confusion between the provinces of Hedonics



and Economics, by exaggerating the applications of his favourite



phrases, and speaking (Theory, 2nd Edn, p. 105) without



qualification of the price of a thing as measuring its final



utility not only to an individual, which it can do, but also to



"a trading body," which it cannot do. These points are developed



later on in Appendix I on Ricardo's Theory of value. It should be



added that Prof. Seligman has shown (Economic Journal, 1903, pp.



356-63) that a long-forgotten Lecture, delivered by Prof. W.F.



Lloyd at Oxford in 1833, anticipated many of the central ideas of



the present doctrine of utility.



    An excellent bibliography of Mathematical Economics is given



by Prof. Fisher as an appendix to Bacon's translation of



Cournot's Researches, to which the reader may be referred for a



more detailed account of the earlier mathematical writings on



economics, as well as of those by Edgeworth, Pareto, Wicksteed,



Auspitz, Lieben and others. Pantaleoni's Pure Economics, amid



much excellent matter, makes generally accessible for the first



time the profoundly original and vigorous, if somewhat abstract,



reasonings of Gossen.







Chapter 4







The Elasticity of Wants







    1. We have seen that the only universal law as to a person's



desire for a commodity is that it diminishes, other things being



equal, with every increase in his supply of that commodity. But



this diminution may be slow or rapid. If it is slow the price



that he will give for the commodity will not fall much in



consequence of a considerable increase in his supply of it; and a



small fall in price will cause a comparatively large increase in



his purchases. But if it is rapid, a small fall in price will



cause only a very small increase in his purchases. In the former



case his willingness to purchase the thing stretches itself out a



great deal under the action of a small inducement: the elasticity



of his wants, we may say, is great. In the latter case the extra



inducement given by the fall in price causes hardly any extension



of his desire to purchase: the elasticity of his demand is small.



If a fall in price from say 16d. to 15d. per lb. of tea would



much increase his purchases, then a rise in price from 15 d. to



16d. would much diminish them. That is, when the demand is



elastic for a fall in price, it is elastic also for a rise.



    And as with the demand of one person so with that of a whole



market. And we may say generally: - The elasticity (or



responsiveness) of demand in a market is great or small according



as the amount demanded increases much or little for a given fall



in price, and diminishes much or little for a given rise in



price.(1*)



    2. The price which is so high relatively to the poor man as



to be almost prohibitive, may be scarcely felt by the rich; the



poor man, for instance, never tastes wine, but the very rich man



may drink as much of it as he has a fancy for, without giving



himself a thought of its cost. We shall therefore get the



clearest notion of the law of the elasticity of demand by



considering one class of society at a time. Of course there are



many degrees of richness among the rich, and of poverty among the



poor; but for the present we may neglect these minor



subdivisions.



    When the price of a thing is very high relatively to any



class, they will buy but little of it; and in some cases custom



and habit may prevent them from using it freely even after its



price has fallen a good deal. It may still remain set apart for a



limited number of special occasions, or for use in extreme



illness, etc. But such cases, though not infrequent, do not form



the general rule; and anyhow as soon as it has been taken into



common use, any considerable fall in its price causes a great



increase in the demand for it. The elasticity of demand is great



for high prices, and great, or at least considerable, for medium



prices; but it declines as the price falls; and gradually fades



away if the fall goes so far that satiety level is reached.



    This rule appears to hold with regard to nearly all



commodities and with regard to the demand of every class; save



only that the level at which high prices end and low prices



begin, is different for different classes; and so again is the



level at which low prices end and very low prices begin. There



are however many varieties in detail; arising chiefly from the



fact that there are some commodities with which people are easily



satiated, and others-chiefly things used for display-for which



their desire is almost unlimited. For the latter the elasticity



of demand remains considerable, however low the price may fall,



while for the former the demand loses nearly all its elasticity



as soon as a low price has once been reached.(2*)



    3. There are some things the current prices of which in this



country are very low relatively even to the poorer classes; such



are for instance salt, and many kinds of savours and flavours,



and also cheap medicines. It is doubtful whether any fall in



price would induce a considerable increase in the consumption of



these.



    The current prices of meat, milk and butter, wool, tobacco,



imported fruits, and of ordinary medical attendance, are such



that every variation in price makes a great change in the



consumption of them by the working classes, and the lower half of



the middle classes; but the rich would not much increase their



own personal consumption of them however cheaply they were to be



had. In other words, the direct demand for these commodities is



very elastic on the part of the working and lower middle classes,



though not on the part of the rich. But the working class is so



numerous that their consumption of such things as are well within



their reach is much greater than that of the rich; and therefore



the aggregate demand for all things of the kind is very elastic.



A little while ago sugar belonged to this group of commodities:



but its price in England has now fallen so far as to be low



relatively even to the working classes, and the demand for it is



therefore not elastic.(3*)



    The current prices of wall-fruit, of the better kinds of



fish, and other moderately expensive luxuries are such as to make



the consumption of them by the middle class increase much with



every fall in price; in other words, the middle class demand for



them is very elastic: while the demand on the part of the rich



and on the part of the working class is much less elastic, the



former because it is already nearly satiated, the latter because



the price is still too high.



    The current prices of such things as rare wines, fruit out of



season, highly skilled medical and legal assistance, are so high



that there is but little demand for them except from the rich:



but what demand there is, often has considerable elasticity. Part



of the demand for the more expensive kinds of food is really a



demand for the means of obtaining social distinction, and is



almost insatiable.(4*)



    4. The case of necessaries is exceptional. When the price of



wheat is very high, and again when it is very low, the demand has



very little elasticity: at all events if we assume that wheat,



even when scarce, is the cheapest food for man; and that, even



when most plentiful, it is not consumed in any other way. We know



that a fall in the price of the quartern loaf from 6d. to 4d. has



scarcely any effect in increasing the consumption of bread. With



regard to the other end of the scale it is more difficult to



speak with certainty, because there has been no approach to a



scarcity in England since the repeal of the corn laws. But,



availing ourselves of the experience of a less happy time, we may



suppose that deficits in the supply of 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 tenths



would cause a rise in price of 3, 8, 16, 28, or 45 tenths



respectively.(5*) Much greater variations in prices indeed than



this have not been uncommon. Thus wheat sold in London for ten



shillings a bushel in 1335, but in the following year it sold for



ten pence.(6*)



    There may be even more violent changes than this in the price



of a thing which is not necessary, if it is perishable and the



demand for it is inelastic: thus fish may be very dear one day,



and sold for manure two or three days later.



    Water is one of the few things the consumption of which we



are able to observe at all prices, from the very highest down to



nothing at all. At moderate prices the demand for it is very



elastic. But the uses to which it can be put are capable of being



completely filled: and as its price sinks towards zero the demand



for it loses its elasticity. Nearly the same may be said of salt.



Its price in England is so low that the demand for it as an



article of food is very inelastic: but in India the price is



comparatively high and the demand is comparatively elastic.



    The price of house-room, on the other hand, has never fallen



very low except when a locality is being deserted by its



inhabitants. Where the condition of society is healthy, and there



is no check to general prosperity, there seems always to be an



elastic demand for house-room, on account both of the real



conveniences and the social distinction which it affords. The



desire for those kinds of clothing which are not used for the



purpose of display, is satiable: when their price is low the



demand for them has scarcely any elasticity.



    The demand for things of a higher quality depends much on



sensibility. some people care little for a refined flavour in



their wine provided they can get plenty of it: others crave a



high quality, but are easily satiated. In the ordinary working



class districts the inferior and the better joints are sold at



nearly the same price: but some well-paid artisans in the north



of England have developed a liking for the best meat, and will



pay for it nearly as high a price as can be got in the west end



of London, where the price is kept artificially high by the



necessity of sending the inferior joints away for sale elsewhere.



U se also gives rise to acquired distastes as well as to acquired



tastes. Illustrations which make a book attractive to many



readers, will repel those whose familiarity with better work has



rendered them fastidious. A person of high musical sensibility in



a large town will avoid bad concerts: though he might go to. them



gladly if he lived in a small town, where no good concerts are to



be heard, because there are not enough persons willing to pay the



high price required to cover their expenses. The effective demand



for first-rate music is elastic only in large towns; for



second-rate music it is elastic both in large and small towns.



    Generally speaking those things have the most elastic demand,



which are capable of being applied to many different uses. Water



for instance is needed first as food, then for cooking, then for



washing of various kinds and so on. When there is no special



drought, but water is sold by the pailful, the price may be low



enough to enable even the poorer classes to drink as much of it



as they are inclined, while for cooking they sometimes use the



same water twice over, and they apply it very scantily in



washing. The middle classes will perhaps not use any of it twice



for cooking; but they will make a pail of water go a good deal



further for washing purposes than if they had an unlimited supply



at command. When water is supplied by pipes, and charged at a



very low rate by meter, many people use as much of it even for



washing as they feel at all inclined to do; and when the water is



supplied not by meter but at a fixed annual charge, and is laid



on in every place where it is wanted, the use of it for every



purpose is carried to the full satiety limit.(7*)



    On the other hand, demand is, generally speaking, very



inelastic, firstly, for absolute necessaries (as distinguished



from conventional necessaries and necessaries for efficiency);



and secondly, for some of those luxuries of the rich which do not



absorb much of their income.



    5. So far we have taken no account of the difficulties of



getting exact lists of demand prices, and interpreting them



correctly. The first which we have to consider arises from the



element of time, the source of many of the greatest difficulties



in economics.



    Thus while a list of demand prices represents the changes in



the price at which a commodity can be sold consequent on changes



in the amount offered for sale, other things being, yet other



things seldom are equal in fact over equal; periods of time



sufficiently long for the collection of full and trustworthy



statistics. There are always occurring disturbing causes whose



effects are commingled with, and cannot easily be separated from,



the effects of that particular cause which we desire to isolate.



This difficulty is aggravated by the fact that in economics the



full effects of a cause seldom come at once, but often spread



themselves out after it has ceased to exist.



    To begin with, the purchasing power of money is continually



changing, and rendering necessary a correction of the results



obtained on our assumption that money retains a uniform value.



This difficulty can however be overcome fairly well, since we can



ascertain with tolerable accuracy the broader changes in the



purchasing power of money.



    Next come the changes in the general prosperity and in the



total purchasing power at the disposal of the community at large.



The influence of these changes is important, but perhaps less so



than is generally supposed. For when the wave of prosperity is



descending, prices fall, and this increases the resources of



those with fixed incomes at the expense of those whose incomes



depend on the profits of business. The downward fluctuation of



prosperity is popularly measured almost entirely by the



conspicuous losses of this last class; but the statistics of the



total consumption of such commodities as tea, sugar, butter,



wool, etc. prove that the total purchasing power of the people



does not meanwhile fall very fast. Still there is a fall, and the



allowance to be made for it must be ascertained by comparing the



prices and the consumption of as many things as possible.



    Next come the changes due to the gradual growth of population



and wealth. For these an easy numerical correction can be made



when the facts are known.(8*)



    6. Next, allowance must be made for changes in fashion, and



taste and habit,(9*) for the opening out of new uses of a



commodity, for the discovery or improvement or cheapening of



other things that can be applied to the same uses with it. In all



these cases there is great difficulty in allowing for the time



that elapses between the economic cause and its effect. For time



is required to enable a rise in the price of a commodity to exert



its full influence on consumption. Time is required for consumers



to become familiar with substitutes that can be used instead of



it, and perhaps for producers to get into the habit of producing



them in sufficient quantities. Time may be also wanted for the



growth of habits of familiarity with the new commodities and the



discovery of methods of economizing them.



    For instance when wood and charcoal became dear in England,



familiarity with coal as a fuel grew slowly, fireplaces were but



slowly adapted to its use, and an organized traffic in it did not



spring up quickly even to places to which it could be easily



carried by water.. the invention of processes by which it could



be used as a substitute for charcoal in manufacture went even



more slowly, and is indeed hardly yet complete. Again, when in



recent years the price of coal became very high, a great stimulus



was given to the invention of economies in its use, especially in



the production of iron and steam; but few of these inventions



bore much practical fruit till after the high price had passed



away. Again, when a new tramway or suburban railway is opened,



even those who live near the line do not get into the habit of



making the most of its assistance at once; and a good deal more



time elapses before many of those whose places of business are



near one end of the line change their homes so as to live near



the other end. Again, when petroleum first became plentiful few



people were ready to use it freely; gradually petroleum and



petroleum lamps have become familiar to all classes of society:



too much influence would therefore be attributed to the fall in



price which has occurred since then, if it were credited with all



the increase of consumption.



    Another difficulty of the same kind arises from the fact that



there are many purchases which can easily be put off for a short



time, but not for a long time. This is often the case with regard



to clothes and other things which are worn out gradually, and



which can be made to serve a little longer than usual under the



pressure of high prices. For instance, at the beginning of the



cotton famine the recorded consumption of cotton in England was



very small. This was partly because retail dealers reduced their



stock, but chiefly because people generally made shift to do as



long as they could without buying new cotton goods. In 1864



however many found themselves unable to wait longer; and a good



deal more cotton was entered for home consumption in that year,



though the price was then much higher, than in either of the



preceding years. For commodities of this kind then a sudden



scarcity does not immediately raise the price fully up to the



level, which properly corresponds to the reduced supply.



Similarly after the great commercial depression in the United



States in 1873 it was noticed that the boot trade revived before



the general clothing trade; because there is a great deal of



reserve wear in the coats and hats that are thrown aside in



prosperous times as worn out, but not so much in the boots.



    7. The above difficulties are fundamental: but there are



others which do not lie deeper than the more or less inevitable



faults of our statistical returns.



    We desire to obtain, if possible, a series of prices at which



different amounts of a commodity can find purchasers during a



given time in a market. A perfect market is a district, small or



large, in which there are many buyers and many sellers all so



keenly on the alert and so well acquainted with one another's



affairs that the price of a commodity is always practically the



same for the whole of the district. But independently of the fact



that those who buy for their own consumption, and not for the



purposes of trade, are not always on the look out for every



change in the market, there is no means of ascertaining exactly



what prices are paid in many transactions. Again, the



geographical limits of a market are seldom clearly drawn, except



when they are marked out by the sea or by custom-house barriers;



and no country has accurate statistics of commodities produced in



it for home consumption.



    Again, there is generally some ambiguity even in such



statistics as are to be had. They commonly show goods as entered



for consumption as soon as they pass into the hands of dealers;



and consequently an increase of dealers' stocks cannot easily be



distinguished from an increase of consumption. But the two are



governed by different causes. A rise of prices tends to check



consumption; but if the rise is expected to continue, it will



probably, as has already been noticed, lead dealers to increase



their stocks.(10*)



    Next it is difficult to insure that the commodities referred



to are always of the same quality. After a dry summer what wheat



there is, is exceptionally good; and the prices for the next



harvest year appear to be higher than they really are. It is



possible to make allowance for this, particularly now that dry



Californian wheat affords a standard. But it is almost impossible



to allow properly for the changes in quality of many kinds of



manufactured goods. This difficulty occurs even in the case of



such a thing as tea: the substitution in recent years of the



stronger Indian tea for the weaker Chinese tea has made the real



increase of consumption greater than that which is shown by the



statistics.







NOTE ON STATISTICS OF CONSUMPTION







    8. General Statistics of consumption are published by many



Governments with regard to certain classes of commodities. But



partly for the reasons just indicated they are of very little



service in helping us to trace either a causal connection between



variations in prices and variations in the amounts which people



will buy, or in the distribution of different kinds of



consumption among the different classes of the community.



    As regards the first of these objects, viz. the discovery of



the laws connecting variations in consumption consequent on



variations in price, there seems much to be gained by working out



a hint given by Jevons (Theory, pp. 11, 12) with regard to



shopkeepers' books. A shopkeeper, or the manager of a



co-operative store, in the working man's quarter of a



manufacturing town has often the means of ascertaining with



tolerable accuracy the financial position of the great body of



his customers. He can find out how many factories are at work,



and for how many hours in the week, and he can hear about all the



important changes in the rate of wages: in fact he makes it his



business to do so. And as a rule his customers are quick in



finding out changes in the price of things which they commonly



use. He will therefore often find cases in which an increased



consumption of a commodity is brought about by a fall in its



price, the cause acting quickly, and acting alone without any



admixture of disturbing causes. Even where disturbing causes are



present, he will often be able to allow for their influence. For



instance, he will know that as the winter comes on, the prices of



butter and vegetables rise; but the cold weather makes people



desire butter more and vegetables less than before: and therefore



when the prices of both vegetables and butter rise towards the



winter, he will expect a greater falling off of consumption in



the case of vegetables than should properly be attributed to the



rise in price taken alone, but a less falling off in the case of



butter. If however in two neighbouring winters his customers have



been about equally numerous, and in receipt of about the same



rate of wages; and if in the one the price of butter was a good



deal higher than in the other, then a comparison of his books for



the two winters will afford a very accurate indication of the



influence of changes in price on consumption. Shopkeepers who



supply other classes of society must occasionally be in a



position to furnish similar facts relating to the consumption of



their customers.



    If a sufficient number of tables of demand by different



sections of society could be obtained, they would afford the



means of estimating indirectly the variations in total demand



that would result from extreme variations in price, and thus



attaining an end which is inaccessible by any other route. For,



as a general rule, the price of a commodity fluctuates within but



narrow limits; and therefore statistics afford us no direct means



of guessing what the consumption of it would be, if its price



were either fivefold or a fifth part of what it actually is. But



we know that its consumption would be confined almost entirely to



the rich if its price were very high; and that, if its price were



very low, the great body of its consumption would in most cases



be among the working classes. If then the present price is very



high relatively to the middle or to the working classes, we may



be able to infer from the laws of their demand at the present



prices what would be the demand of the rich if the price were so



raised so as to be very high relatively even to their means. On



the other hand, if the present price is moderate relatively to



the means of the rich, we may be able to infer from their demand



what would be the demand of the working classes if the price were



to fall to a level which is moderate relatively to their means.



It is only by thus piecing together fragmentary laws of demand



that we can hope to get any approach to an accurate law relating



to widely different prices. (That is to say, the general demand



curve for a commodity cannot be drawn with confidence except in



the immediate neighbourhood of the current price, until we are



able to piece it together out of the fragmentary demand curves of



different classes of society. Compare the second section of this



Chapter.



     When some progress has been made in reducing to definite law



the demand for commodities that are destined for immediate



consumption, then, but not till then, will there be use in



attempting a similar task with regard to those secondary demands



which are dependent on these -the demands namely for the labour



of artisans and others who take part in the production of things



for sale; and again the demand for machines, factories, railway



material and other instruments of production. The demand for the



work of medical men, of domestic servants and of all those whose



services are rendered direct to the consumer is similar in



character to the demand for commodities for immediate



consumption, and its laws may be investigated in the same manner.



    It is a very important, but also difficult task to ascertain



the proportions in which the different classes of society



distribute their expenditure between necessaries, comforts and



luxuries; between things that provide only present pleasure, and



those that build up stores of physical and moral strength; and



lastly between those which gratify the lower wants and those



which stimulate and educate the higher wants. Several endeavours



have been made in this direction on the Continent during the last



fifty years; and latterly the subject has been investigated with



increasing vigour not only there but also in America and in



England.(11*)







NOTES:







1. We may say that the elasticity of demand is one, if a small



fall in price will cause an equal proportionate increase in the



amount demanded: or as we may say roughly, if a fall of one per



cent. in price will increase the sales by one per cent; that it



is two or a hal, if a fall of one per cent in price makes an



increase of two or one half per cent respectively in the amount



demanded; and so on. (This statement is rough; because 98 does



not bear exactly the same proportion to 100 that 100 does to



102.) The elasticity of demand can be best traced in the demand



curve with the aid of the following rule. Let a straight line



touching the curve at any point P meet Ox in T and Oy in t, then



the measure of the elasticity at the point P is the ratio of PT



to Pt.



     If PT were twice Pt, a fall of 1 per cent in price would



cause an increase of 2 per cent, in the amount demanded; the



elasticity of demand would be two. If PT were one-third of Pt, a



fall of 1 per cent in price would cause an increase of 1/3 per



cent. in the amount demanded; the elasticity of demand would be



one-third; and so on. Another way of looking at the same result



is this: the elasticity at the point P is measured by the ratio



of PT to Pt, that is of MT to MO (PM being drawn perpendicular to



Om); and therefore the elasticity is equal to one when the angle



TPM is equal to the angle OPM; and it always increases when the



angle TPM increases relatively to the angle OPM, and vice versa.



See Note III in the Mathematical Appendix.







2. Let us illustrate by the case of the demand for, say, green



peas in a town in which all vegetables are bought and sold in one



market. Early in the season perhaps 100 lb. a day will be brought



to market and sold at 1s. per lb., later on 500 lb. will be



brought and sold at 6d., later on 1,000 lb. at 4d., later still



5,000 at 2d., and later still 10,000 at 1 1/2d. Thus demand is



represented in fig. (4), an inch along Ox representing 5,000 lb.



and an inch along Oy representing 10d. Then a curve through p1,



p2,..., p5, found as shown above, will be the total demand curve.



But this total demand will be made up of the demands of the rich,



the middle class and the poor. The amounts that they will



severally demand may perhaps be represented by the following



schedules: --







At price in         Number of lbs. bought by



 pence per lb.  rich    middle class   poor      Total







 12             100         0           0            100



  6             300       200           0            500



  4             500       400         100          1,000



  2             800     2,500       1,700          5,000



  1 1/2       1,000     4,000       5,000         10,000







These schedules are translated into curves figs. (5), (6), (7),



showing the demands of the rich, the middle class and the poor



represented on the same scale as fig. (4). Thus for instance AH,



BK and CL each represents a price of 2d. and is.2 inches in



length;  OH =.16 in. representing 800 lb., OK =.5 in.



representing 2,500 lb. and OL =.34 in. representing 1,700 lb.,



while OH + OK + OL = 1 inch, i.e. = Om4 in fig. (4) as they



should do. This may serve as an example of the way in which



several partial demand curves, drawn to the same scale, can be



superimposed horizontally on one another to make the total demand



curve representing the aggregate of the partial demands.







3. We must however remember that the character of the demand



schedule for any commodity depends in a great measure on whether



the prices of its rivals are taken to be fixed or to alter with



it. If we separated the demand for beef from that for mutton, and



supposed the price of mutton to be held fixed while that for beef



was raised, then the demand for beef would become extremely



elastic. For any slight fall in the price of beef would cause it



to be used largely in the place of mutton and thus lead to a very



great increase of its consumption: while on the other hand even a



small rise in price would cause many people to eat mutton to the



almost entire exclusion of beef. But the demand schedule for all



kinds of fresh meat taken together, their prices being supposed



to retain always about the same relation to one another, and to



be not very different from those now prevail ing in England,



shows only a moderate elasticity. And similar remarks apply to



beet-root and cane-sugar. Compare the note on p. 100.







4. See above ch. II, sec. 1. In April 1894, for instance, six



plovers' eggs, the first of the season, were sold in London at



10s. 6d each. The following day there were more, and the price



fell to 5s.; the next day to 3s. each; and a week later to 4d.







5. This estimate is commonly attributed to Gregory King. Its



bearing on the law of demand is admirably discussed by Lord



Lauderdale (Inquiry, pp. 51-3). It is represented in fig. (8) by



the curve DD', the point A corresponding to the ordinary price.



If we take account of the fact that where the price of wheat is



very low, it may be used, as it was for instance in 1834, for



feeding cattle and sheep and pigs and for brewing and distilling,



the lower part of the curve would take a shape somewhat like that



of the dotted line in the figure. And if we assume that when the



price is very high, cheaper substitutes can be got for it, the



upper part of the curve would take a shape similar to that of the



upper dotted line.







6. Chronicon Preciosum (A.D. 1745) says that the price of wheat



in London was as low as 2s. a quarter in 1336: and that at



Leicester it sold at 40s. on a Saturday, and at 14s. on the



following Friday.







7. Thus the general demand of any one person for such a thing as



water is the aggregate (or compound, see V, VI, 3) of his demand



for it for each use; in the same way as the demand of a group of



people of different orders of wealth for a commodity, which is



serviceable in only one use, is the aggregate of the demands of



each member of the group. Again, just as the demand of the rich



for peas is considerable even at a very high price, but loses all



elasticity at a price that is still high relatively to the



consumption of the poor; so the demand of the individual for



water to drink is considerable even at a very high price, but



loses all elasticity at a price that is still high relatively to



his demand for it for the purpose of cleaning up the house. And



as the aggregate of a number of demands on the part of different



classes of people for peas retains elasticity over a larger range



of price than will that of any one individual, so the demand of



an individual for water for many uses retains elasticity over a



larger range of prices than his demand for it for any one use.



Compare an article by J.B. Clark on A Universal Law of Economic



Variation in the Harvard Journal of Economics, Vol. VIII.







8. When a statistical table shows the gradual growth of the



consumption of a commodity over a long series of years, we may



want to compare the percentage by which it increases in different



years. This can be done pretty easily with a little practice. But



when the figures are expressed in the form of a statistical



diagram, it cannot easily be done, without translating the



diagram back into figures; and this is a cause of the disfavour



in which many statisticians hold the graphic method. But by the



knowledge of one simple rule the balance can be turned, so far as



this point goes, in favour of the graphic method. The rule is as



follows: - Let the quantity of a commodity consumed (or of trade



carried, or of tax levied etc.) be measured by horizontal lines



parallel to Ox, fig. (9), while the corresponding years are in



the usual manner ticked off in descending order at equal



distances along Oy. To measure the rate of growth at any point P,



put a ruler to touch the curve at P. Let it meet Oy in t, and let



N be the point on Oy at the same vertical height as P: then the



number of years marked off along Oy by the distance Nt is the



inverse of the fraction by which the amount is increasing



annually. That is, if Nt is 20 years, the amount is increasing at



the rate of 1/20, i.e. of 5 per cent, annually. if Nt is 25



years, the increase is 1/25 or 4 per cent annually; and so on.



See a paper by the present writer in the Jubilee number of the



Journal of the London Statistical Society, June 1885; also Note



IV in the Mathematical Appendix.







9. For illustrations of the influence of fashion see articles by



Miss Foley in the Economic Journal, Vol. III, and Miss Heather



Bigg in the Nineteenth Century, Vol. XXIII.







10. In examining the effects of taxation, it is customary to



compare the amounts entered for consumption just before and just



after the imposition of the tax. But this is untrustworthy. For



dealers anticipating the tax lay in large stocks just before it



is imposed, and need to buy very little for some time afterwards.



And vice versa when a tax is lowered. Again, high taxes lead to



false returns. For instance, the nominal importation of molasses



into Boston increased fifty-fold in consequence of the tax being



lowered by the Rockingham Ministry in 1766, from 6d. to 1d. per



gallon. But this was chiefly due to the fact that with the tax at



1d., it was cheaper to pay the duty than to smuggle.







11. A single table made out by the great statistician Engel for



the consumption of the lower, middle and working classes in



Saxony in 1857, may be quoted here; because it has acted as a



guide and a standard of comparison to later inquiries. It is as



follows:







Proportions of the Expenditure of the Family of:







Items of Expenditure    I.          II          III



1. Food only          62.0%       25.0%        50.0%



2. Clothing           16.0        18.0         18.0



3. Lodging            12.0        12.0         12.0



4. Light and Fuel      5.0         5.0          5.0



5. Education           2.0         3.8          5.5



6. Legal Protection    1.0         2.0          3.0



7. Care of Health      1.0         2.0          3.0



8. Comfort and



    recreation         1.0         2.5          3.5



TOTALS               100.0       100.0        100.0







I. Workmen with an income of 45 l. to 60 l. a Year.



II. Workmen with an income of 90 l. to 120 l. a Year.



III. Workmen with an income of 150 l. to 200 l. a Year.







    Working men's budgets have often been collected and compared.



But like all other figures of the kind they suffer from the facts



that those who will take the trouble to make such returns



voluntarily are not average men, that those who keep careful



accounts are not average men; and that when accounts have to be



supplemented by the memory, the memory is apt to be biassed by



notions as to how the money ought to have been spent, especially



when the accounts are put together specially for another's eye.



This border-ground between the provinces of domestic and public



economy is one in which excellent work may be done by many who



are disinclined for more general and abstract speculations.



    Information bearing on the subject was collected long ago by



Harrison, Petty, Cantillon (whose lost Supplement seems to have



contained some workmen's budgets), Arthur Young, Malthus and



others. Working-men's budgets were collected by Eden at the end



of the last century; and there is much miscellaneous information



on the expenditure of the working classes in subsequent Reports



of Commissions on Poor-relief, Factories, etc. Indeed almost



every year sees some important addition from public or private



sources to our information on these subjects.



    It may be noted that the method of le Play's monumental Les



Ouvriers Europeens is the intensive study of all the details of



the domestic life of a few carefully chosen families. To work it



well requires a rare combination of judgment in selecting cases,



and of insight and sympathy in interpreting them. At its best, it



is the best of all: but in ordinary hands it is likely to suggest



more untrustworthy general conclusions, than those obtained by



the extensive method of collecting more rapidly very numerous



observations, reducing them as far as possible to statistical



form, and obtaining broad averages in which inaccuracies and



idiosyncrasies may be trusted to counteract one another to some



extent.











Chapter 5







Choice between Different Uses of the Same Thing. Immediate and



Deferred Uses.







    1. The primitive housewife finding that she has a limited



number of hanks of yarn from the year's shearing, considers all



the domestic wants for clothing and tries to distribute the yarn



between them in such a way as to contribute as much as possible



to the family wellbeing. She will think she has failed if, when



it is done, she has reason to regret that she did not apply more



to making, say, socks, and less to vests. That would mean that



she had miscalculated the points at which to suspend the making



of socks and vests respectively; that she had gone too far in the



case of vests, and not far enough in that of socks; and that



therefore at the points at which she actually did stop, the



utility of yarn turned into socks was greater than that of yarn



turned into vests. But if, on the other hand, she hit on the



right points to stop at, then she made just so many socks and



vests that she got an equal amount of good out of the last bundle



of yarn that she applied to socks, and the last she applied to



vests. This illustrates a general principle, which may be



expressed thus: --



    If a person has a thing which he can put to several uses, he



will distribute it among these uses in such a way that it has the



same marginal utility in all. For if it had a greater marginal



utility in one use than another, he would gain by taking away



some of it from the second use and applying it to the first.(1*)



    One great disadvantage of a primitive economy, in which there



is but little free exchange, is that a person may easily have so



much of one thing, say wool, that when he has applied it to every



possible use, its marginal utility in each use is low: and at the



same time he may have so little of some other thing, say wood,



that its marginal utility for him is very high. Meanwhile some of



his neighbours may be in great need of wool, and have more wood



than they can turn to good account. If each gives up that which



has for him the lower utility and receives that which has the



higher, each will gain by the exchange. But to make such an



adjustment by barter, would be tedious and difficult.



    The difficulty of barter is indeed not so very great where



there are but a few simple commodities each capable of being



adapted by domestic work to several uses; the weaving wife and



the spinster daughters adjusting rightly the marginal utilities



of the different uses of the wool, while the husband and the sons



do the same for the wood.



    2. But when commodities have become very numerous and highly



specialized, there is an urgent need for the free use of money,



or general purchasing power; for that alone can be applied easily



in an unlimited variety of purchases. And in a money-economy,



good management is shown by so adjusting the margins of suspense



on each line of expenditure that the marginal utility of a



shilling's worth of goods on each line shall be the same. And



this result each one will attain by constantly watching to see



whether there is anything on which he is spending so much that he



would gain by taking a little away from that line of expenditure



and putting it on some other line.



    Thus, for instance, the clerk who is in doubt whether to ride



to town, or to walk and have some little extra indulgence at his



lunch, is weighing against one another the (marginal) utilities



of two different modes of spending his money. And when an



experienced housekeeper urges on a young couple the importance of



keeping accounts carefully., a chief motive of the advice is that



they may avoid spending impulsively a great deal of money on



furniture and other things; for, though some quantity of these is



really needful, yet when bought lavishly they do not give high



(marginal) utilities in proportion to their cost. And when the



young pair look over their year's budget at the end of the year,



and find perhaps that it is necessary to curtail their



expenditure somewhere, they compare the (marginal) utilities of



different items, weighing the loss of utility that would result



from taking away a pound's expenditure here, with that which they



would lose by taking it away there: they strive to adjust their



parings down so that the aggregate loss of utility may be a



minimum, and the aggregate of utility that remains to them may be



a maximum.(2*)



    3. The different uses between which a commodity is



distributed need not all be present uses; some may be present and



some future. A prudent person will endeavour to distribute his



means between all their several uses, present and future, in such



a way that they will have in each the same marginal utility. But



in estimating the present marginal utility of a distant source of



pleasure a twofold allowance must be made; firstly, for its



uncertainty (this is an objective property which all



well-informed persons would estimate in the same way); and



secondly, for the difference in the value to them of a distant as



compared with a present pleasure (this is a subjective property



which different people would estimate in different ways according



to their individual characters, and their circumstances at the



time).



    If people regarded future benefits as equally desirable with



similar benefits at the present time, they would probably



endeavour to distribute their pleasures and other satisfactions



evenly throughout their lives. They would therefore generally be



willing to give up a present pleasure for the sake of an equal



pleasure in the future, provided they could be certain of having



it. But in fact human nature is so constituted that in estimating



the "present value" of a future benefit most people generally



make a second deduction from its future value, in the form of



what we may call a "discount," that increases with the period for



which the benefit is deferred. One will reckon a distant benefit



at nearly the same value which it would have for him if it were



present; while another who has less power of realizing the



future, less patience and self-control, will care comparatively



little for any benefit that is not near at hand. And the same



person will vary in his mood, being at one time impatient, and



greedy for present enjoyment; while at another his mind dwells on



the future, and he is willing to postpone all enjoyments that can



conveniently be made to wait. Sometimes he is in a mood to care



little for anything else: sometimes he is like the children who



pick the plums out of their pudding to eat them at once,



sometimes like those who put them aside to be eaten last. And, in



any case, when calculating the rate at which a future benefit is



discounted, we must be careful to make allowance for the



pleasures of expectation.



    The rates at which different people discount the future



affect not only their tendency to save, as the term is ordinarily



understood, but also their tendency to buy things which will be a



lasting source of pleasure rather than those which give a



stronger but more transient enjoyment; to buy a new coat rather



than to indulge in a drinking bout, or to choose simple furniture



that will wear well, rather than showy furniture that will soon



fall to pieces.



    It is in regard to these things especially that the pleasure



of possession makes itself felt. Many people derive from the mere



feeling of ownership a stronger satisfaction than they derive



from ordinary pleasures in the narrower sense of the term: for



example, the delight in the possession of land will often induce



people to pay for it so high a price that it yields them but a



very poor return on their investment. There is a delight in



ownership for its own sake; and there is a delight in ownership



on account of the distinction it yields. Sometimes the latter is



stronger than the former, sometimes weaker; and perhaps no one



knows himself or other people well enough to be able to draw the



line quite certainly between the two.



    4. As has already been urged, we cannot compare the



quantities of two benefits, which are enjoyed at different times



even by the same person. When a person postpones a



pleasure-giving event he does not postpone the pleasure; but he



gives up a present pleasure and takes in its place another, or an



expectation of getting another at a future date: and we cannot



tell whether he expects the future pleasure to be greater than



the one which he is giving up, unless we know all the



circumstances of the case. And therefore, even though we know the



rate at which he discounts future pleasurable events, such as



spending ? on immediate gratifications, we yet do not know the



rate at which he discounts future pleasures.(3*)



    We can however get an artificial measure of the rate at which



he discounts future benefits by making two assumptions. These



are, firstly, that he expects to be about as rich at the future



date as he is now; and secondly, that his capacity for deriving



benefit from the things which money will buy will on the whole



remain unchanged, though it may have increased in some directions



and diminished in others. On these assumptions, if he is willing,



but only just willing, to spare a pound from his expenditure now



with the certainty of having (for the disposal of himself or his



heirs) a guinea one year hence, we may fairly say that he



discounts future benefits that are perfectly secure (subject only



to the conditions of human mortality) at the rate of five per



cent per annum. And on these assumptions the rate at which he



discounts future (certain) benefits, will be the rate at which he



can discount money in the money market.(4*)



    So far we have considered each pleasure singly; but a great



many of the things which people buy are durable, i.e. are not



consumed in a single use; a durable good, such as a piano, is the



probable source of many pleasures, more or less remote; and its



value to a purchaser is the aggregate of the usance, or worth to



him of all these pleasures, allowance being made for their



uncertainty and for their distance.(5*)







NOTES:







1. Our illustration belongs indeed properly to domestic



production rather than to domestic consumption. But that was



almost inevitable; for there are very few things ready for



immediate consumption which are available for many different



uses. And the doctrine of the distribution of means between



different uses has less important and less interesting



applications in the science of demand than in that of supply. See



e.g. V, III, sec. 3.







2. The working-class budgets which were mentioned in Ch. IV, sec.



8 may render most important services in helping people to



distribute their resources wisely between different uses, so that



the marginal utility for each purpose shall be the same. But the



vital problems of domestic economy relate as much to wise action



as to wise spending. The English and the American housewife make



limited means go a less way towards satisfying wants than the



French housewife does, not because they do not know how to buy,



but because they cannot produce as good finished commodities out



of the raw material of inexpensive joints, vegetables etc., as



she can. Domestic economy is often spoken of as belonging to the



science of consumption: but that is only half true. The greatest



faults in domestic economy, among the sober portion of the



Anglo-Saxon working classes at all events, are faults of



production rather than of consumption.







3. In classifying some pleasures as more urgent than others, it



is often forgotten that the postponement of a pleasurable event



may alter the circumstances under which it occurs, and therefore



alter the character of the pleasure itself. For instance it may



be said that a young man discounts at a very high rate the



pleasure of the Alpine tours which he hopes to be able to afford



himself when he has made his fortune. He would much rather have



them now, partly because they would give him much greater



pleasure now.



    Again, it may happen that the postponement of a pleasurable



event involves an unequal distribution in Time of a certain good,



and that the Law of Diminution of Marginal Utility acts strongly



in the case of this particular good. For instance, it is



sometimes said that the pleasures of eating are specially urgent;



and it is undoubtedly true that if a man goes dinnerless for six



days in the week and eats seven dinners on the seventh, he loses



very much; because when postponing six dinners, he does not



postpone the pleasures of eating six separate dinners, but



substitutes for them the pleasure of one day's excessive eating.



Again, when a person puts away eggs for the winter he does not



expect that they will be better flavoured then than now; he



expects that they will be scarce, and that therefore their



utility will be higher than now. This shows the importance of



drawing a clear distinction between discounting a future



pleasure, and discounting the pleasure derived from the future



enjoyment of a certain amount of a commodity. For in the latter



case we must make separate allowance for differences between the



marginal utilities of the commodity at the two times: but in the



former this has been allowed for once in estimating the amount of



the pleasure; and it must not be allowed for again.







4. It is important to remember that, except on these assumptions



there is no direct connection between the rate of discount on the



loan of money, and the rate at which future pleasures are



discounted. A man may be so impatient of delay that a certain



promise of a pleasure ten years hence will not induce him to give



up one close at hand which he regards as a quarter as great. And



yet if he should fear that ten years hence money may be so scarce



with him (and its marginal utility therefore so high) that



half-a-crown then may give him more pleasure or save him more



pain than a pound now, he will save something for the future even



though he have to hoard it, on the same principle that he might



store eggs for the winter. But we are here straying into



questions that are more closely connected with Supply than with



Demand. We shall have to consider them again from different



points of view in connection with the Accumulation of Wealth, and



later again in connection with the causes that determine the Rate



of Interest.



    We may however consider here how to measure numerically the



present value of a future pleasure, on the supposition that we



know, (i) its amount, (ii) the date at which it will come, if it



comes at all, (iii) the chance that it will come, and (iv) the



rate at which the person in question discounts future pleasures.



    If the probability that a pleasure will be enjoyed is three



to one, so that three chances out of four are in its favour, the



value of its expectation is three-fourths of what it would be if



it were certain: if the probability that it will be enjoyed were



only seven to five, so that only seven chances out of twelve are



in its favour, the value of its expectation is only seven



twelfths of what it would be if the event were certain, and so



on. [This is its actuarial value: but further allowance may have



to be made for the fact that the true value to anyone of an



uncertain gain is generally less than its actuarial value (see



the note on p. 135).] If the anticipated pleasure is both



uncertain and distant, we have a twofold deduction to make from



its full value. We will suppose, for instance, that a person



would give 10s. for a gratification if it were present and



certain, but that it is due a year hence, and the probability of



its happening then is three to one. Suppose also that he



discounts the future at the rate of twenty per cent per annum.



Then the value to him of the anticipation of it is 3/4 x 80/100 x



10s. i.e. 6s. Compare the Introductory chapter of Jevons, Theory



of Practical Economy.







5. Of course this estimate is formed by a rough instinct; and in



any attempt to reduce it to numerical accuracy (see Note V in the



Mathematical Appendix), we must recollect what has been said, in



this and the preceding Section, as to the impossibility of



comparing accurately pleasures or other satisfactions that do not



occur at the same time; and also as to the assumption of



uniformity involved in supposing the discount of future pleasures



to obey the exponential law.







Chapter 6







Value and Utility







    1. We may now turn to consider how far the price which is



actually paid for a thing represents the benefit that arises from



its possession. This is a wide subject on which economic science



has very little to say, but that little is of some importance.



    We have already seen that the price which a person pays for a



thing can never exceed, and seldom comes up to that which he



would be willing to pay rather than go without it: so that the



satisfaction which he gets from its purchase generally exceeds



that which he gives up in paying away its price; and he thus



derives from the purchase a surplus of satisfaction. The excess



of the price which he would be willing to pay rather than go



without the thing, over that which he actually does pay, is the



economic measure of this surplus satisfaction. It may be called



consumer's surplus.



    It is obvious that the consumer's surpluses derived from some



commodities are much greater than from others. There are many



comforts and luxuries of which the prices are very much below



those which many people would pay rather than go entirely without



them; and which therefore afford a very great consumer's surplus.



Good instances are matches, salt, a penny newspaper, or a



postage-stamp.



    This benefit, which he gets from purchasing at a low price



things for which he would rather pay a high price than go without



them, may be called the benefit which he derives from his



opportunities, or from his environment. or, to recur to a word



that was in common use a few generations ago, from his



conjuncture. Our aim in the present chapter is to apply the



notion of consumer's surplus as an aid in estimating roughly some



of the benefits which a person derives from his environment or



his conjuncture.(1*)



    2. In order to give definiteness to our notions, let us



consider the case of tea purchased for domestic consumption. Let



us take the case of a man, who, if the price of tea were 20s. a



pound, would just be induced to buy one pound annually; who would



just be induced to buy two pounds if the price were 14s., three



pounds if the price were 10s., four pounds if the price were 6s.,



five pounds if the price were 4s., six pounds if the price were



3s., and who, the price being actually 2s., does purchase seven



pounds. We have to investigate the consumer's surplus which he



derives from his power of purchasing tea at 2s. a pound.



    The fact that he would just be induced to purchase one pound



if the price were 20s., proves that the total enjoyment or



satisfaction which he derives from that pound is as great as that



which he could obtain by spending 20s. on other things. When the



price falls to 14s., he could, if he chose, continue to buy only



one pound. He would then get for 14s. what was worth to him at



least 20s.; and he will obtain a surplus satisfaction worth to



him at least 6s., or in other words a consumer' s surplus of at



least 6s. But in fact he buys a second pound of his own free



choice, thus showing that he regards it as worth to him at least



14s., and that this represents the additional utility of the



second pound to him. He obtains for 28s. what is worth to him at



least 20s. + 14s.; i.e. 34s. His surplus satisfaction is at all



events not diminished by buying it, but remains worth at least



6s. to him. The total utility of the two pounds is worth at least



34s., his consumer's surplus is at least 6s.(2*) The fact that



each additional purchase reacts upon the utility of the purchases



which he had previously decided to make has already been allowed



for in making out the schedule and must not be counted a second



time.



    When the price falls to 10s., he might, if he chose, continue



to buy only two pounds; and obtain for 20s. what was worth to him



at least 34s., and derive a surplus satisfaction worth at least



14s. But in fact he prefers to buy a third pound: and as he does



this freely, we know that he does not diminish his surplus



satisfaction by doing it. He now gets for 30s. three pounds; of



which the first is worth to him at least 20s., the second at



least 14s., and the third at least 10s. The total utility of the



three is worth at least 44s., his consumer's surplus is at least



14s., and so on.



    When at last the price has fallen to 2s. he buys seven



pounds, which are severally worth to him not less than 20, 14,



10, 6, 4, 3, and 2s. or 59s. in all. This sum measures their



total utility to him, and his consumer's surplus is (at least)



the excess of this sum over the 14s. he actually does pay for



them, i.e. 45s. This is the excess value of the satisfaction he



gets from buying the tea over that which he could have got by



spending the 14s. in extending a little his purchase of other



commodities, of which he had just not thought it worth while to



buy more at their current prices; and any further purchases of



which at those prices would not yield him any consumer's surplus.



In other words, he derives this 45s. worth of surplus enjoyment



from his conjuncture, from the adaptation of the environment to



his wants in the particular matter of tea. If that adaptation



ceased, and tea could not be had at any price, he would have



incurred a loss of satisfaction at least equal to that which he



could have got by spending 45s. more on extra supplies of things



that were worth to him only just what he paid for them.(3*)



    3. In the same way if we were to neglect for the moment the



fact that the same sum of money represents different amounts of



pleasure to different people, we might measure the surplus



satisfaction which the sale of tea affords, say, in the London



market, by the aggregate of the sums by which the prices shown in



a complete list of demand prices for tea exceeds its selling



price.(4*)



    This analysis, with its new names and elaborate machinery,



appears at first sight laboured and unreal. On closer study it



will be found to introduce no new difficulties and to make no new



assumptions; but only to bring to light difficulties and



assumptions that are latent in the common language of the



market-place. For in this, as in other cases, the apparent



simplicity of popular phrases veils a real complexity, and it is



the duty of science to bring out that latent complexity; to face



it; and to reduce it as far as possible: so that in later stages



we may handle firmly difficulties that could not be grasped with



a good grip by the vague thought and language of ordinary life.



    It is a common saying in ordinary life that the real worth of



things to a man is not gauged by the price he pays for them:



that, though he spends for instance much more on tea than on



salt, yet salt is of greater real worth to him; and that this



would be clearly seen if he were entirely deprived of it. This



line of argument is but thrown into precise technical form when



it is said that we cannot trust the marginal utility of a



commodity to indicate its total utility. If some shipwrecked men,



expecting to wait a year before they were rescued, had a few



pounds of tea and the same number of pounds of salt to divide



between them, the salt would be the more highly prized; because



the marginal utility of an ounce of salt, when a person expects



to get only a few of them in the year is greater than that of tea



under like circumstances. But, under ordinary circumstances, the



price of salt being low, every one buys so much of it that an



additional pound would bring him little additional satisfaction:



the total utility of salt to him is very great indeed, and yet



its marginal utility is low. On the other hand, since tea is



costly, most people use less of it and let the water stay on it



rather longer than they would, if it could be got at nearly as



low a price as salt can. Their desire for it is far from being



satiated: its marginal utility remains high, and they may be



willing to pay as much for an additional ounce of it as they



would for an additional pound of salt. The common saying of



ordinary life with which we began suggests all this: but not in



an exact and definite form, such as is needed for a statement



which will often be applied in later work. The use of technical



terms at starting adds nothing to knowledge: but it puts familiar



knowledge in a firm compact shape, ready to serve as the basis



for further study.(5*)



    Or the real worth of a thing might be discussed with:



reference not to a single person but to people in general; and



thus it would naturally be assumed that a shilling's worth of



gratification to one Englishman might be taken as equivalent with



a shilling's worth to another, " to start with," and " until



cause to the contrary were shown." But everyone would know that



this was a reasonable course only on the supposition that the



consumers of tea and those of salt belonged to the same classes



of people; and included people of every variety of



temperament.(6*)



    This involves the consideration that a pound's worth of



satisfaction to an ordinary poor man is a much greater thing than



a pound's worth of satisfaction to an ordinary rich man: and if



instead of comparing tea and salt, which are both used largely by



all classes, we compared either of them with champagne or



pineapples, the correction to be made on this account would be



more than important: it would change the whole character of the



estimate. In earlier generations many statesmen, and even some



economists, neglected to make adequate allowance for



considerations of this class, especially when constructing



schemes of taxation; and their words or deeds seemed to imply a



want of sympathy with the sufferings of the poor; though more



often they were due simply to want of thought.



    On the whole however it happens that by far the greater



number of the events with which economics deals, affect in about



equal proportions all the different classes of society; so that



if the money measures of the happiness caused by two events are



equal, there is not in general any very great difference between



the amounts of the happiness in the two cases. And it is on



account of this fact that the exact measurement of the consumers'



surplus in a market has already much theoretical interest, and



may become of high practical importance.



    It will be noted however that the demand prices of each



commodity, on which our estimates of its total utility and



consumers, surplus are based, assume that other things remain



equal, while its price rises to scarcity value: and when the



total utilities of two commodities which contribute to the same



purpose are calculated on this plan, we cannot say that the total



utility of the two together is equal to the sum of the total



utilities of each separately.(7*)



    4. The substance of our argument would not be affected if we



took account of the fact that, the more a person spends on



anything the less power he retains of purchasing more of it or of



other things, and the greater is the value of money to him (in



the technical language every fresh expenditure increases the



marginal value of money to him). But though its substance would



not be altered, its form would be made more intricate without any



corresponding gain; for there are very few practical problems, in



which the corrections to be made under this head would be of any



importance.(8*)



    There are however some exceptions. For instance, as Sir R.



Giffen has pointed out, a rise in the price of bread makes so



large a drain on the resources of the poorer labouring families



and raises so much the marginal utility of money to them, that



they are forced to curtail their consumption of meat and the more



expensive farinaceous foods: and, bread being still the cheapest



food which they can get and will take, they consume more, and not



less of it. But such cases are rare; when they are met with, each



must be treated on its own merits.



    It has already been remarked that we cannot guess at all



accurately how much of anything people would buy at prices very



different from those which they are accustomed to pay for it: or



in other words, what the demand prices for it would be for



amounts very different from those which are commonly sold. Our



list of demand prices is therefore highly conjectural except in



the neighbourhood of the customary price; and the best estimates



we can form of the whole amount of the utility of anything are



liable to large error. But this difficulty is not important



practically. For the chief applications of the doctrine of



consumers' surplus are concerned with such changes in it as would



accompany changes in the price of the commodity in question in



the neighbourhood of the customary price: that is, they require



us to use only that information with which we are fairly well



supplied. These remarks apply with special force to



necessaries.(9*)



    5. There remains another class of considerations which are



apt to be overlooked in estimating the dependence of wellbeing



upon material wealth. Not only does a person's happiness often



depend more on his own physical, mental and moral health than on



his external conditions: but even among these conditions many



that are of chief importance for his real happiness are apt to be



omitted from an inventory of his wealth. Some are free gifts of



nature; and these might indeed be neglected without great harm if



they were always the same for everybody; but in fact they vary



much from place to place. More of them however are elements of



collective wealth which are often omitted from the reckoning of



individual wealth; but which become important when we compare



different parts of the modern civilized world, and even more



important when we compare our own age with earlier times.



    Collective action for the purposes of securing common



wellbeing, as for instance in lighting and watering the streets,



will occupy us much towards the end of our inquiries.



Co-operative associations for the purchase of things for personal



consumption have made more progress in England than elsewhere:



but those for purchasing the things wanted for trade purposes by



farmers and others, have until lately been backward in England.



Both kinds are sometimes described as Consumers' associations;



but they are really associations for economizing effort in



certain branches of business, and belong to the subject of



Production rather than Consumption.



    6. When we speak of the dependence of wellbeing on material



wealth, we refer to the flow or stream of wellbeing as measured



by the flow or stream of incoming wealth an d the consequent



power of using and consuming it. A person's stock of wealth



yields by its usance and in other ways an income of happiness,



among which of course are to be counted the pleasures of



possession: but there is little direct connection between the



aggregate amount of that stock and his aggregate happiness. And



it is for that reason that we have throughout this and preceding



chapters spoken of the rich, the middle classes and the poor as



having respectively large, medium and small incomes - not



possessions.(10*)



    In accordance with a suggestion made by Daniel Bernoulli, we



may regard the satisfaction which a person derives from his



income as commencing when he has enough to support life, and



afterwards as increasing by equal amounts with every equal



successive percentage that is added to his income; and vice versa



for loss of income.(11*)



    But after a time new riches often lose a great part of their



charms. Partly this is the result of familiarity; which makes



people cease to derive much pleasure from accustomed comforts and



luxuries, though they suffer greater pain from their loss. Partly



it is due to the fact that with increased riches there often



comes either the weariness of age, or at least an increase of



nervous strain; and perhaps even habits of living that lower



physical vitality, and diminish the capacity for pleasure.



    In every civilized country there have been some followers of



the Buddhist doctrine that a placid serenity is the highest ideal



of life; that it is the part of the wise man to root out of his



nature as many wants and desires as he can; that real riches



consist not in the abundance of goods but in the paucity of



wants. At the other extreme are those who maintain that the



growth of new wants and desires is always beneficial because it



stimulates people to increased exertions. They seem to have made



the mistake, as Herbert Spencer says, of supposing that life is



for working, instead of working for life.(12*)



    The truth seems to be that as human nature is constituted,



man rapidly degenerates unless he has some hard work to do, some



difficulties to overcome; and that some strenuous exertion is



necessary for physical and moral health. The fulness of life lies



in the development and activity of as many and as high faculties



as possible. There is intense pleasure in the ardent pursuit of



any aim, whether it be success in business, the advancement of



art and science, or the improvement of the condition of one's



fellow-beings. The highest constructive work of all kinds must



often alternate between periods of over-strain and periods of



lassitude and stagnation; but for ordinary people, for those who



have no strong ambitions, whether of a lower or a higher kind, a



moderate income earned by moderate and fairly steady work offers



the best opportunity for the growth of those habits of body,



mind, and spirit in which alone there is true happiness.



    There is some misuse of wealth in all ranks of society. And



though, speaking generally, we may say that every increase in the



wealth of the working classes adds to the fulness and nobility of



human life because it is used chiefly in the satisfaction of real



wants; yet even among the artisans in England, and perhaps still



more in new countries, there are signs of the growth of that



unwholesome desire for wealth as a means of display which has



been the chief bane of the well-to-do classes in every civilized



country. Laws against luxury have been futile; but it would be a



gain if the moral sentiment of the community could induce people



to avoid all sorts of display of individual wealth. There are



indeed true and worthy pleasures to be got from wisely ordered



magnificence: but they are at their best when free from any taint



of personal vanity on the one side and envy on the other; as they



are when they centre round public buildings, public parks, public



collections of the fine arts, and public games and amusements. So



long as wealth is applied to provide for every family the



necessaries of life and culture, and an abundance of the higher



forms of enjoyment for collective use, so long the pursuit of



wealth is a noble aim; and the pleasures which it brings are



likely to increase with the growth of those higher activities



which it is used to promote.



    When the necessaries of life are once provided, everyone



should seek to increase the beauty of things in his possession



rather than their number or their magnificence. An improvement in



the artistic character of furniture and clothing trains the



higher faculties of those who make them, and is a source of



growing happiness to those who use them. But if instead of



seeking for a higher standard of beauty, we spend our growing



resources on increasing the complexity and intricacy of our



domestic goods, we gain thereby no true benefit, no lasting



happiness. The world would go much better if everyone would buy



fewer and simpler things, and would take trouble in selecting



them for their real beauty; being careful of course to get good



value in return for his outlay, but preferring to buy a few



things made well by highly paid labour rather than many made



badly by low paid labour.



    But we are exceeding the proper scope of the present Book;



the discussion of the influence on general wellbeing which is



exerted by the mode in which each individual spends his income is



one of the more important of those applications of economic



science to the art of living.







NOTES:







1. This term is a familiar one in German economics, and meets a



need which is much felt in English economics. For "opportunity"



and "environment," the only available substitutes for it, are



sometimes rather misleading. By Konjunktur, says Wagner



(Grundlegung, Ed. III, p. 387), "we understand the sum total of



the technical, economic, social and legal conditions; which, in a



mode of national life (Volkswirtschaft) resting upon division of



labour and private property,especially private property in land



and other material means of production determine the demand for



and supply of goods, and therefore their exchange value: this



determination being as a rule, or at least in the main,



independent of the will of the owner, of his activity and his



remissness."







2. Some further explanations may be given of this statement;



though in fact they do little more than repeat in other words



what has already been said. The significance of the condition in



the text that he buys the second pound of his own free choice is



shown by the consideration that if the price of 14s. had been



offered to him on the condition that he took two pounds, he would



then have to elect between taking one pound for 20s. or two



pounds for 28s. : and then his taking two pounds would not have



proved that he thought the second pound worth more than 8s. to



him. But as it is, he takes a second pound paying 14s.



unconditionally for it; and that proves that it is worth at least



14s. to him. (If he can get buns at a penny each, but seven for



sixpence; and he elects to buy seven, we know that he is willing



to give up his sixth penny for the sake of the sixth and the



seventh buns: but we cannot tell how much he would pay rather



than go without the seventh bun only.) It is sometimes objected



that as he increases his purchases, the urgency of his need for



his earlier purchases is diminished, and their utility falls;



therefore we ought to continually redraw the earlier parts of our



list of demand prices at a lower level, as we pass along it



towards lower prices (i.e. to redraw at a lower level our demand



curve as we pass along it to the right). But this misconceives



the plan on which the list of prices is made out. The objection



would have been valid, if the demand price set against each



number of pounds of tea represented the average utility of that



number. For it is true that, if he would pay just 20s. for one



pound, and just 14s. for a second, then he would pay just 34s.



for the two; i.e. 17s. each on the average. And if our list had



had reference to the average prices he would pay, and had set



17s. against the second pound; then no doubt we should have had



to redraw the list as we passed on. For when he has bought a



third pound the average utility to him of each of the three will



be less than that of 17s.; being in fact 14s. 8d. if, as we go on



to assume, he would pay just 10s. for a third pound. But this



difficulty is entirely avoided on the plan of making out demand



prices which is here adopted; according to which his second pound



is credited, not with the 17s. which represents the average value



per pound of the two pounds; but with the 14s., which represents



the additional utility which a second pound has for him. For that



remains unchanged when he has bought a third pound, of which the



additional utility is measured by 10s.



    The first pound was probably worth to him more than 20s. All



that we know is that it was not worth less to him. He probably



got some small surplus even on that. Again, the second pound was



probably worth more than 14s. to him. All that we know is that it



was worth at least 14s. and not worth 20s. to him. He would get



therefore at this stage a surplus satisfaction of at least 6s.,



probably a little more. A ragged edge of this kind, as



mathematicians are aware, always exists when we watch the effects



of considerable changes, as that from 20s. to 14s. a pound. If we



had begun with a very high price, had descended by practically



infinitesimal changes of a farthing per pound, and watched



infinitesimal variations in his consumption of a small fraction



of a pound at a time, this ragged edge would have disappeared.







3. Prof. Nicholson (Principles of Political Economy, Vol. I and



Economic Journal, Vol. IV) has raised objections to the notion of



consumers' surplus, which have been answered by Prof. Edgeworth



in the same Journal. Prof. Nicholson says: - "Of what avail is it



to say that the utility of an income of (say) ?00 a year is



worth (say) ?000 a year?" There would be no avail in saying



that. But there might be use, when comparing life in Central



Africa with life in England, in saying that, though the things



which money will buy in Central Africa may on the average be as



cheap there as here, yet there are so many things which cannot be



bought there at all, that a person with a thousand a year there



is not so well off as a person with three or four hundred a year



here. If a man pays 1d. toll on a bridge, which saves him an



additional drive that would cost a shilling, we do not say that



the penny is worth a shilling, but that the penny together with



the advantage offered him by the bridge (the part it plays in his



conjuncture) is worth a shilling for that day. Were the bridge



swept away on a day on which he needed it, he would be in at



least as bad a position as if he had been deprived of eleven



pence.







4. Let us then consider the demand curve DD' for tea in any large



market. Let OH be the amount which is sold there at the price HA



annually, a year being taken as our unit of time. Taking any



point M in OH let us draw MP vertically upwards to meet the curve



in P and cut a horizontal line through A in R. We will suppose



the several lb. numbered in the order of the eagerness of the



several purchasers : the eagerness of the purchaser of any lb.



being measured by the price he is just willing to pay for that



lb. The figure informs us that OM can be sold at the price PM;



but that at any higher price not quite so many lbs. can be sold.



There must be then some individual who will buy more at the price



PM, than he will at any higher price; and we are to regard the



OMth lb. as sold to this individual. Suppose for instance that PM



represents 4s., and that OM represents a million lbs. The



purchaser described in the text is just willing to buy his fifth



lb. of tea at the price 4s., and the OMth or millionth lb. may be



said to be sold to him. If AH and therefore RM represent 2s., the



consumers' surplus derived from the OMth lb. is the excess of PM



or 4s. which the purchaser of that lb. would have been willing to



pay for it over RM the 2s. which he actually does pay for it. Let



us suppose that a very thin vertical parallelogram is drawn of



which the height is PM and of which the base is the distance



along Ox that measures the single unit or lb. of tea. It will be



convenient henceforward to regard price as measured not by a



mathematical straight line without thickness, as PM; but by a



very thin parallelogram, or as it may be called a thick straight



line, of which the breadth is in every case equal to the distance



along Ox which measures a unit or lb. of tea. Thus we should say



that the total satisfaction derived from the OMth lb. of tea is



represented (or, on the assumption made in the last paragraph of



the text is measured) by the thick straight line MP; that the



price paid for this lb. is represented by the thick straight line



MR and the consumers' surplus derived from this lb. by the thick



straight line RP. Now let us suppose that such thin



parallelograms, or thick straight lines, are drawn from all



positions of M between O and H, one for each lb. of tea. The



thick straight lines thus drawn, as MP is, from Ox up to the



demand curve will each represent the aggregate of the



satisfaction derived from a lb. of tea; and taken together thus



occupy and exactly fill up the whole area DOHA. Therefore we may



say that the area DOHA represents the aggregate of the



satisfaction derived from the consumption of tea. Again, each of



the straight lines drawn, as MR is, from Ox upwards as far as AC



represents the price that actually is paid for a lb. of tea.



These straight lines together make up the area COHA; and



therefore this area represents the total price paid for tea.



Finally each of the straight lines drawn as RP is from AC upwards



as far as the demand curve, represents the consumers' surplus



derived from the corresponding lb. of tea. These straight lines



together make up the area DCA; and therefore this area represents



the total consumers' surplus that is derived from tea when the



price is AH. But it must be repeated that this geometrical



measurement is only an aggregate of the measures of benefits



which are not all measured on the same scale except on the



assumption just made in the text. Unless that assumption is made



the area only represents an aggregate of satisfactions, the



several amounts of which are not exactly measured. On that



assumption only, its area measures the volume of the total net



satisfaction derived from the tea by its various purchasers.







5. Harris On Coins 1757, says "Things in general are valued, not



according to their real uses in supplying the necessities of men;



but rather in proportion to the land, labour and skill that are



requisite to produce them. It is according to this proportion



nearly, that things or commodities are exchanged one for another;



and it is by the said scale, that the intrinsic values of most



things are chiefly estimated. Water is of great use, and yet



ordinarily of little or no value; because in most places, water



flows spontaneously in such great plenty, as not to be withheld



within the limits of private property; but all may have enough,



without other expense than that of bringing or conducting it,



when the case so requires. On the other hand, diamonds being very



scarce, have upon that account a great value, though they are but



little use."







6. There might conceivably be persons of high sensibility who



would suffer specially from the want of either salt or tea: or



who were generally sensitive, and would suffer more from the loss



of a certain part of their income than others in the same station



of life. But it would be assumed that such differences between



individuals might be neglected, since we were considering in



either case the average of large numbers of people; though of



course it might be necessary to consider whether there were some



special reason for believing, say, that those who laid most store



by tea were a specially sensitive class of people. If it could,



then a separaTe allowance for this would have to be made before



applying the results of economic analysis to practical problems



of ethics or politics.







7. Some ambiguous phrases in earlier editions appear to have



suggested to some readers the opposite opinion. But the task of



adding together the total utilities of all commodities, so as to



obtain the aggregate of the total utility of all wealth, is



beyond the range of any but the most elaborate mathematical



formulae. An attempt to treat it by them some years ago convinced



the present writer that even if the task be theoretically



feasible, the result would be encumbered by so many hypotheses as



to be practically useless.



    Attention has already (pp. 100, 105) been called to the fact



that for some purposes such things as tea and coffee must be



grouped together as one commodity: and it is obvious that, if tea



were inaccessible, people would increase their consumption of



coffee, and vice versa. The loss that people would suffer from



being deprived both of tea and coffee would be greater than the



sum of their losses from being deprived of either alone: and



therefore the total utility of tea and coffee is greater than The



sum of the total utility of tea calculated on the supposition



that people can have recourse to coffee, and that of coffee



calculated on a like supposition as to tea. This difficulty can



be theoretically evaded by grouping the two "rival" commodities



together under a common demand schedule. On the other hand, if we



have calculated the total utility of fuel with reference to the



fact that without it we could not obtain hot water to obtain the



beverage tea from tea leaves, we should count something twice



over if we added to that utility the total utility of tea leaves,



reckoned on a similar plan. Again the total utility of



agricultural produce includes that of ploughs; and the two may



not be added together; though the total utility of ploughs may be



discussed in connection with one problem, and that of wheat in



connection with another. Other aspects of these two difficulties



are examined in V, VI.



    Prof. Patten has insisted on the latter of them in some able



and suggestive writings. But his attempt to express the aggregate



utility of all forms of wealth seems to overlook many



difficulties.







8. In mathematical language the neglected elements would



generally belong to the second order of small quantities; and the



legitimacy of the familiar scientific method by which they are



neglected would have seemed beyond question, had not Prof.



Nicholson challenged it. A short reply to him has been given by



Prof. Edgeworth in the Economic Journal for March 1894; and a



fuller reply by Prof. Barone in the Giornale degli Economisti for



Sept. 1894; of which some account is given by Mr Sanger in the



Economic Journal for March 1995.



    As is indicated in Note VI in the Mathematical Appendix,



formal account could be taken of changes in the marginal utility



of money, if it were desired to do so. If we attempted to add



together the total utilities of all commodities, we should be



bound to do so: that task is however impracticable.







9. The notion of consumers' surplus may help us a little now;



and, when our statistical knowledge is further advanced, it may



help us a great deal to decide how much injury would be done to



the public by an additional tax of 6d. a pound on tea, or by an



addition of ten per cent. to the freight charges of a railway:



and the value of the notion is but little diminished by the fact



that it would not help us much to estimate the loss that would be



caused by a tax of 30s. a pound on tea, or a tenfold rise in



freight charges.



    Reverting to our last diagram, we may express this by saying



that, if A is the point on the curve corresponding to the amount



that is wont to be sold in the market, data can be obtained



sufficient for drawing the curve with tolerable correctness for



some distance on either side of A; though the curve can seldom be



drawn with any approach to accuracy right up to D. But this is



practically unimportant, because in the chief practical



applications of the theory of value we should seldom make any use



of a knowledge of the whole shape of the demand curve if we had



it. We need just what we can get, that is, a fairly correct



knowledge of its shape in the neighbourhood of A. We seldom



require to ascertain the total area DCA; it is sufficient for



most of our purposes to know the changes in this area that would



be occasioned by moving A through small distances along the curve



in either direction. Nevertheless it will save trouble to assume



provisionally, as in pure theory we are at liberty to do, that



the curve is completely drawn.



    There is however a special difficulty in estimating the whole



of the utility of commodities some supply of which is necessary



for life. If any attempt is made to do it, the best plan is



perhaps to take that necessary supply for granted, and estimate



the total utility only of that part of the commodity which is in



excess of this amount. But we must recollect that the desire for



anything is much dependent on the difficulty of getting



substitutes for it. (See Note VI in the Mathematical Appendix.)







10. See Note VII in the Mathematical Appendix.







11. That is to say, if ?0 represent necessaries, a person's



satisfaction from his income will begin at that point; and when



it has reached ?0, an additional ? will add a tenth to the ?0



which represents its happiness-yielding power. But if his income



were ?00, that is ?0 above the level of necessaries, an



additional ? would be required to add as much to his happiness



as ? if his income were ?0: while if his income were ?0,000,



an additional ?000 would be needed to produce an equal effect



(compare Note VIII in the Mathematical Appendix). Of course such



estimates are very much at random, and unable to adapt themselves



to the varying circumstances of individual life. As we shall see



later, the systems of taxation which are now most widely



prevalent follow generally on the lines of Bernoulli's



suggestion. Earlier systems took from the poor very much more



than would be in accordance with that plan; while the systems of



graduated taxation, which are being foreshadowed in several



countries, are in some measure based on the assumption that the



addition of one per cent to a very large income adds less to the



wellbeing of its owner than an addition of one per cent to



smaller incomes would, even after Bernoulli's correction for



necessaries has been made.



    It may be mentioned in passing that from the general law that



the utility to anyone of an additional ? diminishes with the



number of pounds he already has, there follow two important



practical principles. The first is that gambling involves an



economic loss, even when conducted on perfectly fair and even



terms. For instance, a man who having ?00 makes a fair even bet



of ?00, has now an expectation of happiness equal to half that



derived from ?00, and half that derived from ?00; and this is



less than the certain expectation of the happiness derived from



?00, because by hypothesis the difference between the happiness



got from ?00 and ?00 is greater than the difference between the



happiness got from ?00 and ?00. (Compare Note IX in the



Mathematical Appendix and Jevons, l.c. Ch. IV) The second



principle, the direct converse of the first, is that a



theoretically fair insurance against risks is always an economic



gain. But of course insurance office, after calculating what is a



theoretically fair premium, every has to share in addition to it



enough to pay profits on its own capital, and to cover its own



expenses of working, among which are often to be reckoned very



heavy items for advertising and for losses by fraud. The question



whether it is advisable to pay the premium which insurance



offices practically do charge, is one that must be decided for



each case on its own merits.







12. See his lecture on The Gospel of Relaxation.

















The Principles of Economics





by Alfred Marshall











Book II







Some Fundamental Notions











Chapter 1







Introductory







    1. We have seen that economics is, on the one side, a Science



of Wealth; and, on the other, that part of the Social Science of



man's action in society, which deals with his Efforts to satisfy



his Wants, in so far as the efforts and wants are capable of



being measured in terms of wealth, or its general representative,



i.e. money. We shall be occupied during the greater part of this



volume with these wants and efforts; and with the causes by which



the prices that measure the wants are brought into equilibrium



with those that measure the efforts. For this purpose we shall



have to study in Book III wealth in relation to the diversity of



man's wants, which it has to satisfy; and in Book IV wealth in



relation to the diversity of man's efforts by which it is



produced.



    But in the present Book, we have to inquire which of all the



things that are the result of man's efforts, and are capable of



satisfying man's wants, are to be counted as Wealth; and into



what groups or classes these are to be divided. For there is a



compact group of terms connected with Wealth itself, and with



Capital, the study of each of which throws light on the others;



while the study of the whole together is a direct continuation,



and in some respects a completion, of that inquiry as to the



scope and methods of economics on which we have just been



engaged. And, therefore, instead of taking what may seem the more



natural course of starting with an analysis of wants, and of



wealth in direct relation to them, it seems on the whole best to



deal with this group of terms at once.



    In doing this we shall of course have to take some account of



the variety of wants and efforts; but we shall not want to assume



anything that is not obvious and a matter of common knowledge.



The real difficulty of our task lies in another direction; being



the result of the need under which economics, alone among



sciences, lies of making shift with a few terms in common use to



express a great number of subtle distinctions.



    2. As Mill says:(1*) - "The ends of scientific classification



are best answered when the obj ects are formed into groups



respecting which a greater number of general propositions can be



made, and those propositions more important, than those which



could be made respecting any other groups into which the same



things could be distributed." But we meet at starting with the



difficulty that those propositions which are the most important



in one stage of economic development, are not unlikely to be



among the least important in another, if indeed they apply at



all.



    In this matter economists have much to learn from the recent



experiences of biology: and Darwin's profound discussion of the



question(2*) throws a strong light on the difficulties before us.



He points out that those parts of the structure which determine



the habits of life and the general place of each being in the



economy of nature, are as a rule not those which throw most light



on its origin, but those which throw least. The qualities which a



breeder or a gardener notices as eminently adapted to enable an



animal or a plant to thrive in its environment, are for that very



reason likely to have been developed in comparatively recent



times. And in like manner those properties of an economic



institution which play the most important part in fitting it for



the work which it has to do now, are for that very reason likely



to be in a great measure of recent growth.



    Instances are found in many of the relations between employer



and employed, between middleman and producer, between bankers and



their two classes of clients, those from whom they borrow and



those to whom they lend. The substitution of the term "interest"



for "usury" corresponds to a general change in the character of



loans, which has given an entirely new key-note to our analysis



and classification of the different elements into which the cost



of production of a commodity may be resolved. Again, the general



scheme of division of labour into skilled and unskilled is



undergoing a gradual change; the scope of the term "rent" is



being broadened in some directions and narrowed in others; and so



on.



    But on the other hand we must keep constantly in mind the



history of the terms which we use. For, to begin with, this



history is important for its own sake; and because it throws side



lights on the history of the economic development of society. And



further, even if the sole purpose of our study of economics were



to obtain knowledge that would guide us in the attainment of



immediate practical ends, we should yet be bound to keep our use



of terms as much as possible in harmony with the traditions of



the past; in order that we might be quick to perceive the



indirect hints and the subtle and subdued warnings, which the



experiences of our ancestors offer for our instruction.



    3. Our task is difficult. In physical sciences indeed,



whenever it is seen that a group of things have a certain set of



qualities in common, and will often be spoken of together, they



are formed into a class with a special name; and as soon as a new



notion emerges, a new technical term is invented to represent it.



But economics cannot venture to follow this example. Its



reasonings must be expressed in language that is intelligible to



the general public; it must therefore endeavour to conform itself



to the familiar terms of everyday life, and so far as possible



must use them as they are commonly used.



    In common use almost every word has many shades of meaning,



and therefore needs to be interpreted by the context. And, as



Bagehot has pointed out, even the most formal writers on economic



science are compelled to follow this course; for otherwise they



would not have enough words at their disposal. But unfortunately



they do not always avow that they are taking this freedom;



sometimes perhaps they are scarcely even aware of the fact



themselves. The bold and rigid definitions, with which their



expositions of the science begin, lull the reader into a false



security. Not being warned that he must often look to the context



for a special interpretation clause, he ascribes to what he reads



a meaning different from that which the writers had in their own



minds; and perhaps misinterprets them and accuses them of folly



of which they had not been guilty.(3*)



    Again, most of the chief distinctions marked by economic



terms are differences not of kind but of degree. At first sight



they appear to be differences of kind, and to have sharp outlines



which can be clearly marked out; but a more careful study has



shown that there is no real breach of continuity. It is a



remarkable fact that the progress of economics has discovered



hardly any new real differences in kind, while it is continually



resolving apparent differences in kind into differences in



degree. We shall meet with many instances of the evil that may be



done by attempting to draw broad, hard and fast lines of



division, and to formulate definite propositions with regard to



differences between things which nature has not separated by any



such lines.



    4. We must then analyze carefully the real characteristics of



the various things with which we have to deal; and we shall thus



generally find that there is some use of each term which has



distinctly greater claims than any other to be called its leading



use, on the ground that it represents a distinction that is more



important for the purposes of modern science than any other that



is in harmony with ordinary usage. This may be laid down as the



meaning to be given to the term whenever nothing to the contrary



is stated or implied by the context. When the term is wanted to



be used in any other sense, whether broader or narrower, the



change must be indicated.



    Even among the most careful thinkers there will always remain



differences of opinion as to the exact places in which some at



least of the lines of definition should be drawn. The questions



at issue must in general be solved by judgments as to the



practical convenience of different courses; and such judgments



cannot always be established or overthrown by scientific



reasoning: there must remain a margin of debatable ground. But



there is no such margin in the analysis itself: if two people



differ with regard to that, they cannot both be right. And the



progress of the science may be expected gradually to establish



this analysis on an impregnable basis.(4*)







NOTES:







1. Logic, Bk. IV, ch. VII, Par. 2.







2. Origin of Species, ch. XIV.







3. We ought "to write more as we do in common life, where the



context is a sort of unexpressed 'interpretation clause'; only as



in Political Economy we have more difficult things to speak of



than in ordinary conversation, we must take more care, give more



warning of any change; and at times write out 'the interpretation



clause' for that page or discussion lest there should be any



mistake. I know that this is difficult and delicate work; and all



that I have to say in defence of it is that in practice it is



safer than the competing plan of inflexible definitions. Any one



who tries to express various meanings on complex things with a



scanty vocabulary of fastened senses, will find that his style



grows cumbrous without being accurate, that he has to Use long



periphrases for common thoughts, and that after all he does not



come out right, for he is half the time falling back into the



senses which fit the case in hand best, and these are sometimes



one, sometimes another, and almost always different from his



'hard and fast' sense. In such discussions we should learn to



vary our definitions as we want, just as we say 'let x, y, z,



mean' now this, and now that, in different problems; and this,



though they do not always avow it, is really the practice of the



clearest and most effective writers." (Bagehot's Postulates of



English Political Economy, pp. 78-9.) Cairnes also (Logical



Method of Political Economy, Lect. VI) combats "the assumption



that the attribute on which a definition turns ought to be one



which does not admit of degrees"; and argues that "to admit of



degrees is the character of all natural facts."







4. When it is wanted to narrow the meaning of a term (that is, in



logical language, to diminish its extension by increasing its



intension), a qualifying adjective will generally suffice, but a



change in the opposite direction cannot as a rule be so simply



made. Contests as to definitions are often of this kind: - A and



B are qualities common to a great number of things, many of these



things have in addition the quality C, and again many the quality



D, whilst some have both C and D. It may then be argued that on



the whole it will be best to define a term so as to include all



things which have the qualities A and B, or only those which have



the qualities A, B, C, or only those which have the qualities A,



B, D; or only those which have A, B, C, D. The decision between



these various courses must rest on considerations of practical



convenience, and is a matter of far less importance than a



careful study of the qualities A, B, C, D, and of their mutual



relations. But unfortunately this study has occupied a much



smaller space in English economics than controversies as to



definitions; which have indeed occasionally led indirectly to the



discovery of scientific truth, but always by roundabout routes,



and with much waste of time and labour.







Chapter 2







Wealth







1. All wealth consists of desirable things; that is, things which



satisfy human wants directly or indirectly: but not all desirable



things are reckoned as wealth. The affection of friends, for



instance, is an important element of wellbeing, but it is not



reckoned as wealth, except by a poetic licence. Let us then begin



by classifying desirable things, and then consider which of them



should be accounted as elements of wealth.



    In the absence of any short term in common use to represent



all desirable things, or things that satisfy human wants, we may



use the term Goods for that purpose.



    Desirable things or goods are Material, or Personal and



Immaterial. Material goods consist of useful material things, and



of all rights to hold, or use, or derive benefits from material



things, or to receive them at a future time. Thus they include



the physical gifts of nature, land and water, air and climate;



the products of agriculture, mining, fishing, and manufacture;



buildings, machinery, and implements; mortgages and other bonds;



shares in public and private companies, all kinds of monopolies,



patent-rights, copyrights; also rights of way and other rights of



usage. Lastly, opportunities of travel, access to good scenery,



museums, etc. are the embodiment of material facilities, external



to a man; though the faculty of appreciating them is internal and



personal.



    A man's non-material goods fall into two classes. One



consists of his own qualities and faculties for action and for



enjoyment; such for instance as business ability, professional



skill, or the faculty of deriving recreation from reading or



music. All these lie within himself and are called internal. The



second class are called external because they consist of



relations beneficial to him with other people. Such, for



instance, were the labour dues and personal services of various



kinds which the ruling classes used to require from their serfs



and other dependents. But these have passed away; and the chief



instances of such relations beneficial to their owner now-a-days



are to be found in the good will and business connection of



traders and professional men.(1*)



    Again, goods may be transferable or non-transferable. Among



the latter are to be classed a person's qualities and faculties



for action and enjoyment (i.e. his internal goods); also such



part of his business connection as depends on personal trust in



him and cannot be transferred, as part of his vendible good will;



also the advantages of climate, light, air, and his privileges of



citizenship and rights and opportunities of making use of public



property.(2*)



    Those goods are free, which are not appropriated and are



afforded by Nature without requiring the effort of man. The land



in its original state was a free gift of nature. But in settled



countries it is not a free good from the point of view of the



individual. Wood is still free in some Brazilian forests. The



fish of the sea are free generally: but some sea fisheries are



jealously guarded for the exclusive use of members of a certain



nation, and may be classed as national property. Oyster beds that



have been planted by man are not free in any sense; those that



have grown naturally are free in every sense if they are not



appropriated; if they are private property they are still free



gifts from the point of view of the nation. But, since the nation



has allowed its rights in them to become vested in private



persons, they are not free from the point of view of the



individual; and the same is true of private rights of fishing in



rivers. But wheat grown on free land and the fish that have been



landed from free fisheries are not free: for they have been



acquired by labour.



    2. We may now pass to the question which classes of a man's



goods are to be reckoned as part of his wealth. The question is



one as to which there is some difference of opinion, but the



balance of argument as well as of authority seems clearly to



incline in favour of the following answer.



    When a man's wealth is spoken of simply, and without any



interpretation clause in the context, it is to be taken to be his



stock of two classes of goods.



    In the first class are those material goods to which he has



(by law or custom) private rights of property, and which are



therefore transferable and exchangeable. These it will be



remembered include not only such things as land and houses,



furniture and machinery, and other material things which may be



in his single private ownership, but also any shares in public



companies, debenture bonds, mortgages and other obligations which



he may hold requiring others to pay money or goods to him. On the



other hand, the debts which he owes to others may be regarded as



negative wealth; and they must be subtracted from his gross



possessions before his true net wealth can be found.



    Services and other goods, which pass out of existence in the



same instant that they come into it, are, of course, not part of



the stock of wealth.(3*)



    In the second class are those immaterial goods which belong



to him, are external to him, and serve directly as the means of



enabling him to acquire material goods. Thus it excludes all his



own personal qualities and faculties, even those which enable him



to earn his living; because they are internal. And it excludes



his personal friendships, in so far as they have no direct



business value. But it includes his business and professional



connections, the organization of his business, and - where such



things exist - his property in slaves, in labour dues, etc.



    This use of the term Wealth is in harmony with the usage of



ordinary life: and, at the same time, it includes those goods,



and only those, which come clearly within the scope of economic



science, as defined in Book I; and which may therefore be called



economic goods. For it includes all those things, external to a



man, which (i) belong to him, and do not belong equally to his



neighbours, and therefore are distinctly his; and which (ii) are



directly capable of a money measure, - a measure that represents



on the one side the efforts and sacrifices by which they have



been called into existence, and, on the other, the wants which



they satisfy.(4*)



    3. A broader view of wealth may indeed be taken for some



purposes; but then recourse must be had to a special



interpretation clause, to prevent confusion. Thus, for instance,



the carpenter's skill is as direct a means of enabling him to



satisfy other people's material wants, and therefore indirectly



his own, as are the tools in his work-basket; and perhaps it may



be convenient to have a term which will include it as part of



wealth in a broader use. Pursuing the lines indicated by Adam



Smith,(5*) and followed by most continental economists, we may



define personal wealth so as to include all those energies,



faculties, and habits which directly contribute to making people



industrially efficient; together with those business connections



and associations of any kind, which we have already reckoned as



part of wealth in the narrower use of the term. Industrial



faculties have a further claim to be regarded as economic in the



fact that their value is as a rule capable of some sort of



indirect measurement.(6*)



    The question whether it is ever worth while to speak of them



as wealth is merely one of convenience, though it has been much



discussed as if it were one of principle.



    Confusion would certainly be caused by using the term



"wealth" by itself when we desire to include a person's



industrial qualities. "Wealth" simply should always mean external



wealth only. But little harm, and some good seems likely to arise



from the occasional use of the phrase " material and personal



wealth."



    4. But we still have to take account of those material goods



which are common to him with his neighbours; and which therefore



it would be a needless trouble to mention when comparing his



wealth with theirs; though they may be important for some



purposes, and especially for comparisons between the economic



conditions of distant places or distant times.



    These goods consist of the benefits which he derives from



living in a certain place at a certain time, and being a member



of a certain state or community; they include civil and military



security, and the right and opportunity to make use of public



property and institutions of all kinds, such as roads, gaslight,



etc., and rights to justice or to a free education. The townsman



and the countryman have each of them for nothing many advantages



which the other either cannot get at all, or can get only at



great expense. Other things being equal, one person has more real



wealth in its broadest sense than another, if the place in which



the former lives has a better climate, better roads, better



water, more wholesome drainage; and again better newspapers,



books, and places of amusement and instruction. House-room, food



and clothing, which would be insufficient in a cold climate, may



be abundant in a warm climate: on the other hand, that warmth



which lessens men's physical needs, and makes them rich with but



a slight provision of material wealth, makes them poor in the



energy that procures wealth.



    Many of these things are collective goods. i.e. goods, which



are not in private ownership. And this brings us to consider



wealth from the social, as opposed to the individual point of



view.



    5. Let us then look at those elements of the wealth of a



nation which are commonly ignored when estimating the wealth of



the individuals composing it. The most obvious forms of such



wealth are public material property of all kinds, such as roads



and canals, buildings and parks, gasworks and waterworks; though



unfortunately many of them have been secured not by public



savings, but by public borrowings, and there is the heavy



"negative" wealth of a large debt to be set against them.



    But the Thames has added more to the wealth of England than



all its canals, and perhaps even than all its railroads. And



though the Thames is a free gift of nature (except in so far as



its navigation has been improved), while the canal is the work of



man, yet we ought for many purposes to reckon the Thames a part



of England's wealth.



    German economists often lay stress on the non-material



elements of national wealth; and it is right to do this in some



problems relating to national wealth, but not in all. Scientific



knowledge indeed, wherever discovered, soon becomes the property



of the whole civilized world, and may be considered as



cosmopolitan rather than as specially national wealth. The same



is true of mechanical inventions and of many other improvements



in the arts of production; and it is true of music. But those



kinds of literature which lose their force by translation, may be



regarded as in a special sense the wealth of those nations in



whose language they are written. And the organization of a free



and well-ordered State is to be regarded for some purposes as an



important element of national wealth.



    But national wealth includes the individual as well as the



collective property of its members. And in estimating the



aggregate sum of their individual wealth, we may save some



trouble by omitting all debts and other obligations due to one



member of a nation from another. For instance, so far as the



English national debt and the bonds of an English railway are



owned within the nation, we can adopt the simple plan of counting



the railway itself as part of the national wealth, and neglecting



railway and government bonds altogether. But we still have to



deduct for those bonds etc. issued by the English Government or



by private Englishmen, and held by foreigners; and to add for



those foreign bonds etc. held by Englishmen.(7*)



    Cosmopolitan wealth differs from national wealth much as that



differs from individual wealth. In reckoning it, debts due from



members of one nation to those of another may conveniently be



omitted from both sides of the account. Again, just as rivers are



important elements of national wealth, the ocean is one of the



most valuable properties of the world. The notion of cosmopolitan



wealth is indeed nothing more than that of national wealth



extended over the whole area of the globe.



    Individual and national rights to wealth rest on the basis of



civil and international law, or at least of custom that has the



force of law. An exhaustive investigation of the economic



conditions of any time and place requires therefore an inquiry



into law and custom; and economics owes much to those who have



worked in this direction. But its boundaries are already wide;



and the historical and juridical bases of the conceptions of



property are vast subj ects which may best be discussed in



separate treatises.



    6. The notion of Value is intimately connected with that of



Wealth; and a little may be said about it here. "The word value"



says Adam Smith "has two different meanings, and sometimes



expresses the utility of some particular object and sometimes the



power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that



object conveys." But experience has shown that it is not well to



use the word in the former sense.



    The value, that is the exchange value, of one thing in terms



of another at any place and time, is the amount of that second



thing which can be got there and then in exchange for the first.



Thus the term value is relative, and expresses the relation



between two things at a particular place and time.



    Civilized countries generally adopt gold or silver or both as



money. Instead of expressing the values of lead and tin, and



wood, and corn and other things in terms of one another, we



express them in terms of money in the first instance; and call



the value of each thing thus expressed its price. If we know that



a ton of lead will exchange for fifteen sovereigns at any place



and time, while a ton of tin will exchange for ninety sovereigns,



we say that their prices then and there are ?5 and ?0



respectively, and we know that the value of a ton of tin in terms



of lead is six tons then and there.



    The price of every thing rises and falls from time to time



and place to place; and with every such change the purchasing



power of money changes so far as that thing goes. If the



purchasing power of money rises with regard to some things, and



at the same time falls equally with regard to equally important



things, its general purchasing power (or its power of purchasing



things in general) has remained stationary. This phrase conceals



some difficulties, which we must study later on. But meanwhile we



may take it in its popular sense, which is sufficiently clear and



we may throughout this volume neglect possible changes in the



general purchasing power of money. Thus the price of anything



will be taken as representative of its exchange value relatively



to things in general, or in other words as representative of its



general purchasing power.(8*)



    But if inventions have increased man's power over nature very



much, then the real value of money is better measured for some



purposes in labour than in commodities. This difficulty however



will not much affect our work in the present volume, which is



only a study of the "Foundations" of economics.







NOTES:







1. For, in the words in which Hermann begins his masterly



analysis of wealth, "Some Goods are internal, others external, to



the individual. An internal good is that which he finds in



himself given to him by nature, or which he educates in himself



by his own free action, such as muscular strength, health, mental



attainments. Everything that the outer world offers for the



satisfaction of his wants is an external good to him."







2. The above classification of goods may be expressed thus:



        Goods are: 1. external a. material i. transferable



                                          ii. non-transferable



                               b. personal i. transferable



                                          ii. non-transferable



                   2. internal-personal-non-transferable







Another arrangement is more convenient for some purposes:



        Goods are: 1. material-external i. transferable



                                       ii. non-transferable



                   2. personal a. external i. transferable



                                          ii. non-transferable



                               b. internal-non-transferable











3. That part of the value of the share in a trading company which



is due to the personal reputation and connection of those who



conduct its affairs ought properly to come under the next head as



external personal goods. But this point is not of much practical



importance.







4. It is not implied that the owner of transferable goods, if he



transferred them, could always realize the whole money value,



which they have for him. A well-fitting coat, for instance, may



be worth the price charged for it by an expensive tailor to its



owner, because he wants it and cannot get it made for less: but



he could not sell it for half that sum. The successful financier



who has spent ?0,000 on having a house and grounds made to suit



his own special fancy, is from one point of view right in



reckoning them in the inventory of his property at their cost



price: but, should he fail, they will not form an asset to his



creditors of anything like that value.



    And in the same way from one point of view we may count the



business connection of the solicitor or physician, the merchant



or the manufacturer, at the full equivalent of the income he



would lose if he were deprived of it; while yet we must recognize



that its exchange value, i.e. the value which he could get for it



by selling it, is much less than that.







5. Comp. Wealth of Nations, Bk. II, ch. II.







6. "The bodies of men are without doubt the most valuable



treasure of a country," said Davenant in the seventeenth century;



and similar phrases hve been common whenever the trend of



political developments has made men anxious that the populations



should increase fast.







7. The value of a business may be to some extent due to its



having a monopoly, either a complete monopoly, secured perhaps by



a patent; or a partial monopoly, owing to its wares being better



known than others which are really equally good; and in so far as



this is the case the business does not add to the real wealth of



the nation. If the monopoly were broken down, the diminution of



national wealth due to the disappearance of its value would



generally be more than made up, partly by the increased value of



rival businesses, and partly by the increased purchasing power of



the money representing the Wealth of other members of the



community. (It should, however, be added that in some exceptional



cases, the price of a commodity may be lowered in consequence of



its production being monopolized: but such cases are very rare,



and may be neglected for the present.)



    Again, business connections and trade reputations add to the



national wealth, only in so far as they bring purchasers into



relation with those producers who will meet their real wants most



fully for a given price; or in other words, only in so far as



they increase the extent to which the efforts of the community as



a whole meet the wants of the community as a whole. Nevertheless



when we are estimating national wealth, not directly but



indirectly as the aggregate of individual wealth, we must allow



for these businesses at their full value, even though this partly



consists of a monopoly which is not used for the public benefit.



For the injury they do to rival producers was allowed for in



counting up the values of the businesses of those rivals; and the



injury done to consumers by raising the price of the produce,



which they buy, was allowed for in reckoning the purchasing power



of their means, so far as this particular commodity is concerned.



    A special case of this is the organization of credit. It



increases the efficiency of production in the country, and thus



adds to national wealth. And the power of obtaining credit is a



valuable asset to any individual trader. If, however, any



accident should drive him out of business, the injury to national



wealth is something less than the whole value of that asset;



because some part at least of the business, which he would have



done, will now be done by others with the aid of some part at



least of the capital which he would have borrowed.



    There are similar difficulties as to how far money is to be



reckoned as part of national wealth; but to treat them thoroughly



would require us to anticipate a good deal of the theory of



money.







8. As Cournot points out (Principes Mathematiques de la Theorie



des Richesses, ch. II), we get the same sort of convenience from



assuming the existence of a standard of uniform purchasing power



by which to measure value, that astronomers do by assuming that



there is a "mean sun" which crosses the meridian at uniform



intervals, so that the clock can keep pace with it; whereas the



actual sun crosses the meridian sometimes before and sometimes



after noon as shown by the clock.







Chapter 3







Production, Consumption, Labour, Necessaries







    1. Man cannot create material things. In the mental and moral



world indeed he may produce new ideas; but when he is said to



produce material things, he really only produces utilities; or in



other words, his efforts and sacrifices result in changing the



form or arrangement of matter to adapt it better for the



satisfaction of wants. All that he can do in the physical world



is either to readjust matter so as to make it more useful, as



when he makes a log of wood into a table; or to put it in the way



of being made more useful by nature, as when he puts seed where



the forces of nature will make it burst out into life.(1*)



    It is sometimes said that traders do not produce: that while



the cabinet-maker produces furniture, the furnituredealer merely



sells what is already produced. But there is no scientific



foundation for this distinction. They both produce utilities, and



neither of them can do more: the furniture-dealer moves and



rearranges matter so as to make it more serviceable than it was



before, and the carpenter does nothing more. The sailor or the



railway-man who carries coal above ground produces it, just as



much as the miner who carries it underground; the dealer in fish



helps to move on fish from where it is of comparatively little



use to where it is of greater use, and the fisherman does no



more. It is true that there are often more traders than are



necessary; and that, whenever that is the case, there is a waste.



But there is also waste if there are two men to a plough which



can be well worked by one man; in both cases all those who are at



work produce, though they may produce but little. Some writers



have revived the medieval attacks on trade on the ground that it



does not produce. But they have not aimed at the right mark. They



should have attacked the imperfect organization of trade,



particularly of retail trade.(2*)



    Consumption may be regarded as negative production. Just as



man can produce only utilities, so he can consume nothing more.



He can produce services and other immaterial products, and he can



consume them. But as his production of material products is



really nothing more than a rearrangement of matter which gives it



new utilities; so his consumption of them is nothing more than a



disarrangement of matter, which diminishes or destroys its



utilities. Often indeed when he is said to consume things, he



does nothing more than to hold them for his use, while, as Senior



says, they "are destroyed by those numerous gradual agents which



we call collectively time".(3*) As the "producer" of wheat is he



who puts seed where nature will make it grow, so the "consumer"



of pictures, of curtains, and even of a house or a yacht does



little to wear them out himself; but he uses them while time



wastes them.



    Another distinction to which some prominence has been given,



but which is vague and perhaps not of much practical use, is that



between consumers' goods (called also consumption goods, or again



goods of the first order), such as food, clothes, etc., which



satisfy wants directly on the one hand; and, on the other hand,



producers' goods (called also production goods, or again



instrumental, or again intermediate goods), such as ploughs and



looms and raw cotton, which satisfy wants indirectly by



contributing towards the production of the first class of



goods.(4*)



    2. All labour is directed towards producing some effect. For



though some exertions are taken merely for their own sake, as



when a game is played for amusement, they are not counted as



labour. We may define labour as any exertion of mind or body



undergone partly or wholly with a view to some good other than



the pleasure derived directly from the work.(5*) And if we had to



make a fresh start it would be best to regard all labour as



productive except that which failed to promote the aim towards



which it was directed, and so produced no utility. But in all the



many changes which the meaning of the word " productive,, has



undergone, it has had special reference to stored-up wealth, to



the comparative neglect and sometimes even to the exclusion of



immediate and transitory enjoyment;(6*) and an almost unbroken



tradition compels us to regard the central notion of the word as



relating to the provision for the wants of the future rather than



those of the present. It is true that all wholesome enjoyments,



whether luxurious or not, are legitimate ends of action both



public and private; and it is true that the enjoyment of luxuries



affords an incentive to exertion, and promotes progress in many



ways. But if the efficiency and energy of industry are the same,



the true interest of a country is generally advanced by the



subordination of the desire for transient luxuries to the



attainment of those more solid and lasting resources which will



assist industry in its future work, and will in various ways tend



to make life larger. This general idea has been in solution, as



it were, in all stages of economic theory; and has been



precipitated by different writers into various hard and fast



distinctions by which certain trades have been marked off as



productive and certain others as unproductive.



    For instance, many writers even of recent times have adhered



to Adam Smith's plan of classing domestic servants as



unproductive. There is doubtless in many large houses a



superabundance of servants, some of whose energies might with



advantage to the community be transferred to other. uses. but the



same is true of the greater part of those who earn their



livelihood by distilling whisky; and yet no economist has



proposed to call them unproductive. There is no distinction in



character between the work of the baker who provides bread for a



family, and that of the cook who boils potatoes. If the baker



should be a confectioner, or fancy baker, it is probable that he



spends at least as much of his time as the domestic cook does, on



labour that is unproductive in the popular sense of providing



unnecessary enj oyments.



    Whenever we use the word Productive by itself, it is to be



understood to mean productive of the means of production, and of



durable sources of enjoyment. But it is a slippery term, and



should not be used where precision is needed.(7*)



    If ever we want to use it in a different sense, we must say



so: for instance we may speak of labour as productive of



necessaries, etc.



    Productive consumption, when employed as a technical term, is



commonly defined as the use of wealth in the production of



further wealth; and it should properly include not all the



consumption of productive workers, but only that which is



necessary for their efficiency. The term may perhaps be useful in



studies of the accumulation of material wealth. But it is apt to



mislead. For consumption is the end of production; and all



wholesome consumption is productive of benefits, many of the most



worthy of which do not directly contribute to the production of



material wealth.(8*)



    3. This brings us to consider the term Necessaries. It is



common to distinguish necessaries, comforts, and luxuries; the



first class including all things required to meet wants which



must be satisfied, while the latter consist of things that meet



wants of a less urgent character. But here again there is a



troublesome ambiguity. When we say that a want must be satisfied,



what are the consequences which we have in view if it is not



satisfied? Do they include death? Or do they extend only to the



loss of strength and vigour? In other words, are necessaries the



things which are necessary for life, or those which are necessary



for efficiency?



    The term Necessaries, like the term Productive, has been used



elliptically, the subject to which it refers being left to be



supplied by the reader; and since the implied subject has varied,



the reader has often supplied one which the writer did not



intend, and thus misunderstood his drift. In this, as in the



preceding case, the chief source of confusion can be removed by



supplying explicitly in every critical place that which the



reader is intended to undsertand.



    The older use of the term Necessaries was limited to those



things which were sufficient to enable the labourers, taken one



with another, to support themselves and their families. Adam



Smith and the more careful of his followers observed indeed



variations in the standard of comfort and "decency"; and they



recognized that differences of climate and differences of custom



make things necessary in some cases, which are superfluous in



others.(9*) But Adam Smith was influenced by reasonings of the



Physiocrats: they were based on the condition ofthe French people



in the eighteenth century, most of whom had no notion of any



necessaries beyond those which were required for mere existence.



In happier times, however, a more careful analysis has made it



evident that there is for each rank of industry, at any time and



place, a more or less clearly defined income which is necessary



for merely sustaining its members; while there is another and



larger income which is necessary for keeping it in full



efficiency.(10*)



    It may be true that the wages of any industrial class might



have sufficed to maintain a higher efficiency, if they had been



spent with perfect wisdom. But every estimate of necessaries must



be relative to a given place and time; and unless there be a



special interpretation clause to the contrary, it may be assumed



that the wages will be spent with just that amount of wisdom,



forethought, and unselfishness, which prevails in fact among the



industrial class under discussion. With this understanding we may



say that the income of any class in the ranks of industry is



below its necessary level, when any increase in their income



would in the course of time produce a more than proportionate



increase in their efficiency. Consumption may be economized by a



change of habits, but any stinting of necessaries is



wasteful.(11*)



    4. Some detailed study of the necessaries for efficiency of



different classes of workers will have to be made, when we come



to inquire into the causes that determine the supply of efficient



labour. But it will serve to give some definiteness to our ideas,



if we consider here what are the necessaries for the efficiency



of an ordinary agricultural or of an unskilled town labourer and



his family, in England, in this generation. They may be said to



consist of a well-drained dwelling with several rooms, warm



clothing, with some changes of underclothing, pure water, a



plentiful supply of cereal food, with a moderate allowance of



meat and milk, and a little tea, etc., some education and some



recreation, and lastly, sufficient freedom for his wife from



other work to enable her to perform properly her maternal and her



household duties. If in any district unskilled labour is deprived



of any of these things, its efficiency will suffer in the same



way as that of a horse that is not properly tended, or a



steam-engine that has an inadequate supply of coals. All



consumption up to this limit is strictly productive consumption:



any stinting of this consumption is not economical, but wasteful.



    In addition, perhaps, some consumption of alcohol and



tobacco, and some indulgence in fashionable dress are in many



places so habitual, that they may be said to be conventionally



necessary, since in order to obtain them the average man and



woman will sacrifice some things which are necessary for



efficiency. Their wages are therefore less than are practically



necessary for efficiency, unless they provide not only for what



is strictly necessary consumption, but include also a certain



amount of conventional necessaries.(12*)



    The consumption of conventional necessaries by productive



workers is commonly classed as productive consumption; but



strictly speaking it ought not to be; and in critical passages a



special interpretation clause should be added to say whether or



not they are included.



    It should however be noticed that many things which are



rightly described as superfluous luxuries, do yet, to some



extent, take the place of necessaries; and to that extent their



consumption is productive when they are consumed by



producers.(13*)







NOTES:







1. Bacon, Novum Organon IV, says "Ad opera nil aliud potest homo



quam ut corpora naturalia admoveat et amoveat, reliqua natura



intus agit" (quoted by Bonar, Philosophy and Political Economy,



p. 249).







2. Production, in the narrow sense, changes the form and nature



of products. Trade and transport change their external relations.







3. Political Economy, p. 54. Senior would like to substitute the



verb "to use" for the verb "to consume."







4. Thus flour to be made into a cake when already in the house of



the consumer, is treated by some as a consumers' good; while not



only the flour, but the cake itself is treated as a producers'



good when in the hand of the confectioner. Carl Menger



(Volkswirtschaftslehre, ch. I, 2) says bread belongs to the first



order, flour to the second, a flour mill to the third order and



so on. It appears that if a railway train carries people on a



pleasure excursion, also some tins of biscuits, and milling



machinery and some machinery that is used for making milling



machinery; then the train is at one and the same time a good of



the first, second, third and fourth orders.







5. This is Jevons' definition (Theory of Political Economy, ch.



v), except that he includes only painful exertions. But he



himself points out how painful idleness often is. Most people



work more than they would if they considered only the direct



pleasure resulting from the work; but in a healthy state,



pleasure predominates over pain in a great part even of the work



that is done for hire. Of course the definition is elastic; an



agricultural labourer working in his garden in the evening thinks



chiefly of the fruit of his labours; a mechanic returning home



after a day of sedentary toil finds positive pleasure in his



garden work, but he too cares a good deal about the fruit of his



labour; while a rich man working in like manner, though he may



take a pride in doing it well, will probably care little for any



pecuniary saving that he effects by it.







6. Thus the Mercantilists who regarded the precious metals;



partly because they were imperishable, as wealth in a fuller



sense than anything else, regarded as unproductive or "sterile"



all labour that was not directed to producing goods for



exportation in exchange for gold and silver. The Physiocrats



thought all labour sterile which consumed an equal value to that



which it produced; and regarded the agriculturist as the only



productive worker, because his labour alone (as they thought)



left behind it a net surplus of stored-up wealth. Adam Smith



softened down the Physiocratic definition; but still he



considered that agricultural labour was more productive than any



other. His followers discarded this distinction; but they have



generally adhered, though with many differences in points of



detail, to the notion that productive labour is that which tends



to increase accumulated wealth; a notion which is implied rather



than stated in the celebrated chapter of The Wealth of Nations



which bears the title, "On the Accumulation of Capital, or on



Productive and Unproductive Labour." (Comp. Travers Twiss,



Progress of Political Economy, Sect. vi, and the discussions on



the word Productive in J.S. Mill's Essays, and in his Principles



of Political Economy.)







7. Among the means of production are included the necessaries of



labour but not ephemeral luxuries; and the maker of ices is thus



classed as unproductive whether he is working for a pastry cook,



or as a private servant in a country house. But a bricklayer



engaged in building a theatre is classed as productive. No doubt



the division between permanent and ephemeral sources of enjoyment



is vague and unsubstantial. But this difficulty exists in the



nature of things and cannot be completely evaded by any device of



words. We can speak of an increase of tall men relatively to



short, without deciding whether all those above five feet nine



inches are to be classed as tall, or only those above five feet



ten. And we can speak of the increase of productive labour at the



expense of unproductive without fixing on any rigid, and



therefore arbitrary line of division between them. If such an



artificial line is required for any particular purpose, it must



be drawn explicitly for the occasion. But in fact such occasions



seldom or never occur.







8. All the distinctions in which the word Productive is used are



very thin and have a certain air of unreality. It would hardly be



worth while to introduce them now: but they have a long history;



and it is probably better that they should dwindle gradually out



of use, rather than be suddenly discarded.



    The attempt to draw a hard and fast line of distinction where



there is no real discontinuity in nature has often done more



mischief, but has perhaps never led to more quaint results, than



in the rigid definitions which have been sometimes given of this



term Productive. Some of them for instance lead to the conclusion



that a singer in an opera is unproductive, that the printer of



the tickets of admission to the opera is productive; while the



usher who shows people to their places is unproductive, unless he



happens to sell programmes, and then he is productive. Senior



points out that "a cook is not said to make roast meat but to



dress it; but he is said to make a pudding.... A tailor is said



to make cloth into a coat, a dyer is not said to make undyed



cloth into dyed cloth. The change produced by the dyer is perhaps



greater than that produced by the tailor, but the cloth in



passing through the tailor's hands changes its name; in passing



through the dyer's it does not: the dyer has not produced a new



name, nor consequently a new thing." Pol. Econ. pp. 51-2.







9. Compare Carver, Principles of Political Economy, p. 474; which



called my attention to Adam Smith's observation that customary



decencies are in effect necessaries.







10. Thus in the South of England population has increased during



the last hundred years at a fair rate, allowance being made for



migration. But the efficiency of labour, which in earlier times



was as high as that in the North of England, has sunk relatively



to the North; so that the low-waged labour of the South is often



dearer than the more highly-paid labour of the North. We cannot



thus say whether the labourers in the South have been supplied



with necessaries, unless we know in which of these two senses the



word is used. They have had the bare necessaries for existence



and the increase of numbers, but apparently they have not had the



necessaries for efficiency. It must however be remembered that



the strongest labourers in the South have constantly migrated to



the North; and that the energies of those in the North have been



raised by their larger share of economic freedom and of the hope



of rising to a higher position. See Mackay in Charity



Organization Journal, Feb. 1891.







11. If we considered an individual of exceptional abilities we



should have to take account of the fact that there is not likely



to be the same close correspondence between the real value of his



work for the community and the income which he earns by it, that



there is in the case of an ordinary member of any industrial



class. And we should have to say that all his consumption is



strictly productive and necessary, so long as by cutting off any



part of it he would diminish his efficiency by an amount that is



of more real value to him or the rest of the world than he saved



from his consumption. If a Newton or a Watt could have added a



hundredth part to his efficiency by doubling his personal



expenditure, the increase in his consumption would have been



truly productive. As we shall see later on, such a case is



analogous to additional cultivation of rich land that bears a



high rent: it may be profitable though the return to it is less



than in proportion to the previous outlay.







12. Compare the distinction between "Physical and Political



Necessaries" in James Steuart's Inquiry, A.D. 1767, II, xxi.







13. Thus a dish of green peas in March, costing perhaps ten



shillings, is a superfluous luxury: but yet it is wholesome food,



and does the work perhaps of three pennyworth of cabbage; or



even, since variety undoubtedly conduces to health, a little more



than that. So it may be entered perhaps at the value of fourpence



under the head of necessaries, and at that of nine shillings and



eightpence under that of superfluities; and its consumption may



be regarded as strictly productive to the extent of one fortieth.



In exceptional cases, as for instance when the peas are given to



an invalid, the whole ten shillings may be well spent, and



reproduce their own value.



    For the sake of giving definiteness to the ideas it may be



well to venture on estimates of necessaries, rough and random as



they must be. Perhaps at present prices the strict necessaries



for an average agricultural family are covered by fifteen or



eighteen shillings a week, the conventional necessaries by about



five shillings more. For the unskilled labourer in the town a few



shillings must be added to the strict necessaries. For the family



of the skilled workman living in a town we may take twenty-five



or thirty shillings for strict necessaries, and ten shillings for



conventional necessaries. For a man whose brain has to undergo



great continuous strain the strict necessaries are perhaps two



hundred or two hundred and fifty pounds a year if he is a



bachelor: but more than twice as much if he has an expensive



family to educate. His conventional necessaries depend on the



nature of his calling.







Chapter 4







Income, Capital







    1. In a primitive community each family is nearly



self-sufficing, and provides most of its own food and clothing



and even household furniture. Only a very small part of the



income, or comings in, of the family is in the form of money;



when one thinks of their income at all, one reckons in the



benefits which they get from their cooking utensils, just as much



as those which they get from their plough: one draws no



distinction between their capital and the rest of their



accumulated stock, to which the cooking utensils and the plough



alike belong.(1*)



    But with the growth of a money economy there has been a



strong tendency to confine the notion of income to those



incomings which are in the form of money; including "payments in



kind" (such as the free use of a house, free coals, gas, water),



which are given as part of an employee's remuneration, and in



lieu of money payments.



    In harmony with this meaning of Income, the language of the



market-place commonly regards a man's capital as that part of his



wealth which he devotes to acquiring an income in the form of



money; or, more generally, to acquisition (Erwerbung) by means of



trade. It may be convenient sometimes to speak of this as his



trade capital; which may be defined to consist of those external



goods which a person uses in his trade, either holding them to be



sold for money or applying them to produce things that are to be



sold for money. Among its conspicuous elements are such things as



the factory and the business plant of a manufacturer; that is,



his machinery, his raw material, any food, clothing, and



house-room that he may hold for the use of his employees, and the



goodwill of his business.



    To the things in his possession must be added those to which



he has a right and from which he is drawing income: including



loans which he has made on mortgage or in other ways, and all the



command over capital which he may hold under the complex forms of



the modern "money market." On the other hand debts owed by him



must be deducted from his capital.



    This definition of capital from the individual or business



point of view is firmly established in ordinary usage; and it



will be assumed throughout the present treatise whenever we are



discussing problems relating to business in general, and in



particular to the supply of any particular group of commodities



for sale in open market. Income and capital will be discussed



from the point of view of private business in the first half of



the chapter; and afterwards the social point of view will be



considered.



    2. If a person is engaged in business, he is sure to have to



incur certain outgoings for raw material, the hire of labour,



etc. And, in that case, his true or net income is found by



deducting from his gross income "the outgoings that belong to its



production."(2*)



    Anything which a person does for which he is paid directly or



indirectly in money, swells his nominal income; while no services



that he performs for himself are commonly reckoned as adding to



his nominal income. But, though it is best generally to neglect



them when they are trivial, account should for consistency be



taken of them, when they are of a kind which people commonly pay



for having done for them. Thus a woman who makes her own clothes



or a man who digs in his own garden or repairs his own house, is



earning income; just as would the dressmaker, gardener or



carpenter who might be hired to do the work.



    In this connection we may introduce a term of which we shall



have to make frequent use hereafter. The need for it arises from



the fact that every occupation involves other disadvantages



besides the fatigue of the work required in it, and every



occupation offers other advantages besides the receipt of money



wages. The true reward which an occupation offers to labour has



to be calculated by deducting the money value of all its



disadvantages from that of all its advantages; and we may



describe this true reward as the net advantages of the



occupation.



    The payment made by a borrower for the use of a loan for,



say, a year is expressed as the ratio which that payment bears to



the loan, and is called interest. And this term is also used more



broadly to represent the money equivalent of the whole income



which is derived from capital. It is commonly expressed as a



certain percentage on the "capital" sum of the loan. Whenever



this is done the capital must not be regarded as a stock of



things in general. It must be regarded as a stock of one



particular thing, money, which is taken to represent them. Thus



?00 may be lent at four per cent., that is for an interest of ?



yearly. And, if a man employs in business a capital stock of



goods of various kinds which are estimated as worth ?0,000 in



all; then ?00 a year may be said to represent interest at the



rate of four per cent. on that capital, on the supposition that



the aggregate money value of the things which constitute it has



remained unchanged. He would not, however, be willing to continue



the business unless he expected his total net gains from it to



exceed interest on his capital at the current rate. These gains



are called profits.



    The command over goods to a given money value, which can be



applied to any purpose, is often described as "free" or



"floating" capital.(3*)



    When a man is engaged in business, his profits for the year



are the excess of his receipts from his business during the year



over his outlay for his business. The difference between the



value of his stock of plant, material, etc. at the end and at the



beginning of the year is taken as part of his receipts or as part



of his outlay, according as there has been an increase or



decrease of value. What remains of his profits after deducting



interest on his capital at the current rate (allowing, where



necessary, for insurance) is generally called his earnings of



undertaking or management. The ratio in which his profits for the



year stand to his capital is spoken of as his rate of profits.



But this phrase, like the corresponding phrase with regard to



interest, assumes that the money value of the things which



constitute his capital has been estimated: and such an estimate



is often found to involve great difficulties.



    When any particular thing, as a house, a piano, or a sewing



machine is lent out, the payment for it is often called Rent. And



economists may follow this practice without inconvenience when



they are regarding the income from the point of view of the



individual trader. But, as will be argued presently, the balance



of advantage seems to lie in favour of reserving the term Rent



for the income derived from the free gifts of nature, whenever



the discussion of business affairs passes from the point of view



of the individual to that of society at large. And for that



reason, the term Quasirent will be used in the present volume for



the income derived from machines and other appliances for



production made by man. That is to say, any particular machine



may yield an income which is of the nature of a rent, and which



is sometimes called a Rent; though on the whole, there seems to



be some advantage in calling it a Quasi-rent. But we cannot



properly speak of the interest yielded by a machine. If we use



the term "interest" at all, it must be in relation not to the



machine itself, but to its money value. For instance if the work



done by a machine which cost ?00 is wortb ? a year net, that



machine is yielding a quasi-rent of ? which is equivalent to



interest at four per cent. on its original cost: but if the



machine is worth only ?0 now, it is yielding five per cent. on



its present value. This however raises some difficult questions



of principle, which will be discussed in Book V.



    3. Next to consider some details relating to capital. It has



been classed as Consumption capital, and Auxiliary or



Instrumental capital: and though no clear distinction can be



drawn between the two classes, it may sometimes be convenient to



use the terms, with the understanding that they are vague. Where



definiteness is necessary, the terms should be avoided; and



explicit enumerations should be given. The general notion of the



distinction which the terms are designed to suggest, can be



gathered from the following approximate definitions.



    Consumption capital consists of goods in a form to satisfy



wants directly; that is, goods which afford a direct sustenance



to the workers, such as food, clothes, house-room, etc.



    Auxiliary, or instrumental, capital is so called because it



consists of all the goods that aid labour in production. Under



this head come tools, machines, factories, railways, docks,



ships, etc.; and raw materials of all kinds.



    But of course a man's clothes assist him in his work and are



instrumental in keeping him warm; and he derives a direct benefit



from the shelter of his factory as he does from the shelter of



his house.(4*)



    We may follow Mill in distinguishing circulating capital



"which fulfils the whole of its office in the production in which



it is engaged, by a single use," from fixed capital "which exists



in a durable shape and the return to which is spread over a



period of corresponding duration."(5*)



    4. The customary point of view of the business man is that



which is most convenient for the economist to adopt when



discussing the production of goods for a market, and the causes



which govern their exchange value. But there is a broader point



of view which the business man, no less than the economist, must



adopt when he studies the causes which govern the material



wellbeing of the community as a whole. Ordinary conversation may



pass from one point of view to another without any formal note of



the change: for if a misunderstanding arises it soon becomes



manifest; and confusion is cut short by a question or by a



volunteered explanation. But the economist may take no risks of



that sort: he must make prominent any change in his point of view



or in his uses of terms. His path might have seemed smoother for



the time, if he had passed silently from one use to another: but



in the long run better progress is made by a clear indication of



the meaning attached to each term in every doubtful case.(6*)



    Let us then during the remainder of this chapter deliberately



adopt the social, in contrast with the individual point of view:



let us look at the production of the community as a whole, and at



its total net income available for all purposes. That is, let us



revert nearly to the point of view of a primitive people, who are



chiefly concerned with the production of desirable things, and



with their direct uses; and who are little concerned with



exchange and marketing.



    From this point of view income is regarded as including all



the benefits which mankind derive at any time from their efforts,



in the present and in the past, to turn nature's resources to



their best account. The pleasure derived from the beauties of the



rainbow, or the sweet taste of the fresh morning air, are left



out of the reckoning, not because they are unimportant, nor



because the estimate would in any way be vitiated by including



them; but solely because reckoning them in would serve no good



purpose, while it would add greatly to the length of our



sentences and the prolixity of our discussions. For a similar



reason it is not worth while to take separate account of the



simple services which nearly every one renders to himself, such



as putting on his clothes; though there are a few persons who



choose to pay others to do such things for them. Their exclusion



involves no principle; and time spent by some controversial



writers on discussing it has been wasted. It simply follows the



maxim De minimis non curat lex. A driver who, not noticing a pool



in his way, splashes a passer by is not held to have done him



legal injury; though there is no distinction in principle between



his act and that of another, who by a similar lack of attention,



did serious harm to someone else.



    A man's present labour yields him income directly, when



devoted to his own use; and he looks to be paid for it in some



form or another if he devotes it as a matter of business to the



service of others. Similarly any useful thing which he has made



or acquired in the past, or which has been handed down to him,



under the existing institutions of property, by others who have



so made or acquired it, is generally a source of material benefit



to him directly or indirectly. If he applies it in business, this



income generally appears in the form of money. But a broader use



of this term is occasionally needed, which embraces the whole



income of benefits of every sort which a person derives from the



ownership of property however applied: it includes for instance



the benefits which he gets from the use of his own piano, equally



with those which a piano dealer would win by letting out a piano



on hire. The language of common life while averse to so broad a



use of the term Income as this even when discussing social



problems, yet habitually includes a certain number of forms of



income, other than money income.



    The Income Tax Commissioners count a dwelling-house inhabited



by its owner as a source of taxable income, though it yields its



income of comfort directly. They do this, not on any abstract



principle; but partly because of the practical importance of



house-room, partly because the ownership of a house is commonly



treated in a business fashion, and partly because the real income



accruing from it can easily be separated off and estimated. They



do not claim to establish any absolute distinction in kind



between the things which their rule includes, and those which it



excludes.



    Jevons, regarding the problem from a purely mathematical



point of view, was justified in classing all commodities in the



hands of consumers as capital. But some writers, while developing



this suggestion with great ingenuity, have treated it as a great



principle; and that appears to be an error in judgment. A true



sense of proportion requires us not to burden our work with the



incessant enumeration of details of secondary importance, of



which no account is taken in customary discourse, and which



cannot even be described without offending against popular



conventions.



    5. This brings us to consider the use of the term capital



from the point of view of inquiries into the material wellbeing



of society as a whole. Adam Smith said that a person's capital is



that part of his stock from which he expects to derive an income.



And almost every use of the term capital, which is known to



history, has corresponded more or less closely to a parallel use



of the term Income: in almost every use, capital has been that



part of a man's stock from which he expects to derive an income.



    By far the most important use of the term Capital in general,



i.e. from the social point of view, is in the inquiry how the



three agents of production, land (that is, natural agents),



labour and capital, contribute to producing the national income



(or the national dividend, as it will be called later on); and



how that income is distributed among the three agents. And this



is an additional reason for making the terms Capital and Income



correlative from the social, as we did from the individual point



of view.



    Accordingly it is proposed in this treatise to count as part



of capital from the social point of view all things other than



land, which yield income that is generally reckoned as such in



common discourse; together with similar things in public



ownership, such as government factories: the term Land being



taken to include all free gifts of nature, such as mines,



fisheries, etc., which yield income.



    Thus it will include all things held for trade purposes,



whether machinery, raw material or finished goods; theatres and



hotels; home farms and houses: but not furniture or clothes owned



by those who use them. For the former are and the latter are not



commonly regarded as yielding income by the world at large, as is



shown by the practice of the income tax commissioners.



    This usage of the term is in harmony with the common practice



of economists of treating social problems in broad outline to



start with, and reserving minor details for later consideration:



it is in harmony also with their common practice of taking Labour



to include those activities, and those only, which are regarded



as the source of income in this broader use of the term. Labour



together with capital and land thus defined are the sources of



all that income of which account is commonly taken in reckoning



up the National Income.(*7)



    6. Social income may be estimated by adding together the



incomes of the individuals in the society in question, whether it



be a nation or any other group of persons.



    We must however not count the same thing twice. If we have



counted a carpet at its full value, we have already counted the



values of the yarn and the labour that were used in making it;



and these must not be counted again. And further, if the carpet



was made of wool that was in stock at the beginning of the year,



the value of that wool must be deducted from the value of the



carpet before the net income of the year is reached; while



similar deduction must be made for the wear and tear of machinery



and other plant used in making it. This is required by the



general rule, with which we started, that true or net income is



found by deducting from gross income the outgoings that belong to



its production.



    But if the carpet is cleaned by domestic servants or at steam



scouring works, the value of the labour spent in cleaning it must



be counted in separately; for otherwise the results of this



labour would be altogether omitted from the inventory of those



newly-produced commodities and conveniences which constitute the



real income of the country. The work of domestic servants is



always classed as "labour" in the technical sense; and since it



can be assessed en bloc at the value of their remuneration in



money and in kind without being enumerated in detail, its



inclusion raises no great statistical difficulty. There is



however some inconsistency in omitting the heavy domestic work



which is done by women and other members of the household, where



no servants are kept.



    Again, suppose a landowner with an annual income of ?0,000



hires a private secretary at a salary of ?00, who hires a



servant at wages of ?0. It may seem that if the incomes of all



these three persons are counted in as part of the net income of



the country, some of it will be counted twice over, and some



three times. But this is not the case. The landlord transfers to



his secretary, in return for his assistance, part of the



purchasing power derived from the produce of land; and the



secretary again transfers part of this to his servant in return



for his assistance. The farm produce the value of which goes as



rent to the landlord, the assistance which the landlord derives



from the work of the secretary, and that which the secretary



derives from the work of the servant are independent parts of the



real net income of the country; and therefore the ?0,000 and the



?00 and the ?0 which are their money measures, must all be



counted in when we are estimating the income of the country. But



if the landlord makes an allowance of ?00 a year to his son,



that must not be counted as an independent income; because no



services are rendered for it. And it would not be assessed to the



Income tax.



    As the net payments on account of interest etc. due to an



individual-net, i.e. after deducting those due from him to others



are part of his income, so the money and other things received



net by a nation from other countries are part of its income.



    7. The money income, or inflow, of wealth gives a measure of



a nation's prosperity, which, untrustworthy as it is, is yet in



some respects better than that afforded by the money value of its



stock of wealth.



    For income consists chiefly of commodities in a form to give



pleasure directly; while the greater part of national wealth



consists of the means of production, which are of service to the



nation only in so far as they contribute to producing commodities



ready for consumption. And further, though this is a minor point,



consumable commodities, being more portable, have more nearly



uniform prices all the world over than the things used in



producing them: the prices of an acre of good land in Manitoba



and Kent differ more tban those of a bushel of wheat in the two



places.



    But if we look chiefly at the income of a country we must



allow for the depreciation of the sources from which it is



derived. More must be deducted from the income derived from a



house if it is made of wood, than if it is made of stone; a stone



house counts for more towards the real richness of a country than



a wooden house which gives equally good accommodation. Again, a



mine may yield for a time a large income, but be exhausted in a



few years: in that case, it must be counted as equivalent to a



field, or a fishery, which yields a much smaller annual income,



but will yield that income permanently.



    8. In purely abstract, and especially in mathematical,



reasoning the terms Capital and Wealth are used as synonymous



almost perforce, except that "land" proper may for some purposes



be omitted from Capital. But there is a clear tradition that we



should speak of Capital when considering things as agents of



production; and that we should speak of Wealth when considering



them as results of production, as subjects of consumption and as



yielding pleasures of possession. Thus the chief demand for



capital arises from its productiveness, from the services which



it renders, for instance, in enabling wool to be spun and woven



more easily than by the unaided hand, or in causing water to flow



freely wherever it is wanted instead of being carried laboriously



in pails; (though there are other uses of capital, as for



instance when it is lent to a spendthrift, which cannot easily be



brought under this head). On the other hand the supply of capital



is controlled by the fact that, in order to accumulate it, men



must act prospectively: they must "wait" and "save," they must



sacrifice the present to the future.



    At the beginning of this Book it was argued that the



economist must forego the aid of a complete set of technical



terms. He must make the terms in common use serve his purpose in



the expression of precise thought, by the aid of qualifying



adjectives or other indications in the context. If he arbitrarily



assigns a rigid exact use to a word which has several more or



less vague uses in the market place, he confuses business men,



and he is in some danger of committing himself to untenable



positions. The selection of a normal use for such terms as Income



and Capital must therefore be tested by actually working with



it.(8*)







NOTES:







1. This and similar facts have led some people to suppose not



only that some parts of the modern analysis of distribution and



exchange are inapplicable to a primitive community; which is



true: but also that there are no important parts of it that are



applicable; which is not true. This is a striking instance of the



dangers that arise from allowing ourselves to become the servants



of words, avoiding the hard work that is required for discovering



unity of substance under lying variety of form.







2. See a report of a Committee of the British Association, 1878,



on the Income Tax.







3. Professor Clark has made the suggestion to distinguish between



Pure Capital and Capital Goods: the former is to correspond to a



waterfall which remains stationary; while Capital Goods are the



particular things which enter and leave the business, as



particular drops pass through the waterfall. He would of course



connect interest with pure capital, not with capital goods.







4. See above II, iii, sec. 1.







5. Adam Smith's distinction between fixed and circulating capital



turned on the question whether the goods "yield a profit without



changing masters" or not. Ricardo made it turn on whether they



are "of slow consumption or require to be frequently reproduced";



but he truly remarks that this is "a division not essential, and



in which the line of demarcation cannot be accurately drawn."



Mill's modification is generally accepted by modern economists.







6. Compare above II. i, sec. 3.







7. Just as for practical purposes it is better not to encumber



ourselves with specifying the "income" of benefit which a man



derives from the labour of brushing his hat in the morning, so it



is better to ignore the element of capital vested in his brush.



But no such consideration arises in a merely abstract discussion:



and therefore the logical simplicity of Jevons' dictum that



commodities in the hands of consumers are capital has some



advantages and no disadvantages for mathematical versions of



economic doctrines.







8. A short forecast of some of this work may be given here. It



will be seen how Capital needs to be considered in regard both to



the embodied aggregate of the benefits derivable from its use,



and to the embodied aggregate of the costs of the efforts and of



the saving needed for its production: and it will be shown how



these two aggregates tend to balance. Thus in V, IV, which may be



taken as in some sense a continuation of the present chapter,



they will be seen balancing directly in the forecasts of an



individual Robinson Crusoe; and for the greater part at least in



terms of money in the forecasts of a modern business man. In



either case both sides of the account must be referred to the



same date of time; those that come after that date being



"discounted" back to it; and those that come before being



"accumulated" up to it.



    A similar balancing in regard to the benefits and the costs



of capital at large will be found to be a chief corner stone of



social economy: although it is true that in consequence of the



unequal distribution of wealth, accounts cannot be made up from



the social point of view with that clearness of outline that is



attainable in the case of an individual, whether a Robinson



Crusoe, or a modern business man. In every part of our discussion



of the causes that govern the accumulation and the application of



productive resources, it will appear that there is no universal



rule that the use of roundabout methods of production is more



efficient than direct methods; that there are some conditions



under which the investment of effort in obtaining machinery and



in making costly provision against future wants is economical in



the long run, and others in which it is not: and that capital is



accumulated in proportion to the prospectiveness of man on the



one hand, and on the other to the absorption of capital by those



roundabout methods, which are sufficiently productive to



remunerate their adoption. See especially IV, VII, sec, 8; V, IV,



VI, I, sec. 8; and VI, VI, sec. 1.



    The broader forces, that govern the production of capital in



general and its contribution to the national income, are



discussed in IV, VII, IX XI: the imperfect adjustments of the



money measures of benefits and costs to their real volume are



discussed chieJy in III, III-V; IV, VII; and VI, III VIII; the



resulting share in the total product of labour and capital, aided



by natural resources, which goes to capital, is discussed chieJy



in VI, I, II, VI-VII, XI, XII.



    Some of the chief incidents in the history of the definitions



of Capital are given in Appendix E.



























Book IV











The Agents of Production











Land, Labour, and Capital and Organization

















Chapter 1











Introductory











    1. The agents of production are commonly classed as Land,





Labour and Capital. By Land is meant the material and the forces





which Nature gives freely for man's aid, in land and water, in





air and light and heat. By Labour is meant: the economic work of





man, whether with the hand or the head.(1*) By Capital is meant





all stored-up provision for the production of material goods, and





for the attainment of those benefits which are commonly reckoned





as part of income. It is the main stock of wealth regarded as an





agent of production rather than as a direct source of





gratification.





    Capital consists in a great part of knowledge and





organization: and of this some part is private property and other





part is not. Knowledge is our most powerful engine of production;





it enables us to subdue Nature and force her to satisfy our





wants. Organization aids knowledge; it has many forms, e.g. that





of a single business, that of various businesses in the same





trade, that of various trades relatively to one another, and that





of the State providing security for all and help for many. The





distinction between public and private property in knowledge and





organization is of great and growing importance: in some respects





of more importance than that between public and private property





in material things; and partly for that reason it seems best





sometimes to reckon Organization apart as a distinct agent of





production. It cannot be fully examined till a much later stage





in our inquiry; but something has to be said of it in the present





Book.





    In a sense there are only two agents of production, nature





and man. Capital and organization are the result of the work of





man aided by nature, and directed by his power of forecasting the





future and his willingness to make provision for it. If the





character and powers of nature and of man be given, the growth of





wealth and knowledge and organization follow from them as effect





from cause. But on the other hand man is himself largely formed





by his surroundings, in which nature plays a great part: and thus





from every point of view man is the centre of the problem of





production as well as that of consumption; and also of that





further problem of the relations between the two, which goes by





the twofold name of Distribution and Exchange.





    The growth of mankind in numbers, in health and strength, in





knowledge, ability, and in richness of character is the end of





all our studies: but it is an aim to which economics can do no





more than contribute some important elements. In its broader





aspects therefore the study of this growth belongs to the end, if





to any part of a treatise on economics: but does not properly





belong even there. Meanwhile we cannot avoid taking account of





the direct agency of man in production, and of the conditions





which govern his efficiency as a producer. And on the whole it is





perhaps the most convenient course, as it certainly is that most





in accordance with English tradition, to include some account of





the growth of population in numbers and character as a part of





the general discussion of production.





    2. It is not possible at this stage to do more than indicate





very slightly the general relations between demand and supply,





between consumption and production. But it may be well, while the





discussion of utility and value is fresh in our minds, to take a





short glance at the relations between value and the disutility or





discommodity that has to be overcome in order to obtain those





goods which have value because they are at once desirable and





difficult of attainment. All that can be said now must be





provisional; and may even seem rather to raise difficulties than





to solve them: and there will be an advantage in having before us





a map, in however slight and broken outline, of the ground to be





covered.





    While demand is based on the desire to obtain commodities,





supply depends mainly on the overcoming of the unwillingness to





undergo "discommodities." These fall generally under two heads:





-- labour, and the sacrifice involved in putting off consumption.





It must suffice here to give a sketch of the part played by





ordinary labour in supply. It will be seen hereafter that remarks





similar, though not quite the same, might have been made about





the work of management and the sacrifice which is involved





(sometimes, but not always) in that waiting which is involved in





accumulating the means of production.





    The discommodity of labour may arise from bodily or mental





fatigue, or from its being carried on in unhealthy surroundings,





or with unwelcome associates, or from its occupying time that is





wanted for recreation, or for social or intellectual pursuits.





But whatever be the form of the discommodity, its intensity





nearly always increases with the severity and the duration of





labour. Of course much exertion is undergone for its own sake, as





for instance in mountaineering, in playing games and in the





pursuit of literature, of art, and of science; and much hard work





is done under the influence of a desire to benefit others.(2*)





But the chief motive to most labour, in our use of the term, is





the desire to obtain some material advantage; which in the





present state of the world appears generally in the form of the





gain of a certain amount of money. It is true that even when a





man is working for hire he often finds pleasure in his work: but





he generally gets so far tired before it is done that he is glad





when the hour for stopping arrives. Perhaps after he has been out





of work for some time, he might, as far as his immediate comfort





is concerned, rather work for nothing than not work at all; but





he will probably prefer not to spoil his market, any more than a





manufacturer would, by offering what he has for sale much below





its normal price. On this matter much will need to be said in





another volume.





    In technical phrase this may be called the marginal





disutility of labour. For, as with every increase in the amount





of a commodity its marginal utility falls; and as with every fall





in that desirableness, there is a fall in the price that can be





got for the whole of the commodity, and not for the last part





only; so the marginal disutility of labour generally increases,





with every increase in its amount.





    The unwillingness of anyone already in an occupation to





increase his exertions depends, under ordinary circumstances, on





fundamental principles of human nature which economists have to





accept as ultimate facts. As Jevons remarks,(3*) there is often





some resistance to be overcome before setting to work. Some





little painful effort is often involved at starting; but this





gradually diminishes to zero, and is succeeded by pleasure; which





increases for a while until it attains a certain low maximum.





after which it diminishes to zero, and is succeeded by increasing





weariness and craving for relaxation and change. In intellectual





work, however, the pleasure and excitement, after they have once





set in, often go on increasing till progress is stopped of





necessity or by prudence. Everyone in health has a certain store





of energy on which he can draw, but which can only be replaced by





rest; so that if his expenditure exceed his income for long, his





health becomes bankrupt; and employers often find that in cases





of great need a temporary increase of pay will induce their





workmen to do an amount of work which they cannot long keep up,





whatever they are paid for it. One reason of this is that the





need for relaxation becomes more urgent with every increase in





the hours of labour beyond a certain limit. The disagreeableness





of additional work increases; partly because, as the time left





for rest and other activities diminishes, the agreeableness of





additional free time increases.





    Subject to these and some other qualifications, it is broadly





true that the exertions which any set of workers will make, rise





or fall with a rise or fall in the remuneration which is offered





to them. As the price required to attract purchasers for any





given amount of a commodity, was called the demand price for that





amount during a year or any other given time; so the price





required to call forth the exertion necessary for producing any





given amount of a commodity, may be called the supply price for





that amount during the same time. And if for the moment we





assumed that production depended solely upon the exertions of a





certain number of workers, already in existence and trained for





their work, we should get a list of supply prices corresponding





to the list of demand prices which we have already considered.





This list would set forth theoretically in one column of figures





various amounts of exertion and therefore of production; and in a





parallel column the prices which must be paid to induce the





available workers to put forth these amounts of exertion.(4*)





    But this simple method of treating the supply of work of any





kind, and consequently the supply of goods made by that work,





assumes that the number of those who are qualified for it is





fixed; and that assumption can be made only for short periods of





time. The total numbers of the people change under the action of





many causes. Of these causes only some are economic; but among





them the average earnings of labour take a prominent place;





though their influence on the growth of numbers is fitful and





irregular.





    But the distribution of the population between different





trades is more subject to the influence of economic causes. In





the long run the supply of labour in any trade is adapted more or





less closely to the demand for it: thoughtful parents bring up





their children to the most advantageous occupations to which they





have access; that is to those that offer the best reward, in





wages and other advantages, in return for labour that is not too





severe in quantity or character, and for skill that is not too





hard to be acquired. This adjustment between demand and supply





can however never be perfect; fluctuations of demand may make it





much greater or much less for a while, even for many years, than





would have been just sufficient to induce parents to select for





their children that trade rather than some other of the same





class. Although therefore the reward to be had for any kind of





work at any time does stand in some relation to the difficulty of





acquiring the necessary skill combined with the exertion, the





disagreeableness, the waste of leisure, etc. involved in the work





itself; yet this correspondence is liable to great disturbances.





The study of these disturbances is a difficult task; and it will





occupy us much in later stages of our work. But the present Book





is mainly descriptive and raises few difficult problems.











NOTES:











1. Labour is classed as economic when it is "undergone partly or





wholly with a view to some good other than the pleasure directly





derived from it." See p. 65 and footnote. Such labour with the





head as does not tend directly or indirectly to promote material





production, as for instance the work of the schoolboy at his





tasks, is left out of account, so long as we are confining our





attention to production in the ordinary sense of the term. From





some points of view, but not from all, the phrase Land, Labour,





Capital would be more symmetrical if labour were interpreted to





mean the labourers, i.e. mankind. See Walras, conomie Politique





Pure, Leon 17, and Prof. Fisher, Economic Journal, VI, p. 529.











2. We have seen (p. 124) that, if a person makes the whole of his





purchases at the price which he would be just willing to pay for





his last purchases, he gains a surplus of satisfaction on his





earlier purchases; since he gets them for less than he would have





paid rather than go without them. So, if the price paid to him





for doing any work is an adequate reward for that part which he





does most unwillingly; and if, as generally happens, the same





payment is given for that part of the work which he does less





unwillingly and at less real cost to himself; then from that part





he obtains a producer's surplus. Some difficulties connected with





this notion are considered in Appendix K.





    The labourer's unwillingness to sell his labour for less than





its normal price resembles the unwillingness of manufacturers to





spoil their market by pushing goods for sale at a low price; even





though, so far as the particular transaction is concerned, they





would rather take the low price than let their works stand idle.











3. Theory of Political Economy, Ch. V. This doctrine has been





emphasized and developed in much detail by Austrian and American





economists.











4. See above III, iii, section 4.

















Chapter 2











The Fertility of Land

















    1. The requisites of production are commonly spoken of as





land, labour and capital: those material things which owe their





usefulness to human labour being classed under capital, and those





which owe nothing to it being classed as land. The distinction is





obviously a loose one: for bricks are but pieces of earth





slightly worked up; and the soil of old settled countries has for





the greater part been worked over many times by man, and owes to





him its present form. There is however a scientific principle





underlying the distinction. While man has no power of creating





matter, he creates utilities by putting things into a useful





form;(1*) and the utilities made by him can be increased in





supply if there is an increased demand for them: they have a





supply price. But there are other utilities over the supply of





which he has no control; they are given as a fixed quantity by





nature and have therefore no supply price. The term "land" has





been extended by economists so as to include the permanent





sources of these utilities;(2*) whether they are found in land,





as the term is commonly used, or in seas and rivers, in sunshine





and rain, in winds and waterfalls.





    When we have inquired what it is that marks off land from





those material things which we regard as products of the land, we





shall find that the fundamental attribute of land is its





extension. The right to use a piece of land gives command over a





certain space -- a certain part of the earth's surface. The area





of the earth is fixed: the geometric relations in which any





particular part of it stands to other parts are fixed. Man has no





control over them; they are wholly unaffected by demand; they





have no cost of production, there is no supply price at which





they can be produced.





    The use of a certain area of the earth's surface is a primary





condition of anything that man can do; it gives him room for his





own actions, with the enjoyment of the heat and the light, the





air and the rain which nature assigns to that area; and it





determines his distance from, and in a great measure his





relations to, other things and other persons. We shall find that





it is this property of "land" which, though as yet insufficient





prominence has been given to it, is the ultimate cause of the





distinction which all writers on economics are compelled to make





between land and other things. It is the foundation of much that





is most interesting and most difficult in economic science.





    Some parts of the earth's surface contribute to production





chiefly by the services which they render to the navigator:





others are of chief value to the miner; others -- though this





selection is made by man rather than by nature -- to the builder.





But when the productiveness of land is spoken of our first





thoughts turn to its agricultural use.





    2. To the agriculturist an area of land is the means of





supporting a certain amount of vegetable, and perhaps ultimately





of animal, life. For this purpose the soil must have certain





mechanical and chemical qualities.





    Mechanically, it must be so far yielding that the fine roots





of plants can push their way freely in it; and yet it must be





firm enough to give them a good hold. It must not err as some





sandy soils do by affording water too free a passage: for then it





will often be dry, and the plant food will be washed away almost





as soon as it is formed in the soil or put into it. Nor must it





err, as stiff clays do, by not allowing the water a fairly free





passage. For constant supplies of fresh water, and of the air





that it brings with it in its journey through the soil, are





essential: they convert into plant food the minerals and gases





that otherwise would be useless or even poisonous. The action of





fresh air and water and of frosts are nature's tillage of the





soil; and even unaided they will in time make almost any part of





the earth' s surface fairly fertile if the soil that they form





can rest where it is, and is not torn away down-hill by rain and





torrents as soon as it is formed. But man gives great aid in this





mechanical preparation of the soil. The chief purpose of his





tillage is to help nature to enable the soil to hold plant roots





gently but firmly, and to enable the air and water to move about





freely in it. And farmyard manure subdivides clay soils and makes





them lighter and more open; while to sandy soils it gives a much





needed firmness of texture, and helps them, mechanically as well





as chemically, to hold the materials of plant food which would





otherwise be quickly washed out of them.





    Chemically the soil must have the inorganic elements that the





plant wants in a form palatable to it; and in some cases man can





make a great change with but little labour. For he can then turn





a barren into a very fertile soil by adding a small quantity of





just those things that are needed; using in most cases either





lime in some of its many forms, or those artificial manures which





modern chemical science has provided in great variety: and he is





now calling in the aid of bacteria to help him in this work.





    3. By all these means the fertility of the soil can be





brought under man's control. He can by sufficient labour make





almost any land bear large crops. He can prepare the soil





mechanically and chemically for whatever crops he intends to grow





next. He can adapt his crops to the nature of the soil and to one





another; selecting such a rotation that each will leave the land





in such a state, and at such a time of year, that it can be





worked up easily and without loss of time into a suitable seed





bed for the coming crop. He can even permanently alter the nature





of the soil by draining it, or by mixing with it other soil that





will supplement its deficiencies. Hitherto this has been done





only on a small scale; chalk and lime, clay and marl have been





but thinly spread over the fields; a completely new soil has





seldom been made except in gardens and other favoured spots. But





it is possible, and even as some think probable, that at some





future time the mechanical agencies used in making railways and





other great earthworks may be applied on a large scale to





creating a rich soil by mixing two poor soils with opposite





faults.





    All these changes are likely to be carried out more





extensively and thoroughly in the future than in the past. But





even now the greater part of the soil in cold countries owes much





of its character to human action; all that lies just below the





surface has in it a large element of capital, the produce of





man's past labour. Those free gifts of nature which Ricardo





classed as the "inherent" and "indestructible" properties of the





soil, have been largely modified; partly impoverished and partly





enriched by the work of many generations of men.





    But it is different with that which is above the surface.





Every acre has given to it by nature an annual income of heat and





light, of air and moisture; and over these man has but little





control. He may indeed alter the climate a little by extensive





drainage works or by planting forests, or cutting them down. But,





on the whole, the action of the sun and the wind and the rain are





an annuity fixed by nature for each plot of land. Ownership of





the land gives possession of this annuity: and it also gives the





space required for the life and action of vegetables and animals;





the value of this space being much affected by its geographical





position.





    We may then continue to use the ordinary distinction between





the original or inherent properties, which the land derives from





nature, and the artificial properties which it owes to human





action; provided we remember that the first include the





space-relations of the plot in question, and the annuity that





nature has given it of sunlight and air and rain; and that in





many cases these are the chief of the inherent properties of the





soil. It is chiefly from them that the ownership of agricultural





land derives its peculiar significance, and the Theory of Rent





its special character.





    4. But the question how far the fertility of any soil is due





to the original properties given to it by nature, and how far to





the changes in it made by man, cannot be fully discussed without





taking account of the kind of produce raised from it. Human





agency can do much more to promote the growth of some crops than





of others. At one end of the scale are forest trees; an oak well





planted and with plenty of room has very little to gain from





man's aid: there is no way of applying labour to it so as to





obtain any considerable return. Nearly the same may be said of





the grass on some rich river bottoms which are endowed with a





rich soil and good natural drainage; wild animals feeding off





this grass without man's care will farm it nearly as well as he





does; and much of the richest farm land in England (paying a rent





of ? an acre and upwards) would give to unaided nature almost as





great a return as is got from it now. Next comes land which,





though not quite so rich, is still kept in permanent pasture; and





after this comes arable land on which man does not trust to





nature's sowing, but prepares for each crop a seed bed to suit





its special wants, sows the seed himself and weeds away the





rivals to it. The seeds which he sows are selected for their





habit of quickly maturing and fully developing just those parts





which are most useful to him; and though the habit of making this





selection carefully is only quite modern, and is even now far





from general, yet the continued work of thousands of years has





given him plants that have but little resemblance to their wild





ancestors. Lastly, the kinds of produce which owe most to man's





labour and care are the choicer kinds of fruits, flowers and





vegetables, and of animals, particularly those which are used for





improving their own breeds. For while nature left to herself





would select those that are best able to take care of themselves





and their offspring, man selects those which will provide him





most quickly with the largest supplies of the things he most





wants; and many of the choicest products could not hold their own





at all without his care.





    Thus various then are the parts which man plays in aiding





nature to raise the different kinds of agricultural produce. In





each case he works on till the extra return got by extra capital





and labour has so far diminished that it will no longer





remunerate him for applying them. Where this limit is soon





reached he leaves nature to do nearly all the work; where his





share in the production has been great, it is because he has been





able to work far without reaching this limit. We are thus brought





to consider the law of diminishing return.





    It is important to note that the return to capital and labour





now under discussion is measured by the amount of the produce





raised independently of any changes that may meanwhile take place





in the exchange value or price of produce; such, for instance, as





might occur if a new railway had been made in the neighbourhood,





or the population of the county had increased much, while





agricultural produce could not be imported easily. Such changes





will be of vital importance when we come to draw inferences from





the law of diminishing return, and particularly when we discuss





the pressure of increasing population on the means of





subsistence. But they have no bearing on the law itself, because





that has to do not with the value of the produce raised, but only





with its amount.(3*)











NOTES:











1. See Book II, Chapter iii.











2. In Ricardo's famous phrase "the original and indestructible





powers of the soil." Von Thnen, in a noteworthy discussion of





the basis of the theory of rent, and of the positions which Adam





Smith and Ricardo took with regard to it, speaks of "Der Boden an





sich"; a phrase which unfortunately cannot be translated, but





which means the soil as it would be by itself, if not altered by





the action of man (Der Isolierte Staat, 1, i, 5).











3. But see the latter part of IV, iii, section 8; also IV, xiii,





section 2.











Chapter 3











The Fertility of Land, Continued, The Tendency to Diminishing





Return











    1. The law of or statement of tendency to Diminishing Return





may be provisionally worded thus:





    An increase in the capital and labour applied in the





cultivation of land causes in general a less than proportionate





increase in the amount of produce raised, unless it happens to





coincide with an improvement in the arts of agriculture.





    We learn from history and by observation that every





agriculturist in every age and clime desires to have the use of a





good deal of land; and that when he cannot get it freely, he will





pay for it, if he has the means. If he thought that he would get





as good results by applying all his capital and labour to a very





small piece, he would not pay for any but a very small piece.





    When land that requires no clearing is to be had for nothing,





everyone uses just that quantity which he thinks will give his





capital and labour the largest return. His cultivation is





"extensive," not "intensive." He does not aim at getting many





bushels of corn from any one acre, for then he would cultivate





only a few acres. His purpose is to get as large a total crop as





possible with a given expenditure of seed and labour; and





therefore he sows as many acres as he can manage to bring under a





light cultivation. Of course he may go too far: he may spread his





work over so large an area that he would gain by concentrating





his capital and labour on a smaller space; and under these





circumstances if he could get command over more capital and





labour so as to apply more to each acre, the land would give him





an Increasing Return; that is, an extra return larger in





proportion than it gives to his present expenditure. But if he





has made his calculations rightly, he is using just so much





ground as will give him the highest return; and he would lose by





concentrating his capital and labour on a smaller area. If he had





command over more capital and labour and were to apply more to





his present land, he would gain less than he would by taking up





more land; he would get a Diminishing Return, that is, an extra





return smaller in proportion than he gets for the last





applications of capital and labour that he now makes, provided of





course that there is meanwhile no perceptible improvement in his





agricultural skill. As his sons grow up they will have more





capital and labour to apply to land; and in order to avoid





obtaining a diminishing return, they will want to cultivate more





land. But perhaps by this time all the neighbouring land is





already taken up, and in order to get more they must buy it or





pay a rent for the use of it, or migrate where they can get it





for nothing.(1*)





    This tendency to a diminishing return was the cause of





Abraham's parting from Lot,(2*) and most of the migrations of





which history tells. And wherever the right to cultivate land is





much in request, we may be sure that the tendency to a





diminishing return is in full operation. Were it not for this





tendency every farmer could save nearly the whole of his rent by





giving up all but a small piece of his land, and bestowing all





his capital and labour on that. If all the capital and labour





which he would in that case apply to it, gave as good a return in





proportion as that which he now applies to it, he would get from





that plot as large a produce as he now gets from his whole farm;





and he would make a net gain of all his rent save that of the





little plot that he retained.





    It may be conceded that the ambition of farmers often leads





them to take more land than they can properly manage: and indeed





almost every great authority on agriculture from Arthur Young





downwards, has inveighed against this mistake. But when they tell





a farmer that he would gain by applying his capital and labour to





a smaller area, they do not necessarily mean that he would get a





larger gross produce. It is sufficient for their argument that





the saving in rent would more than counterbalance any probable





diminution of the total returns that he got from the land. If a





farmer pays a fourth of his produce as rent, he would gain by





concentrating his capital and labour on less land, provided the





extra capital and labour applied to each acre gave anything more





than three-fourths as good a return in proportion, as he got from





his earlier expenditure.





    Again, it may be granted that much land, even in a country as





advanced as England, is so unskilfully cultivated that it could





be made to give more than double its present gross produce if





twice the present capital and labour were applied to it





skilfully. Very likely those are right who maintain that if all





English farmers were as able, wise and energetic as the best are,





they might profitably apply twice the capital and labour that is





now applied. Assuming rent to be one-fourth of the present





produce, they might get seven hundredweight of produce for every





four that they now get: it is conceivable that with still more





improved methods they might get eight hundredweight, or even





more. But this does not prove that, as things are, further





capital and labour could obtain from land an increasing return.





The fact remains that, taking farmers as they are with the skill





and energy which they actually have, we find as the result of





universal observation that there is not open to them a short road





to riches by giving up a great part of their land, by





concentrating all their capital and labour on the remainder, and





saving for their own pockets the rent of all but that remainder.





The reason why they cannot do this is told in the law of





diminishing return; that return being measured, as has already





been said by its quantity, not its exchange value.





    We may now state distinctly the limitations which were





implied under the words "in general" in our provisional wording





of the law. The law is a statement of a tendency which may indeed





be held in check for a time by improvements in the arts of





production and by the fitful course of the development of the





full powers of the soil; but which must ultimately become





irresistible if the demand for produce should increase without





limit. Our final statement of the tendency may then be divided





into two parts, thus: --





    Although an improvement in the arts of agriculture may raise





the rate of return which land generally affords to any given





amount of capital and labour; and although the capital and labour





already applied to any piece of land may have been so inadequate





for the development of its full powers, that some further





expenditure on it even with the existing arts of agriculture





would give a more than proportionate return; yet these conditions





are rare in an old country: and, except when they are present,





the application of increased capital and labour to land will add





a less than proportionate amount to the produce raised, unless





there be meanwhile an increase in the skill of the individual





cultivator. Secondly, whatever may be the future developments of





the arts of agriculture, a continued increase in the application





of capital and labour to land must ultimately result in a





diminution of the extra produce which can be obtained by a given





extra amount of capital and labour.





    2. Making use of a term suggested by James Mill, we may





regard the capital and labour applied to land as consisting of





equal successive doses.(3*) As we have seen, the return to the





first few doses may perhaps be small and a greater number of





doses may get a larger proportionate return; the return to





successive doses may even in exceptional cases alternately rise





and fall. But our law states that sooner or later (it being





always supposed that there is meanwhile no change in the arts of





cultivation) a point will be reached after which all further





doses will obtain a less proportionate return than the preceding





doses. The dose is always a combined dose of labour and capital,





whether it is applied by a peasant owner working unaided on his





own land, or at the charges of a capitalist farmer who does no





manual labour himself. But in the latter case the main body of





the outlay presents itself in the form of money; and when





discussing the business economy of farming in relation to English





conditions, it is often convenient to consider the labour





converted at its market value into a money equivalent, and to





speak of doses of capital simply, rather than of doses of labour





and capital.





    The dose which only just remunerates the cultivator may be





said to be the marginal dose, and the return to it the marginal





return. If there happens to be in the neighbourhood land that is





cultivated but only just pays its expenses, and so gives no





surplus for rent we may suppose this dose applied to it. We can





then say that the dose applied to it is applied to land on the





margin of cultivation, and this way of speaking has the advantage





of simplicity. But it is not necessary for the argument to





suppose that there is any such land: what we want to fix our





minds on is the return to the marginal dose; whether it happens





to be applied to poor land or to rich does not matter; all that





is necessary is that it should be the last dose which can





profitably be applied to that land.(4*)





    When we speak of the marginal, or the "last" dose applied to





the land, we do not mean the last in time, we mean that dose





which is on the margin of profitable expenditure; that is, which





is applied so as just to give the ordinary returns to the capital





and labour of the cultivator, without affording any surplus. To





take a concrete instance, we may suppose a farmer to be thinking





of sending the hoers over a field once more; and after a little





hesitation he decides that it is worth his while, but only just





worth his while to do it. The dose of capital and labour spent on





doing it, is then the last dose in our present sense, though





there are many doses still to be applied in reaping the crop. Of





course the return to this last dose cannot be separated from the





others; but we ascribe to it all that part of the produce which





we believe would not have been produced if the farmer had decided





against the extra hoeing.(5*)





    Since the return to the dose on the margin of cultivation





just remunerates the cultivator, it follows that he will be just





remunerated for the whole of his capital and labour by as many





times the marginal return as he has applied doses in all.





Whatever he gets in excess of this is the surplus produce of the





land. This surplus is retained by the cultivator if he owns the





land himself.(6*)





    It is important to note that this description of the nature





of surplus produce is not a theory of rent: we shall not be ready





for that till a much later stage. All that can be said here, is





that this surplus produce may, under certain conditions, become





the rent which the owner of the land can exact from the tenant





for its use. But, as we shall see hereafter, the full rent of a





farm in an old country is made up of three elements: the first





being due to the value of the soil as it was made by nature; the





second to improvements made in it by man; and the third, which is





often the most important of all, to the growth of a dense and





rich population, and to facilities of communication by public





roads, railroads, etc. It is to be noted also that in an old





country it is impossible to discover what was the original state





of the land before it was first cultivated. The results of some





of man's work are for good and evil fixed in the land, and cannot





be distinguished from those of nature's work: the line of





division is blurred, and must be drawn more or less arbitrarily.





But for most purposes it is best to regard the first difficulties





of coping with nature as pretty well conquered before we begin to





reckon the farmer's cultivation. Thus the returns that we count





as due to the first doses of capital and labour are generally the





largest of all, and the tendency of the return to diminish shows





itself at once. Having English agriculture chiefly in view, we





may fairly take, as Ricardo did, this as the typical case.(7*)





    3. Let us next inquire on what depends the rate of diminution





or of increase of the returns to successive doses of capital and





labour. We have seen that there are great variations in the share





of the produce which man may claim as the additional result of





his own work over what unaided nature would have produced; and





that man's share is much larger with some crops and soils and





methods of cultivation than with others. Thus broadly speaking it





increases as we pass from forest to pasture land, from pasture to





arable, and from plough land to spade land; and this is because





the rate of diminution of the return is as a rule greatest in





forests, rather less in pasture, still less in arable land, and





least of all in spade land.    There is no absolute measure of





the richness or fertility of land. Even if there be no change in





the arts of production, a mere increase in the demand for produce





may invert the order in which two adjacent pieces of land rank as





regards fertility. The one which gives the smaller produce, when





both are uncultivated, or when the cultivation of both is equally





slight, may rise above the other and justly rank as the more





fertile when both are cultivated with equal thoroughness. In





other words, many of those lands which are the least fertile when





cultivation is merely extensive, become among the most fertile





when cultivation is intensive. For instance, self-drained pasture





land may give a return large in proportion to a very slight





expenditure of capital and labour, but a rapidly diminishing





return to further expenditure: as population increases it may





gradually become profitable to break up some of the pasture and





introduce a mixed cultivation of roots and grains and grasses;





and then the return to further doses of capital and labour may





diminish less quickly.





    Other land makes poor pasture, but will give more or less





liberal returns to a great deal of capital and labour applied in





tilling and in manuring it; its returns to the early doses are





not very high, but they diminish slowly. Again, other land is





marshy. It may, as did the fens of east England, produce little





but osiers and wild fowl. Or, as is the case in many tropical





districts, it may be prolific of vegetation, but so shrouded with





malaria that it is difficult for man to live there, and still





more to work there. In such cases the returns to capital and





labour are at first small, but as drainage progresses, they





increase; afterwards perhaps they again fall off.(8*)





    But when improvements of this kind have once been made, the





capital invested in the soil cannot be removed; the early history





of the cultivation is not repeated; and the produce due to





further applications of capital and labour shows a tendency to





diminishing return.(9*)





    Similar though less conspicuous changes may occur on land





already well cultivated. For instance, without being marshy, it





may be in need of a little drainage to take off the stagnant





water from it, and to enable fresh water and air to stream





through it. Or the subsoil may happen to be naturally richer than





the soil at the surface: or again, though not itself rich, it may





have just those properties in which the surface soil is





deficient, and then a thorough system of deep steam-ploughing may





permanently change the character of the land.





    Thus we need not suppose that when the return to extra





capital and labour has begun to diminish, it will always continue





to do so. Improvements in the arts of production may, it has





always been understood, raise generally the return which can be





got by any amount of capital and labour; but this is not what is





meant here. The point is that, independently of any increase in





his knowledge, and using only those methods with which he has





long been familiar, a farmer finding extra capital and labour at





his command, may sometimes obtain an increasing return even at a





late stage in his cultivation.(10*)





    It has been well said that as the strength of a chain is that





of its weakest link, so fertility is limited by that element in





which it is most deficient. Those who are in a hurry, will reject





a chain which has one or two very weak links, however strong the





rest may be: and prefer to it a much slighter chain that has no





flaw. But if there is heavy work to be done, and they have time





to make repairs, they will set the larger chain in order, and





then its strength will exceed that of the other. In this we find





the explanation of much that is apparently strange in





agricultural history.





    The first settlers in a new country generally avoid land





which does not lend itself to immediate cultivation. They are





often repelled by the very luxuriance of natural vegetation, if





it happens to be of a kind that they do not want. They do not





care to plough land that is at all heavy, however rich it might





become if thoroughly worked. They will have nothing to do with





water-logged land. They generally select light land which can





easily be worked with a double plough, and then they sow their





seed broadly, so that the plants when they grow up may have





plenty of light and air, and may collect their food from a wide





area.





    When America was first settled, many farming operations that





are now done by horse machinery were still done by hand; and





though now the farmers have a strong preference for flat prairie





land, free from stumps and stones, where their machines can work





easily and without risk, they had then no great objection to a





hill-side. Their crops were light in proportion to their acreage,





but heavy in proportion to the capital and labour expended in





raising them.





    We cannot then call one piece of land more fertile than





another until we know something about the skill and enterprise of





its cultivators, and the amount of capital and labour at their





disposal; and till we know whether the demand for produce is such





as to make intensive cultivation profitable with the resources at





their disposal. If it is, those lands will be the most fertile





which give the highest average returns to a large expenditure of





capital and labour; but if not, those will be the most fertile





which give the best returns to the first few doses. The term





fertility has no meaning except with reference to the special





circumstances of a particular time and place.





    But even when so limited there is some uncertainty as to the





usage of the term. Sometimes attention is directed chiefly to the





power which land has of giving adequate returns to intensive





cultivation and so bearing a large total produce per acre; and





sometimes to its power of yielding a large surplus produce or





rent, even though its gross produce is not very large: thus in





England now rich arable land is very fertile in the former sense,





rich meadow in the latter. For many purposes it does not matter





which of these senses of the term is understood: in the few cases





in which it does matter, an interpretation clause must be





supplied in the context.(11*)





    4. But further, the order of fertility of different soils is





liable to be changed by changes in the methods of cultivation and





in the relative values of different crops. Thus when at the end





of last century Mr Coke showed how to grow wheat well on light





soils by preparing the way with clover, they rose relatively to





clay soils; and now though they are still sometimes called from





old custom "poor", some of them have a higher value, and are





really more fertile, than much of the land that used to be





carefully cultivated while they were left in a state of nature.





    Again, the increasing demand in central Europe for wood to be





used as fuel and for building purposes, has raised the value of





the pine-covered mountain slopes relatively to almost every other





kind of land. But in England this rise has been prevented by the





substitution of coal for wood as fuel, and of iron for wood as a





material for ship-building, and lastly by England's special





facilities for importing wood. Again, the cultivation of rice and





jute often gives a very high value to lands that are too much





covered with water to bear most other crops. And again, since the





repeal of the Corn Laws the prices of meat and dairy produce have





risen in England relatively to that of corn. Those arable soils





that would grow rich forage crops in rotation with corn, rose





relatively to the cold clay soils; and permanent pasture





recovered part of that great fall in value relatively to arable





land, which had resulted from the growth of population.(12*)





    Independently of any change in the suitability of the





prevailing crops and methods of cultivation for special soils,





there is a constant tendency towards equality in the value of





different soils. In the absence of any special cause to the





contrary, the growth of population and wealth will make the





poorer soils gain on the richer. Land that was at one time





entirely neglected is made by much labour to raise rich crops;





its annual income of light and heat and air, is probably as good





as those of richer soils: while its faults can be much lessened





by labour.(13*)





    As there is no absolute standard for fertility, so there is





none of good cultivation. The best cultivation in the richest





parts of the Channel Islands, for instance, involves a lavish





expenditure of capital and labour on each acre: for they are near





good markets and have a monopoly of an equable and early climate.





If left to nature the land would not be very fertile, for though





it has many virtues, it has two weak links (being deficient in





phosphoric acid and potash). But, partly by the aid of the





abundant seaweed on its shores, these links can be strengthened,





and the chain thus becomes exceptionally strong. Intense, or as





it is ordinarily called in England "good" cultivation, will thus





raise ?00 worth of early potatoes from a single acre. But an





equal expenditure per acre by the farmer in Western America would





ruin him; relatively to his circumstances it would not be good,





but bad cultivation.





    5. Ricardo' s wording of the law of diminishing return was





inexact. It is however probable that the inaccuracy was due not





to careless thinking but only to careless writing. In any case he





would have been justified in thinking that these conditions were





not of great importance in the peculiar circumstances of England





at the time at which he wrote, and for the special purposes of





the particular practical problems he had in view. Of course he





could not anticipate the great series of inventions which were





about to open up new sources of supply, and, with the aid of free





trade, to revolutionize English agriculture; but the agricultural





history of England and other countries might have led him to lay





greater stress on the probability of a change.(14*)





    He stated that the first settlers in a new country invariably





chose the richest lands, and that as population increased, poorer





and poorer soils were gradually brought under cultivation,





speaking carelessly as though there were an absolute standard of





fertility. But as we have already seen, where land is free,





everyone chooses that which is best adapted for his own purpose,





and that which will give him, all things considered, the best





return for his capital and labour. He looks out, therefore, for





land that can be cultivated at once, and passes by land that has





any weak links in the chain of its elements of fertility, however





strong it may be in some other links. But besides having to avoid





malaria, he must think of his communication with his markets and





the base of his resources; and in some cases the need for





security against the attacks of enemies and wild beasts outweighs





all other considerations. It is therefore not to be expected that





the lands which were first chosen, should turn out always to be





those which ultimately come to be regarded as the most fertile.





Ricardo did not consider this point, and thus laid himself open





to attacks by Carey and others, which, though for the greater





part based on a misinterpretation of his position, have yet some





solid substance in them.





    The fact that, in new countries, soils which an English





farmer would regard as poor, are sometimes cultivated before





neighbouring soils which he would regard as rich, is not





inconsistent, as some foreign writers have supposed, with the





general tenor of Ricardo's doctrines. Its practical importance is





in relation to the conditions under which the growth of





population tends to cause increased pressure on the means of





subsistence: it shifts the centre of interest from the mere





amount of the farmer's produce to its exchange value in terms of





the things which the industrial population in his neighbourhood





will offer for it.(15*)





    6. Ricardo, and the economists of his time generally were too





hasty in deducing this inference from the law of diminishing





return; and they did not allow enough for the increase of





strength that comes from organization. But in fact every farmer





is aided by the presence of neighbours whether agriculturists or





townspeople.(16*) Even if most of them are engaged like himself





in agriculture, they gradually supply him with good roads, and





other means of communication: they give him a market in which he





can buy at reasonable terms what he wants, necessaries, comforts





and luxuries for himself and his family, and all the various





requisites for his farm work: they surround him with knowledge:





medical aid, instruction and amusement are brought to his door;





his mind becomes wider, and his efficiency is in many ways





increased. And if the neighbouring market town expands into a





large industrial centre, his gain is much greater. All his





produce is worth more; some things which he used to throw away





fetch a good price. He finds new openings in dairy farming and





market gardening, and with a larger range of produce he makes use





of rotations that keep his land always active without denuding it





of any one of the elements that are necessary for its fertility.





    Further, as we shall see later on, an increase of population





tends to develop the organization of trade and industry; and





therefore the law of diminishing return does not apply to the





total capital and labour spent in a district as sharply as to





that on a single farm. Even when cultivation has reached a stage





after which each successive dose applied to a field would get a





less return than the preceding dose, it may be possible for an





increase in the population to cause a more than proportional





increase in the means of subsistence. It is true that the evil





day is only deferred: but it is deferred. The growth of





population, if not checked by other causes, must ultimately be





checked by the difficulty of obtaining raw produce; but in spite





of the law of diminishing return, the pressure of population on





the means of subsistence may be restrained for a long time to





come by the opening up of new fields of supply, by the cheapening





of railway and steamship communication, and by the growth of





organization and knowledge.





    Against this must be set the growing difficulty of getting





fresh air and light, and in some cases fresh water, in densely





peopled places. The natural beauties of a place of fashionable





resort have a direct money value which cannot be overlooked; but





it requires some effort to realize the true value to men, women





and children of being able to stroll amid beautiful and varied





scenery.





    7. As has already been said the land in economic phrase





includes rivers and the sea. In river-fisheries, the extra return





to additional applications of capital and labour shows a rapid





diminution. As to the sea, opinions differ. Its volume is vast,





and fish are very prolific; and some think that a practically





unlimited supply can be drawn from the sea by man without





appreciably affecting the numbers that remain there; or in other





words, that the law of diminishing return scarcely applies at all





to sea-fisheries: while others think that experience shows a





falling-off in the productiveness of those fisheries that have





been vigorously worked, especially by steam trawlers. The





question is important, for the future population of the world





will be appreciably affected as regards both quantity and





quality, by the available supply of fish.





    The produce of mines again, among which may be reckoned





quarries and brickfields, is said to conform to the law of





diminishing return; but this statement is misleading. It is true





that we find continually increasing difficulty in obtaining a





further supply of minerals, except in so far as we obtain





increased power over nature's stores through improvements in the





arts of mining, and through better knowledge of the contents of





the earth's crust; and there is no doubt that, other things being





equal, the continued application of capital and labour to mines





will result in a diminishing rate of yield. But this yield is not





a net yield, like the return of which we speak in the law of





diminishing return. That return is part of a constantly recurring





income, while the produce of mines is merely a giving up of their





stored-up treasures. The produce of the field is something other





than the soil; for the field, properly cultivated, retains its





fertility. But the produce of the mine is part of the mine





itself.





    To put the same thing in another way, the supply of





agricultural produce and of fish is a perennial stream; mines are





as it were nature' s reservoir. The more nearly a reservoir is





exhausted, the greater is the labour of pumping from it; but if





one man could pump it out in ten days, ten men could pump it out





in one day: and when once empty, it would yield no more. So the





mines that are being opened this year might just as easily have





been opened many years ago: if the plans had been properly laid





in advance, and the requisite specialized capital and skill got





ready for the work, ten years' supply of coal might have been





raised in one year without any increased difficulty; and when a





vein had once given up its treasure, it could produce no more.





This difference is illustrated by the fact that the rent of a





mine is calculated on a different principle from that of a farm.





The farmer contracts to give back the land as rich as he found





it: a mining company cannot do this; and while the farmer's rent





is reckoned by the year, mining rent consists chiefly of





"royalties" which are levied in proportion to the stores that are





taken out of nature's storehouse.(17*)





    On the other hand, services which land renders to man, in





giving him space and light and air in which to live and work, do





conform strictly to the law of diminishing return. It is





advantageous to apply a constantly increasing capital to land





that has any special advantages of situation, natural or





acquired. Buildings tower up towards the sky; natural light and





ventilation are supplemented by artificial means, and the steam





lift reduces the disadvantages of the highest floors; and for





this expenditure there is a return of extra convenience, but it





is a diminishing return. However great the ground rent may be, a





limit is at last reached after which it is better to pay more





ground rent for a larger area than to go on piling up storey on





storey any further; just as the farmer finds that at last a stage





is reached at which more intensive cultivation will not pay its





expenses, and it is better to pay more rent for extra land, than





to face the diminution in the return which he would get by





applying more capital and labour to his old land.(18*) From this





it results that the theory of ground rents is substantially the





same as that of farm rents. This and similar facts will presently





enable us to simplify and extend the theory of value as given by





Ricardo and Mill.





    And what is true of building land is true of many other





things. If a manufacturer has, say, three planing machines there





is a certain amount of work which he can get out of them easily.





If he wants to get more work from them he must laboriously





economize every minute of their time during the ordinary hours,





and perhaps work overtime. Thus after they are once well





employed, every successive application of effort to them brings





him a diminishing return. At last the net return is so small that





he finds it cheaper to buy a fourth machine than to force so much





work out of his old machines: just as a farmer who has already





cultivated his land highly finds it cheaper to take in more land





than to force more produce from his present land. Indeed there





are points of view from which the income derived from machinery





partakes of the nature of rent: as will be shown in Book V.











 NOTE ON THE LAW OF DIMINISHING RETURN











    8. The elasticity of the notion of diminishing return cannot





be fully considered here; for it is but an important detail of





that large general problem of the economic distribution of





resources in the investment of capital, which is the pivot of the





main argument of Book V and indeed of a great part of the whole





Volume. But a few words about it seem now to be called for in





this place, because much stress has recently been laid on it





under the able and suggestive leadership of Professor





Carver.(19*)





    If a manufacturer expends an inappropriately large amount of





his resources on machinery, so that a considerable part of it is





habitually idle; or on buildings, so that a considerable part of





his space is not well filled; or on his office staff, so that he





has to employ some of them on work that it is not worth what it





costs; then his excessive expenditure in that particular





direction will not be as remunerative as his previous expenditure





had been: and it may be said to yield him a "diminishing return."





But this use of the phrase, though strictly correct is apt to





mislead unless used with caution. For when the tendency to a





diminishing return from increased labour and capital applied to





land is regarded as a special instance of the general tendency to





diminishing return from any agent of production, applied in





excessive proportion to the other agents, one is apt to take it





for granted that the supply of the other factors can be





increased. That is to say, one is apt to deny the existence of





that condition -- the fixedness of the whole stock of cultivable





land in an old country -- which was the main foundation of those





great classical discussions of the law of diminishing return,





which we have just been considering. Even the individual farmer





may not always be able to get an additional ten or fifty acres





adjoining his own farm, just when he wants them, save at a





prohibitive price. And in that respect land differs from most





other agents of production even from the individual point of





view. This difference may indeed be regarded as of little account





in regard to the individual farmer. But from the social point of





view, from the point of view of the following chapters on





population it is vital. Let us look into this.





    In every phase of any branch of production there is some





distribution of resources between various expenditures which





yields a better result than any other. The abler the man in





control of any business, the nearer he will approach to the





ideally perfect distribution; just as the abler the primitive





housewife in control of a family's stock of wool, the nearer she





will approach to an ideal distribution of wool between the





different needs of the family.(20*)





    If his business extends he will extend his uses of each





requisite of production in due proportion; but not, as has





sometimes been said, proportionately; for instance the proportion





of manual work to machine work, which would be appropriate in a





small furniture factory would not be appropriate in a large one.





If he makes the best possible apportionment of his resources, he





gets the greatest (marginal) return from each appliance of





production of which his business is capable. If he uses too much





of any one he gets a diminishing return from it; because the





others are not able to back it up properly. And this diminishing





return is analogous to that which a farmer obtains, when he





cultivates land so intensively that he obtains a diminishing





return from it. If the farmer can get more land at the same rent





as he has paid for the old, he will take more land, or else lie





open to the imputation of being a bad business man: and this





illustrates the fact that land from the point of view of the





individual cultivator is simply one form of capital.





    But when the older economists spoke of the Law of Diminishing





Return they were looking at the problems of agriculture not only





from the point of view of the individual cultivator but also from





that of the nation as a whole. Now if the nation as a whole finds





its stock of planing machines or ploughs inappropriately large or





inappropriately small, it can redistribute its resources. It can





obtain more of that in which it is deficient, while gradually





lessening its stock of such things as are superabundant: but it





cannot do that in regard to land: it can cultivate its land more





intensively, but it cannot get any more. And for that reason the





older economists rightly insisted that, from the social point of





view, land is not on exactly the same footing as those implements





of production which man can increase without limit.





    No doubt in a new country where there is an abundance of rich





land not yet brought under cultivation, this fixedness of the





total stock of land is not operative. American economists often





speak of the value, or rent, of land as varying with the land's





distance from good markets, because even now there is a great





deal rather than with its fertility; of rich land in their





country which is not fully cultivated. And in like manner they





lay but little stress on the fact that the diminishing return to





labour and capital in general applied to the land by discreet





farmers, in such a country as England, is not exactly on the same





footing as the diminishing return to an inappropriate investment





of their resources by indiscreet farmers or manufacturers in a





disproportionately large number of ploughs or planing machines.





    It is true that when the tendency to diminishing return is





generalized, the return is apt to be expressed in terms of value,





and not of quantity. It must however be conceded that the older





method of measuring return in terms of quantity often jostled





against the difficulty of rightly interpreting a dose of labour





and capital without the aid of a money measure: and that, though





helpful for a broad preliminary survey, it cannot be carried very





far.





    But even the recourse to money fails us, if we want to bring





to a common standard the productiveness of lands in distant times





or places; and we must then fall back on rough, and more or less





arbitrary modes of measurement, which make no aim at numerical





precision, but will yet suffice for the broader purposes of





history. We have to take account of the facts that there are





great variations in the relative amounts of labour and capital in





a dose: and that interest on capital is generally a much less





important item in backward than in advanced stages of





agriculture, in spite of the fact that the rate of interest is





generally much lower in the latter. For most purposes it is





probably best to take as a common standard a day's unskilled





labour of given efficiency: we thus regard the dose as made up of





so much labour of different kinds, and such charges for the use





and replacement of capital, as will together make up the value





of, say, ten days' such labour. the relative proportions of these





elements and their several values in terms of such labour being





fixed according to the special circumstances of each





problem.(21*)





    A similar difficulty is found in comparing the returns





obtained by labour and capital applied under different





circumstances. So long as the crops are of the same kind, the





quantity of one return can be measured off against that of





another: but, when they are of different kinds, they cannot be





compared till they are reduced to a common measure of value.





When, for instance, it is said that land would give better





returns to the capital and labour expended on it with one crop or





rotation of crops than with another, the statement must be





understood to hold only on the basis of the prices at the time.





In such a case we must take the whole period of rotation





together, assuming the land to be in the same condition at the





beginning and the end of the rotation; and counting on the one





hand all the labour and capital applied during the whole period,





and on the other the aggregate returns of all the crops.





    It must be remembered that the return due to a dose of labour





and capital is not here taken to include the value of the capital





itself. For instance, if part of the capital on a farm consists





of two-year-old oxen, then the returns to a year's labour and





capital will include not the full weight of these oxen at the end





of the year, but only the addition that has been made to it





during the year. Again, when a farmer is said to work with a





capital of ?0 to the acre, this includes the value of everything





that he has on the farm; but the total volume of the doses of





labour and capital applied to a farm during, say, a year, does





not include the whole value of the fixed capital, such as





machinery and horses, but only the value of their use after





allowing for interest, depreciation and repairs; though it does





include the whole value of the circulating capital, such as seed.





    The above is the method of measuring capital generally





adopted, and it is to be taken for granted if nothing is said to





the contrary; but another method is more suitable occasionally.





Sometimes it is convenient to speak as though all the capital





applied were circulating capital applied at the beginning of the





year or during it: and in that case everything that is on the





farm at the end of the year is part of the produce. Thus, young





cattle are regarded as a sort of raw material which is worked up





in the course of time into fat cattle ready for the butcher. The





farm implements may even be treated in the same way, their value





at the beginning of the year being taken as so much circulating





capital applied to the farm, and at the end of the year as so





much produce. This plan enables us to avoid a good deal of





repetition of conditioning clauses as to depreciation, etc., and





to save the use of words in many ways. It is often the best plan





for general reasonings of an abstract character, particularly if





they are expressed in a mathematical form.





    The law of diminishing return must have occupied thoughtful





men in every densely peopled country. It was first stated clearly





by Turgot (OEuvres, ed. Daire I, pp. 420-1), as Prof. Cannan has





shown; and its chief applications were developed by Ricardo.











NOTES:











1. Increasing return in the earlier stages arises partly from





economy of organization, similar to that which gives an advantage





to manufacture on a large scale. But it is also partly due to the





fact that where land is very slightly cultivated the farmer's





crops are apt to be smothered by nature's crop of weeds. The





relation between Diminishing and Increasing Return is discussed





further in the last chapter of this Book.











2. "The land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell





together: for their substance was great, so that they could not





dwell together." Genesis xiii, 6.











3. As to this term see the Note at the end of the Chapter.











4. Ricardo was well aware of this: though he did not emphasize it





enough. Those opponents of his doctrine who have supposed that it





has no application to places where all the land pays a rent, have





mistaken the nature of his argument.











5. An illustration from recorded experiments may help to make





clearer the notion of the return to a marginal dose of capital





and labour. The Arkansas experimental station (see The Times, 18





Nov. 1889) reported that four plots of an acre each were treated





exactly alike except in the matter of ploughing and harrowing,





with the following result: --











 Plot            Cultivation             Crop yields





                                        bushels per





                                            acre











  1             Ploughed once               16





  2             Ploughed once and





                    harrowed once           18 1/3





  3             Ploughed twice and





                    harrowed once           21 2/3





  4             Ploughed twice and





                    harrowed twice          23 1/4











    This would show that the dose of capital and labour applied





in harrowing a second time an acre which had already been





ploughed twice gave a return of 1 7/12 bushels. And if the value





of these bushels, after allowing for expenses of harvesting, etc.





just replaced that dose with profits, then that dose was a





marginal one; even though it was not the last in point of time,





since those spent on harvesting must needs come later.











6. Let us seek a graphical illustration. {Figure 11} It is to be





remembered that graphical illustrations are not proofs. They are





merely pictures corresponding very roughly to the main conditions





of certain real problems. They obtain clearness of outline, by





leaving out of account many considerations which vary from one





practical problem to another, and of which the farmer must take





full account in his own special case. If on any given field there





were expended a capital of ?0, a certain amount of produce would





be raised from it: a certain amount larger than the former would





be raised if there were expended on it a capital of ?1. The





difference between these two amounts may be regarded as the





produce due to the fifty-first pound; and if we suppose the





capital to be applied in successive doses of ? each we may speak





of this difference as the produce due to the fifty-first dose.





Let the doses be represented in order by successive equal





divisions of the line OD. Let there now be drawn from the





division of this line representing the fifty-first dose M, a line





MP at right angles to OD, in thickness equal to the length of one





of the divisions, and such that its length represents the amount





of the produce due to the fifty-first dose. Suppose this done for





each separate division up to that corresponding to the last dose





which it is found profitable to put on the land. Let this last





dose be the 110th at D, and DC the corresponding return that only





just remunerates the farmer. The extremities of such lines will





lie on a curve APC. The gross produce will be represented by the





sum of these lines: i.e., since the thickness of each line is





equal to the length of the division on which it stands, by the





area ODCA. Let CGH be drawn parallel to DO, cutting PM in G; then





MG is equal to CD; and since DC just remunerates the farmer for





one dose, MG will just remunerate him for another: and so for all





the portions of the thick vertical lines cut off between OD and





HC. Therefore the sum of these, that is, the area ODCH,





represents the share of the produce that is required to





remunerate him; while the remainder, AHGCPA, is the surplus





produce, which under certain conditions becomes the rent.











7. That is, we may substitute (fig. 11) the dotted line BA' for





BA and regard A' BPC as the typical curve for the return to





capital and labour applied in English agriculture. No doubt crops





of wheat and some other annuals cannot be raised at all without





some considerable labour. But natural grasses which sow





themselves will yield a good return of rough cattle to scarcely





any labour.





    It has already been noticed (Book iii, ch. iii, 1), the law





of diminishing return bears a close analogy to the law of demand.





The return which land gives to a dose of capital and labour may





be regarded as the price which land offers for that dose. Land's





return to capital and labour is, so to speak, her effective





demand for them: her return to any dose is her demand price for





that dose, and the list of returns that she will give to





successive doses may thus be regarded as her demand schedule: but





to avoid confusion we shall call it her "Return Schedule."





Corresponding to the case of the land in the text is that of a





man who may be willing to pay a larger proportionate price for a





paper that would cover the whole of the walls of his room than





for one that would go only half way; and then his demand schedule





would at one stage show an increase and not a diminution of





demand price for an increased quantity. But in the aggregate





demand of many individuals these unevennesses destroy one





another; so that the aggregate demand schedule of a group of





people always shows the demand price as falling steadily with





every increase in the amount offered. In the same way, by





grouping together many pieces of land we might obtain a return





schedule that would show a constant diminution for every increase





of capital and labour applied. But it is more easy to ascertain,





and in some ways more important to take note of, the variations





of individual demand in the case of plots of land than in the





case of people. And therefore our typical return schedule is not





drawn out so as to show as even and uniform a diminution of





return as our typical demand schedule does of demand price.





8. This case may be represented by diagrams. If the produce rises





in real value in the ratio of OH' to OH (so that the amount





required to remunerate the farmer for a dose of capital and





labour has fallen from OH to OH'), the surplus produce rises only





to AH'C', which is not very much greater than its old amount AHC,





fig. 12, representing the first case. The second case is





represented in fig. 13, where a similar change in the price of





produce makes the new surplus produce AH'C' about three times as





large as the old surplus, AHC; and the third in fig. 14. The





earliest doses of capital and labour applied to the land give so





poor a return, that it would not be worth while to apply them





unless it were intended to carry the cultivation further. But





later doses give an increasing return which culminates at P, and





afterwards diminishes. If the price to be got for produce is so





low that an amount OH" is required to remunerate the cultivator





for a dose of capital and labour, it will then be only just





profitable to cultivate the land. For then cultivation will be





carried as far as D"; there will be a deficit on the earlier





doses represented by the area H"AE", and a surplus on the later





doses represented by the area E" PC": and as these two are about





equal, the cultivation of the land so far will only just pay its





way. But if the price of produce rises till OH is sufficient to





remunerate the cultivator for a dose of capital and labour, the





deficit on the earlier doses will sink to HAE, and the surplus on





the later doses will rise to EPC. the net surplus (the true rent





in case the land is hired out) will be the excess of EPC over





HAE. Should the price rise further till OH' is Sufficient to





remunerate the cultivator for a dose of capital and labour, this





net surplus will rise to the very large amount represented by the





excess of E'PC' over H'AE'.











9. In such a case as this the earlier doses are pretty sure to be





sunk in the land; and the actual rent paid, if the land is hired





out, will then include profits on them in addition to the surplus





produce or true rent thus shown. Provision can easily be made in





the diagrams for the returns due to the landlord's capital.











10. Of course his return may diminish and then increase and then





diminish again; and yet again increase when he is in a position





to carry out some further extensive change, as was represented by





fig. 11. But more extreme instances, of the kind represented by





fig. 15, are not very rare.











11. If the price of produce is such that an amount of it OH





(figs. 12, 13, 14) is required to pay the cultivator for one dose





of capital and labour, the cultivation will be carried as far as





D. and the produce raised, AODC, will be greatest in fig. 12,





next greatest in fig. 13, and least in fig. 14. But if the demand





for agricultural produce so rises that OH' is enough to repay the





cultivator for a dose, the cultivation will be carried as far as





D', and the produce raised will be AOD'C', which is greatest in





fig. 14, next in fig. 13, and least in fig. 12. The contrast





would have been even stronger if we had considered the surplus





produce which remains after deducting what is sufficient to repay





the cultivator, and which becomes under some conditions the rent





of the land. For this is AHC in figs. 12 and 13 in the first case





and AH'C' in the second; while in fig. 14 it is in the first case





the excess of AODCPA over ODCH, i.e. the excess of PEC over AHE;





and in the second case the excess of PE'C' over AH'E'.











12. Rogers (Six Centuries of Work and Wages, p. 73) calculates





that rich meadow had about the same value, estimated in grain,





five or six centuries ago as it has now; but that the value of





arable land, similarly estimated, has increased about fivefold in





the same time. This is partly due to the great importance of hay





at a time when roots and other modern kinds of winter food for





cattle were unknown.











13. Thus we may compare two pieces of land represented in figs.





16 and 17, with regard to which the law of diminishing return





acts in a similar way, so that their produce curves have similar





shapes, but the former has a higher fertility than the other for





all degrees of intensity of cultivation. The value of the land





may generally be represented by its surplus produce or rent,





which is in each case represented by AHC when OH is required to





repay a dose of capital and labour; and by AH'C' when the growth





of numbers and wealth have made OH' sufficient. It is clear that





AH'C' in fig. 17 bears a more favourable comparison with AH'C' in





fig. 16 than does AHC in fig. 17 with AHC in fig. 16. In the same





way, though not to the same extent, the total produce AOD'C' in





fig. 17 bears a more favourable comparison with AOD'C' in fig.





16, than does AODC in fig. 17 with AODC in fig. 16. (It is





ingeniously argued in Wicksteed's Coordinates of Laws of





Distribution, pp. 51-2 that rent may be negative. Of course taxes





may absorb rent: but land which will not reward the plough will





grow trees or rough grass. See above, pp. 157-8.)





    Leroy Beaulieu (Rpartition des Richesses, chap. II) has





collected several facts illustrating this tendency of poor lands





to rise in value relatively to rich. He quotes the following





figures, showing the rental in francs per hectare (2 1/2 acres)





of five classes of land in several communes of the Dpartements





de l'Eure et de l'Oise in 1829 and 1852 respectively.











            Class I. Class II. Class III. Class IV. Class V.











 A.D. 1829      58      48          34        20        8





 A.D. 1852      80      78          60        50       40











14. As Roscher says (Political Economy, Sect. CLV), "In judging





Ricardo, it must not be forgotten that it was not his intention





to write a text-book on the science of Political Economy, but





only to communicate to those versed in it the result of his





researches in as brief a manner as possible. Hence he writes so





frequently making certain assumptions, and his words are to be





extended to other cases only after due consideration, or rather





re-written to suit the changed case."











15. Carey claims to have proved that "in every quarter of the





world cultivation has commenced on the sides of the hills where





the soil was poorest, and where the natural advantages of





situation were the least. With the growth of wealth and





population, men have been seen descending from the high lands





bounding the valley on either side, and coming together at its





feet." (Principles of Social Science, chap. IV, 4.) He has even





argued that whenever a thickly peopled country is laid waste,





"whenever population, wealth, and the power of association





decline, it is the rich soil. that is abandoned by men who fly





again to the poor ones" (Ib. ch. v, 3); the rich soils being





rendered difficult and dangerous by the rapid growth of jungles





which harbour wild beasts and banditti, and perhaps by malaria.





The experience of more recent settlers in South Africa and





elsewhere does not however generally support his conclusions,





which are indeed based largely on facts relating to warm





countries. But much of the apparent attractiveness of tropical





countries is delusive: they would give a very rich return to hard





work: but hard work in them is impossible at present, though some





change in this respect may be made by the progress of medical and





especially bacteriological science. A cool refreshing breeze is





as much a necessary of vigorous life as food itself. Land that





offers plenty of food but whose climate destroys energy, is not





more productive of the raw material of human wellbeing, than land





that supplies less food but has an invigorating climate.





    The late Duke of Argyll described the influence of insecurity





and poverty in compelling the cultivation of the hills before





that of the valleys of the Highlands was feasible, Scotland as it





is and was, II, 74-5.





16. In a new country an important form of this assistance is to





enable him to Venture on rich land that he would have otherwise





shunned, through fear of enemies or of malaria.











17. As Ricardo says (Principles, chap. II) "The compensation





given (by the lessee) for the mine or quarry is paid for the





value of the coal or stone which can be removed from them, and





has no connection with the original or indestructible Powers of





the land." But both he and others seem sometimes to lose sight of





these distinctions in discussing the law of diminishing return in





its application to wines. Especially is this the case in





Ricardo's criticism of Adam Smith's theory of rent (Principles,





chap. XXIV).











18. Of course the return to capital spent in building increases





for the earlier doses. Even where land can be had for almost





nothing, it is cheaper to build houses two stories high than one;





and hitherto it has been thought cheapest to build factories





about four stories high. But a belief is growing up in America,





that where land is not very dear factories should be only two





stories high, partly in order to avoid the evil effects of





vibration, and of the expensive foundations and walls required to





prevent it in a high building, that is, it is found that the





return of accommodation diminishes perceptibly after the capital





and labour required to raise two stories have been spent on the





land.











19. See also the writings of Professors Bullock and Landry.











20. In this he will make large use of what is called below the





"substitution" of more for less appropriate means. Discussions





bearing directly on this paragraph will be found in III, V, 1-3;





IV, VII, 8; and XIII, 2: V, III, 3; IV, 1-4; V, 6-8; VIII, 1-5;





X, 3; VI, 1, 7; and II, 5.





    The tendencies of diminishing utility and of diminishing





return have their roots, the one in qualities of human nature,





the other in the technical conditions of industry. But the





distributions of resources, to which they point, are governed by





exactly similar laws. In mathematical phrase, the problems in





maxima and minima to which they give rise are expressed by the





same general equations; as may be seen by reference to





Mathematical Note XIV.











21. The labour-part of the dose is of course current agricultural





labour; the capital-part is itself also the product of labour in





past times rendered by workers of many kinds and degrees,





accompanied by "waiting."

















Chapter 4











The Growth of Population

















    1. The production of wealth is but a means to the sustenance





of man; to the satisfaction of his wants; and to the development





of his activities, physical, mental, and moral. But man himself





is the chief means of the production of that wealth of which he





is the ultimate aim:(1*) and this and the two following chapters





will be given to some study of the supply of labour; i.e. of the





growth of population in numbers, in strength, in knowledge, and





in character.





    In the animal and vegetable world the growth of numbers is





governed by the tendency of individuals to propagate their





species on the one hand, and on the other hand by the struggle





for life which thins out the young before they arrive at





maturity. In the human race alone the conflict of these two





opposing forces is complicated by other influences. On the one





hand regard for the future induces many individuals to control





their natural impulses; sometimes with the purpose of worthily





discharging their duties as parents; sometimes, as for instance





at Rome under the Empire, for mean motives. And on the other hand





society exercises pressure on the individual by religious, moral





and legal sanctions, sometimes with the object of quickening, and





sometimes with that of retarding, the growth of population.





    The study of the growth of population is often spoken of as





though it were a modern one. But in a more or less vague form it





has occupied the attention of thoughtful men in all ages of the





world. To its influence, often unavowed, sometimes not even





clearly recognized, we can trace a great part of the rules,





customs and ceremonies that have been enjoined in the Eastern and





Western world by law-givers, by moralists, and those nameless





thinkers, whose far-seeing wisdom has left its impress on





national habits. Among vigorous races, and in times of great





military conflict, they aimed at increasing the supply of males





capable of bearing arms; and in the higher stages of progress





they have inculcated a great respect for the sanctity of human





life; but in the lower stages, they have encouraged and even





compelled the ruthless slaughter of the infirm and the aged, and





sometimes of a certain proportion of the female children.





    In ancient Greece and Rome, with the safety-valve of the





power of planting colonies, and in the presence of constant war,





an increase in the number of citizens was regarded as a source of





public strength; and marriage was encouraged by public opinion,





and in many cases even by legislation: though thoughtful men were





even then aware that action in the contrary sense might be





necessary if the responsibilities of parentage should ever cease





to be burdensome.(2*) In later times there may be observed, as





Roscher says,(3*) a regular ebb and flow of the opinion that the





State should encourage the growth of numbers. It was in full flow





in England under the first two Tudors, but in the course of the





sixteenth century it slackened and turned; and it began to ebb,





when the abolition of the celibacy of the religious orders, and





the more settled state of the country had had time to give a





perceptible impetus to population; the effective demand for





labour having meanwhile been diminished by the increase of sheep





runs, and by the collapse of that part of the industrial system





which had been organized by the monastic establishments. Later on





the growth of population was checked by that rise in the standard





of comfort which took effect in the general adoption of wheat as





the staple food of Englishmen during the first half of the





eighteenth century. At that time there were even fears, which





later inquiries showed to be unfounded, that the population was





actually diminishing. Petty(4*) had forestalled some of Carey's





and Wakefield's arguments as to the advantages of a dense





population. Child had argued that "whatever tends to the





depopulating of a country tends to the impoverishment of it;" and





that "most nations in the civilized parts of the world are more





or less rich or poor proportionably to the paucity or plenty of





their people, and not to the sterility or fruitfulness of their





land."(5*) And by the time that the world-struggle with France





had attained its height, when the demands for more and more





troops were ever growing, and when manufacturers were wanting





more men for their new machinery; the bias of the ruling classes





was strongly flowing in favour of an increase of population. So





far did this movement of opinion reach that in 1796 Pitt declared





that a man who had enriched his country with a number of children





had a claim on its assistance. An Act, passed amid the military





anxieties of 1806, which granted exemptions from taxes to the





fathers of more than two children born in wedlock, was repealed





as soon as Napoleon had been safely lodged in St Helena.(6*)





    2. But during all this time there had been a growing feeling





among those who thought most seriously on social problems, that





an inordinate increase of numbers, whether it strengthened the





State or not, must necessarily cause great misery: and that the





rulers of the State had no right to subordinate individual





happiness to the aggrandizement of the State. In France in





particular a reaction was caused, as we have seen, by the cynical





selfishness with which the Court and its adherents sacrificed the





wellbeing of the people for the sake of their own luxury and





military glory. If the humane sympathies of the Physiocrats had





been able to overcome the frivolity and harshness of the





privileged classes of France, the eighteenth century would





probably not have ended in tumult and bloodshed, the march of





freedom in England would not have been arrested, and the dial of





progress would have been more forward than it is by the space of





at least a generation. As it was, but little attention was paid





to Quesnay's guarded but forcible protest: -- "one should aim





less at augmenting the population than at increasing the national





income, for the condition of greater comfort which is derived





from a good income, is preferable to that in which a population





exceeds its income and is ever in urgent need of the means of





subsistence."(7*)





    Adam Smith said but little on the question of population, for





indeed he wrote at one of the culminating points of the





prosperity of the English working classes; but what he does say





is wise and well balanced and modern in tone. Accepting the





Physiocratic doctrine as his basis, he corrected it by insisting





that the necessaries of life are not a fixed and determined





quantity, but have varied much from place to place and time to





time; and may vary more.(8*) But he did not work out this hint





fully. And there was nothing to lead him to anticipate the second





great limitation of the physiocratic doctrine, which has been





made prominent in our time by the carriage of wheat from the





centre of America to Liverpool for less than what had been the





cost of its carriage across England.





    The eighteenth century wore on to its close and the next





century began; year by year the condition of the working classes





in England became more gloomy. An astonishing series of bad





harvests,(9*) a most exhausting war,(10*) and a change in the





methods of industry that dislocated old ties, combined with an





injudicious poor law to bring the working classes into the





greatest misery they have ever suffered, at all events since the





beginning of trustworthy records of English social history.(11*)





And to crown all, well-meaning enthusiasts, chiefly under French





influence, were proposing communistic schemes which would enable





people to throw on society the whole responsibility for rearing





their children.(12*)





    Thus while the recruiting sergeant and the employer of labour





were calling for measures tending to increase the growth of





population, more far-seeing men began to inquire whether the race





could escape degradation if the numbers continued long to





increase as they were then doing. Of these inquirers the chief





was Malthus, and his Essay on the Principle of Population is the





starting-point of all modern speculations on the subject.





    3. Malthus' reasoning consists of three parts, which must be





kept distinct. The first relates to the supply of labour. By a





careful study of facts he proves that every people, of whose





history we have a trustworthy record, has been so prolific that





the growth of its numbers would have been rapid and continuous if





it had not been checked either by a scarcity of the necessaries





of life, or some other cause, that is, by disease, by war, by





infanticide, or lastly by voluntary restraint.





    His second position relates to the demand for labour. Like





the first it is supported by facts, but by a different set of





facts. He shows that up to the time at which he wrote no country





(as distinguished from a city, such as Rome or Venice) had been





able to obtain an abundant supply of the necessaries of life





after its territory had become very thickly peopled. The produce





which Nature returns to the work of man is her effective demand





for population: and he shows that up to this time a rapid





increase in population when already thick had not led to a





proportionate increase in this demand.(13*)





    Thirdly, he draws the conclusion that what had been in the





past, was likely to be in the future; and that the growth of





population would be checked by poverty or some other cause of





suffering unless it were checked by voluntary restraint. He





therefore urges people to use this restraint, and, while leading





lives of moral purity, to abstain from very early marriages.(14*)





    His position with regard to the supply of population, with





which alone we are directly concerned in this chapter, remains





substantially valid. The changes which the course of events has





introduced into the doctrine of population relate chiefly to the





second and third steps of his reasoning. We have already noticed





that the English economists of the earlier half of last century





overrated the tendency of an increasing population to press upon





the means of subsistence; and it was not Malthus' fault that he





could not foresee the great developments of steam transport by





land and by sea, which have enabled Englishmen of the present





generation to obtain the products of the richest lands of the





earth at comparatively small cost.





    But the fact that he did not foresee these changes makes the





second and third steps of his argument antiquated in form; though





they are still in a great measure valid in substance. It remains





true that unless the checks on the growth of population in force





at the end of the nineteenth century are on the whole increased





(they are certain to change their form in places that are as yet





imperfectly civilized) it will be impossible for the habits of





comfort prevailing in Western Europe to spread themselves over





the whole world and maintain themselves for many hundred years.





But of this more hereafter.(15*)





    4. The growth in numbers of a people depends firstly on the





Natural Increase, that is, the excess of their births over their





deaths; and secondly on migration.





    The number of births depends chiefly on habits relating to





marriage, the early history of which is full of instruction; but





we must confine ourselves here to the conditions of marriage in





modern civilized countries.





    The age of marriage varies with the climate. In warm climates





where childbearing begins early, it ends early, in colder





climates it begins later and ends later;(16*) but in every case





the longer marriages are postponed beyond the age that is natural





to the country, the smaller is the birth-rate; the age of the





wife being of course much more important in this respect than





that of the husband.(17*) Given the climate, the average age of





marriage depends chiefly on the ease with which young people can





establish themselves, and support a family according to the





standard of comfort that prevails among their friends and





acquaintances; and therefore it is different in different





stations of life.





    In the middle classes a man's income seldom reaches its





maximum till he is forty or fifty years old; and the expense of





bringing up his children is heavy and lasts for many years. The





artisan earns nearly as much at twenty-one as he ever does,





unless he rises to a responsible post, but he does not earn much





before he is twenty-one: his children are likely to be a





considerable expense to him till about the age of fifteen; unless





they are sent into a factory, where they may pay their way at a





very early age; and lastly the labourer earns nearly full wages





at eighteen, while his children begin to pay their own expenses





very early. In consequence, the average age at marriage is





highest among the middle classes: it is low among the artisans





and lower still among the unskilled labourers.(18*)





    Unskilled labourers, when not so poor as to suffer actual





want and not restrained by any external cause, have seldom, if





ever, shown a lower power of increase than that of doubling in





thirty years; that is, of multiplying a million-fold in six





hundred years, a billion-fold in twelve hundred: and hence it





might be inferred a priori that their increase has never gone on





without restraint for any considerable time. This inference is





confirmed by the teaching of all history. Throughout Europe





during the Middle Ages, and in some parts of it even up to the





present time, unmarried labourers have usually slept in the





farmhouse or with their parents; while a married pair have





generally required a house for themselves: when a village has as





many hands as it can well employ, the number of houses is not





increased, and young people have to wait as best they can.





    There are many parts of Europe even now in which custom





exercising the force of law prevents more than one son in each





family from marrying; he is generally the eldest, but in some





places the youngest: if any other son marries he must leave the





village. When great material prosperity and the absence of all





extreme poverty are found in old-fashioned corners of the Old





World, the explanation generally lies in some such custom as this





with all its evils and hardships.(19*) It is true that the





severity of this custom may be tempered by the power of





migration; but in the Middle Ages the free movement of the people





was hindered by stern regulations. The free towns indeed often





encouraged immigration from the country: but the rules of the





gilds were in some respects almost as cruel to people who tried





to escape from their old homes as were those enforced by the





feudal lords themselves.(20*)





    5. In this respect the position of the hired agricultural





labourer has changed very much. The towns are now always open to





him and his children; and if he betakes himself to the New World





he is likely to succeed better than any other class of emigrants.





But on the other hand the gradual rise in the value of land and





its growing scarcity is tending to check the increase of





population in some districts in which the system of peasant





properties prevails, in which there is not much enterprise for





opening out new trades or for emigration, and parents feel that





the social position of their children will depend on the amount





of their land. They incline to limit artificially the size of





their families and to treat marriage very much as a business





contract, seeking always to marry their sons to heiresses.





Francis Galton pointed out that, though the families of English





peers are generally large, the habits of marrying the eldest son





to an heiress who is presumably not of fertile stock, and





sometimes dissuading younger sons from marriage, have led to the





extinction of many peerages. Similar habits among French





peasants, combined with their preference for small families, keep





their numbers almost stationary.





    On the other hand there seem to be no conditions more





favourable to the rapid growth of numbers than those of the





agricultural districts of new countries. Land is to be had in





abundance, railways and steamships carry away the produce of the





land and bring back in exchange implements of advanced types, and





many of the comforts and luxuries of life. The "farmer," as the





peasant proprietor is called in America, finds therefore that a





large family is not a burden, but an assistance to him. He and





they live healthy out-of-door lives; there is nothing to check





but everything to stimulate the growth of numbers. The natural





increase is aided by immigration; and thus, in spite of the fact





that some classes of the inhabitants of large cities in America





are, it is said, reluctant to have many children, the population





has increased sixteen-fold in the last hundred years.(21*)





    On the whole it seems proved that the birth-rate is generally





lower among the well-to-do than among those who make little





expensive provision for the future of themselves and their





families, and who live an active life: and that fecundity is





diminished by luxurious habits of living. Probably it is also





diminished by severe mental strain; that is to say, given the





natural strength of the parents, their expectation of a large





family is diminished by a great increase of mental strain. Of





course those who do high mental work, have as a class more than





the average of constitutional and nervous strength; and Galton





has shown that they are not as a class unprolific. But they





commonly marry late.





    6. The growth of population in England has a more clearly





defined history than that in the United Kingdom, and we shall





find some interest in noticing its chief movements.





    The restraints on the increase of numbers during the Middle





Ages were the same in England as elsewhere. In England as





elsewhere the religious orders were a refuge to those for whom no





establishment in marriage could be provided; and religious





celibacy while undoubtedly acting in some measure as an





independent check on the growth of population, is in the main to





be regarded rather as a method in which the broad natural forces





tending to restrain population expressed themselves, than as an





addition to them. Infectious and contagious diseases, both





endemic and epidemic, were caused by dirty habits of life which





were even worse in England than in the South of Europe; and





famines by the failures of good harvests and the difficulties of





communication; though this evil was less in England than





elsewhere.





    Country life was, as elsewhere, rigid in its habits; young





people found it difficult to establish themselves until some





other married pair had passed from the scene and made a vacancy





in their own parish; for migration to another parish was seldom





thought of by an agricultural labourer under ordinary





circumstances. Consequently whenever plague or war or famine





thinned the population, there were always many waiting to be





married, who filled the vacant places; and, being perhaps younger





and stronger than the average of newly married couples, had





larger families.(22*)





    There was however some movement even of agricultural





labourers towards districts which had been struck more heavily





than their neighbours by pestilence, by famine or the sword.





Moreover artisans were often more or less on the move, and this





was especially the case with those who were engaged in the





building trades, and those who worked in metal and wood; though





no doubt the "wander years" were chiefly those of youth, and





after these were over the wanderer was likely to settle down in





the place in which he was born. Again, there seems to have been a





good deal of migration on the part of the retainers of the landed





gentry, especially of the greater barons who had seats in several





parts of the country. And lastly, in spite of the selfish





exclusiveness which the gilds developed as years went on, the





towns offered in England as elsewhere a refuge to many who could





get no good openings for work and for marriage in their own





homes. In these various ways some elasticity was introduced into





the rigid system of medieval economy; and population was able to





avail itself in some measure of the increased demand for labour





which came gradually with the growth of knowledge, the





establishment of law and order, and the development of oceanic





trade.(23*)





    In the latter half of the seventeenth and the first half of





the eighteenth century the central government exerted itself to





hinder the adjustment of the supply of population in different





parts of the country to the demand for it by Settlement laws,





which made any one chargeable to a parish who had resided there





forty days, but ordered that he might be sent home by force at





any time within that period.(24*) Landlords and farmers were so





eager to prevent people from getting a "settlement" in their





parish that they put great difficulties in the way of building





cottages, and sometimes even razed them to the ground. In





consequence the agricultural population of England was stationary





during the hundred years ending with 1760; while the manufactures





were not yet sufficiently developed to absorb large numbers. This





retardation in the growth of numbers was partly caused by, and





partly a cause of, a rise in the standard of living; a chief





element of which was an increased use of wheat in the place of





inferior grains as the food of the common people.(25*)





    From 1760 onwards those who could not establish themselves at





home found little difficulty in getting employment in the new





manufacturing or mining districts, where the demand for workers





often kept the local authorities from enforcing the removal





clauses of the Settlement Act. To these districts young people





resorted freely, and the birthrate in them became exceptionally





high; but so did the death-rate also; the net result being a





fairly rapid growth of population. At the end of the century,





when Malthus wrote, the Poor Law again began to influence the age





of marriage; but this time in the direction of making it unduly





early. The sufferings of the working classes caused by a series





of famines and by the French War made some measure of relief





necessary; and the need of large bodies of recruits for the army





and navy was an additional inducement to tender-hearted people to





be somewhat liberal in their allowances to a large family, with





the practical effect of making the father of many children often





able to procure more indulgences for himself without working than





he could have got by hard work if he had been unmarried or had





only a small family. Those who availed themselves most of this





bounty were naturally the laziest and meanest of the people,





those with least self-respect and enterprise. So although there





was in the manufacturing towns a fearful mortality, particularly





of infants, the quantity of the people increased fast; but its





quality improved little, if at all, till the passing of the New





Poor Law in 1834. Since that time the rapid growth of the town





population has, as we shall see in the next chapter, tended to





increase mortality, but this has been counteracted by the growth





of temperance, of medical knowledge, of sanitation and of general





cleanliness. Emigration has increased, the age of marriage has





been slightly raised and a somewhat less proportion of the whole





population are married; but, on the other hand, the ratio of





births to a marriage has risen;(26*) with the result that





population has been growing very nearly steadily.(27*) Let us





examine the course of recent changes a little more closely.





    7. Early in this century, when wages were low and wheat was





dear, the working classes generally spent more than half their





income on bread: and consequently a rise in the price of wheat





diminished marriages very much among them: that is, it diminished





very much the number of marriages by banns. But it raised the





income of many members of the well-to-do classes, and therefore





often increased the number of marriages by licence.(28*) Since





however these were but a small part of the whole, the net effect





was to lower the marriage-rate.(29*) But as time went on, the





price of wheat fell and wages rose, till now the working classes





spend on the average less than a quarter of their incomes on





bread; and in consequence the variations of commercial prosperity





have got to exercise a preponderating influence on the





marriage-rate.(30*)





    Since 1873 though the average real income of the population





of England has indeed been increasing, its rate of increase has





been less than in the preceding years, and meanwhile there has





been a continuous fall of prices, and consequently a continuous





fall in the money incomes of many classes of society. Now people





are governed in their calculations as to whether they can afford





to marry or not, more by the money income which they expect to be





able to get, than by elaborate calculations of changes in its





purchasing power. And therefore the standard of living among the





working classes has been rising rapidly, perhaps more rapidly





than at any other time in English history; their household





expenditure measured in money has remained about stationary, and





measured in goods has increased very fast. Meanwhile the price of





wheat has also fallen very much, and a marked fall in the





marriage-rate for the whole country has often accompanied a





marked fall in the price of wheat. The marriage-rate is now





reckoned on the basis that each marriage involves two persons and





should therefore count for two. The English rate fell from 17.6





per thousand in 1873 to 14.2 in 1886. It rose to 16.5 in 1899; in





1907 it was 15.8, but in 1908 only 14.9.(31*)





    There is much to be learnt from the history of population in





Scotland and in Ireland. In the lowlands of Scotland a high





standard of education, the development of mineral resources, and





close contact with their richer English neighbours have combined





to afford a great increase of average income to a rapidly





increasing population. On the other hand, the inordinate growth





of population in Ireland before the potato-famine in 1847, and





its steady diminution since that time, will remain for ever





landmarks in economic history.





    Comparing the habits of different nations(32*) we find that





in the Teutonic countries of Central and Northern Europe, the age





of marriage is kept late, partly in consequence of the early





years of manhood being spent in the army; but that it has been





very early in Russia; where, at all events under the old rgime,





the family group insisted on the son's bringing a wife to help in





the work of the household as early as possible, even if he had to





leave her for a time and go to earn his living elsewhere. In the





United Kingdom and America there is no compulsory service, and





men marry early. In France, contrary to general opinion, early





marriages on the part of men are not rare; while on the part of





women they are more common than in any country for which we have





statistics, except the Slavonic countries, where they are much





the highest.





    The marriage-rate, the birth-rate and the death-rate are





diminishing in almost every country. But the general mortality is





high where the birth-rate is high. For instance, both are high in





Slavonic countries, and both are low in the North of Europe. The





death-rates are low in Australasia, and the "natural" increase





there is fairly high, though the birth-rate is low and falling





very fast. In fact its fall in the various States ranged from 23





to 30 per cent in the period 1881-1901.(33*)











NOTES:











1. See IV, i, section 1.











2. Thus Aristotle (Politics, II, 6) objects to Plato's scheme for





equalizing property and abolishing poverty on the ground that it





would be unworkable unless the State exercised a firm control





over the growth of numbers. And as Jowett points out, Plato





himself was aware of this (see Laws, v, 740: also Aristotle,





Politics, VII, 16). The opinion, formerly held that the





population of Greece declined from the seventh century B.C., and





that of Rome from the third, has recently been called in





question, see "Die Bevlkerung des Altertums" by Edouard Meyer in





the Handwrterbuch der Staatswissenschaften.











3. Political Economy, section 254.











4. He argues that Holland is richer than it appears to be





relatively to France, because its people have access to many





advantages that cannot be had by those who live on poorer land,





and are therefore more scattered. "rich land is better than





coarse land of the same rent." Political Arithmetick, ch. 1.











5. Discourses on Trade, ch. X. Harris, Essay on Coins, pp. 32-3,





argues to a similar effect, and proposes to "encourage matrimony





among the lower classes by giving some privileges to those who





have children," etc.











6. "Let us," said Pitt, "make relief, in cases where there are a





large number of children, a matter of right and an honour,





instead of a ground for opprobrium and contempt. This will make a





large family a blessing and not a curse, and this will draw a





proper line of distinction between those who are able to provide





for themselves by labour, and those who after having enriched





their country with a number of children have a claim on its





assistance for their support." Of course he desired "to





discourage relief where it was not wanted." Napoleon the First





had offered to take under his own charge one member of any family





which contained seven male children; and Louis XIV his





predecessor in the slaughter of men, had exempted from public





taxes all those who married before the age of 20 or had more than





ten legitimate children. A comparison of the rapid increase in





the population of Germany with that of France was a chief motive





of the order of the French Chamber in 1885 that education and





board should be provided at the public expense for every seventh





child in necessitous families: and in 1913 a law was passed





giving bounties under certain conditions to parents of large





families. The British Budget Bill of 1909 allowed a small





abatement of income tax for fathers of families.











7. The Physiocratic doctrine with regard to the tendency of





population to increase up to the margin of subsistence may be





given in Turgot's words: -- the employer "since he always has his





choice of a great number of working men, will choose that one who





will work most cheaply. Thus then the workers are compelled by





mutual competition to lower their price; and with regard to every





kind of labour the result is bound to be reached and it is





reached as a matter of fact -- that the wages of the worker are





limited to that which is necessary to procure his subsistence."





(Sur la formation et la distribution des richesses, VI) Similarly





Sir James Steuart says (Inquiry, Bk. 1, ch. III), "The generative





faculty resembles a spring loaded with a weight, which always





exerts itself in proportion to the diminution of resistance: when





food has remained some time without augmentation or diminution,





generation will carry numbers as high as possible; if then food





comes to be diminished the spring is overpowered; the force of it





becomes less than nothing, inhabitants will diminish at least in





proportion to the overcharge. If, on the other hand, food be





increased, the spring which stood at 0, will begin to exert





itself in proportion as the resistance diminishes; people will





begin to be better fed; they will multiply, and in proportion as





they increase in numbers the food will become scarce again." Sir





James Steuart was much under the influence of the Physiocrats,





and was indeed in some respects imbued with Continental rather





than English notions of government: and his artificial schemes





for regulating population seem very far off from us now. See his





Inquiry, Bk. I, ch. XII, "Of the great advantage of combining a





well-digested Theory and a perfect Knowledge of Facts with the





Practical Part of Government in order to make a People multiply."











8. See Wealth of Nations, Bk. I, ch. VIII, and Bk. V, ch. II. See





also supra, Bk. II, ch. III.











9. The average price of wheat in the decade 1771-80 in which Adam





Smith wrote was 34s. 7d.; in 1781-90 it was 37s. 1d.; in





1791-1800 it was 63s. 6d.; in 1801-10 it was 83s. 11d.; and in





1811-20 it was 87s. 6d.











10. Early in the last century the Imperial taxes for the greater





part war taxes amounted to one-fifth of the whole income of the





country; whereas now they are not much more than a twentieth, and





even of this a great part is spent on education and other





benefits which Government did not then afford.





11. See below section 7 and above Bk. I, ch. III, section 5.











12. Especially Godwin in his Inquiry concerning Political Justice





(1792). It is interesting to compare Malthus' criticism of this





Essay (Bk. III, ch. II) with Aristotle's comments on Plato's





Republic (see especially Politics, II, 6).











13. But many of his critics suppose him to have stated his





position much less unreservedly than he did; they have forgotten





such passages as this: -- "From a review of the state of society





in former periods compared with the present I should certainly





say that the evils resulting from the principle of population





have rather diminished than increased, even under the





disadvantage of an almost total ignorance of their real cause.





And if we can indulge the hope that this ignorance will be





gradually dissipated, it does not seem unreasonable to hope that





they will be still further diminished. The increase of absolute





population, which will of course take place, will evidently tend





but little to weaken this expectation, as everything depends on





the relative proportions between population and food, and not on





the absolute number of the people. In the former part of this





work it appeared that the countries which possessed the fewest





people often suffered the most from the effects of the principle





of population." Essay, Bk. IV, ch. XII.











14. In the first edition of his essay, 1798, Malthus gave his





argument without any detailed statement of facts, though from the





first he regarded it as needing to be treated in direct





connection with a study of facts; as is shown by his having told





Pryme (who afterwards became the first Professor of Political





Economy at Cambridge) "that his theory was first suggested to his





mind in an argumentative conversation which he had with his





father on the state of some other countries" (Pryme's





Recollections, p. 66). American experience showed that population





if unchecked would double at least once in twenty-five years. He





argued that a doubled population might, even in a country as





thickly peopled as England was with its seven million





inhabitants, conceivably though not probably double the





subsistence raised from the English soil: but that labour doubled





again would not suffice to double the produce again. "Let us then





take this for our rule, though certainly far beyond the truth;





and allow that the whole produce of the island might be increased





every twenty five years [that is with every doubling of the





population] by a quantity of subsistence equal to that which it





at present produces"; or in other words, in an arithmetical





progression. His desire to make himself clearly understood made





him, as Wagner says in his excellent introduction to the study of





Population (Grundlegung, Ed. 3, p. 453), "put too sharp a point





on his doctrine, and formulate it too absolutely." Thus he got





into the habit of speaking of production as capable of increasing





in an arithmetical ratio: and many writers think that he attached





importance to the phrase itself: whereas it was really only a





short way of stating the utmost that he thought any reasonable





person could ask him to concede. What he meant, stated in modern





language, was that the tendency to diminishing return, which is





assumed throughout his argument, would begin to operate sharply





after the produce of the island had been doubled. Doubled labour





might give doubled produce: but quadrupled labour would hardly





treble it: octupled labour would not quadruple it.





    In the second edition, 1803, he based himself on so wide and





careful a statement of facts as to claim a place among the





founders of historical economics; he softened and explained away





many of the "sharp points" of his old doctrine, though he did not





abandon (as was implied in the earlier editions of this work) the





use of the phrase "arithmetical ratio." In particular he took a





less despondent view of the future of the human race; and dwelt





on the hope that moral restraint might hold population in check,





and that "vice and misery," the old check, might thus be kept in





abeyance. Francis Place, who was not blind to his many faults,





wrote in 1822 an apology for him, excellent in tone and judgment.





Good accounts of his work are given in Bonar's Malthus and his





Work, Cannan's Production and Distribution, 1776-1848, and





Nicholson's Political Economy, Bk. 1, ch. XII.





15. Taking the present population of the world at one and a half





thousand millions; and assuming that its present rate of increase





(about 8 per 1000 annually, see Ravenstein's paper before the





British Association in 1890) will continue, we find that in less





than two hundred years it will amount to six thousand millions;





or at the rate of about 200 to the square mile of fairly fertile





land (Ravenstein reckons 28 million square miles of fairly





fertile land, and 14 millions of poor grass lands. The first





estimate is thought by many to be too high: but, allowing for





this, if the less fertile land be reckoned in for what it is





worth, the result will be about thirty million square miles as





assumed above). Meanwhile there will probably be great





improvements in the arts of agriculture; and, if so, the pressure





of population on the means of subsistence may be held in check





for about two hundred years, but not longer.











16. Of course the length of a generation has itself some





influence on the growth of population. If it is 25 years in one





place and 20 in another; and if in each place population doubles





once in two generations during a thousand years, the increase





will be a million-fold in the first place, but thirty





million-fold in the second.











17. Dr Ogle (Statistical Journal, Vol. 53) calculates that if the





average age of marriage of women in England were postponed five





years, the number of children to a marriage, which is now 4.2





would fall to 3.1. Korsi, basing himself on the facts of the





relatively warm climate of Buda Pest, finds 18-20 the most





prolific age for women, 24-26 that for men. But he concludes that





a slight postponement of weddings beyond these ages is advisable





mainly on the ground that the vitality of the children of women





under 20 is generally small. See Proceedings of Congress of





Hygiene and Demography, London 1892, and Statistical Journal, Vol





57.











18. The term marriage in the text must be taken in a wide sense





so as to include not only legal marriages, but all those informal





unions which are sufficiently permanent in character to involve





for several years at least the practical responsibilities of





married life. They are often contracted at an early age, and not





unfrequently lead up to legal marriages after the lapse of some





years. For this reason the average age at marriage in the broad





sense of the term, with which alone we are here concerned, is





below the average age at legal marriage. The allowance to be made





on this head for the whole of the working classes is probably





considerable; but it is very much greater in the case of





unskilled labourers than of any other class. The following





statistics must be interpreted in the light of this remark, and





of the fact that all English industrial statistics are vitiated





by the want of sufficient care in the classification of the





working classes in our official returns. The Registrar-General's





forty-ninth Annual Report states that in certain selected





districts the returns of marriages for 1884-5 were examined with





the following results; the number after each occupation being the





average age of bachelors in it at marriage, and the following





number, in brackets, being the average age of spinsters who





married men of that occupation: -- Miners 24.06 (22.46); Textile





hands 24.38 (23.43); Shoemakers, Tailors 24.92 (24.31); Artisans





25.35 (23.70); Labourers 15.56 (23.66); Commercial Clerks 16.15





(24.43); Shopkeepers, Shopmen 26.67 (24.22); Farmers and sons





29.23 (26.91); Professional and Independent Class 31.22 (26.40).





    Dr Ogle, in the paper already referred to, shows that the





marriage-rate is greatest generally in those parts of England in





which the percentage of those women between 15 and 25 years of





age who are industrially occupied is the greatest. This is no





doubt due, as he suggests, partly to the willingness of men to





have their money incomes supplemented by those of their wives;





but it may be partly due also to an excess of women of a





marriageable age in those districts.











19. Thus a visit to the valley Jachenau in the Bavarian Alps





about 1880 found this custom still in full force. Aided by a





great recent rise in the value of their woods, with regard to





which they had pursued a farseeing policy, the inhabitants lived





prosperously in large houses, the younger brothers and sisters





acting as servants in their old homes or elsewhere. They were of





a different race from the workpeople in the neighbouring valleys,





who lived poor and hard lives, but seemed to think that the





Jachenau purchased its material prosperity at too great a cost.











20. See e.g. Rogers, Six Centuries, pp. 106-7.











21. The extreme prudence of peasant proprietors under stationary





conditions was noticed by Malthus; see his account of Switzerland





(Essay, Bk. II, ch. v). Adam Smith remarked that poor Highland





women frequently had twenty children of whom not more than two





reached maturity (Wealth of Nations, Bk. 1, ch. VIII); and the





notion that want stimulated fertility was insisted on by





Doubleday, True Law of Population. See also Sadler, Law of





Population. Herbert Spencer seemed to think it probable that the





progress of civilization will of itself hold the growth of





population completely in check. But Malthus' remark, that the





reproductive power is less in barbarous than in civilized races,





has been extended by Darwin to the animal and vegetable kingdom





generally.





    Mr Charles Booth (Statistical Journal, 1893) has divided





London into 27 districts (chiefly Registration districts); and





arranged them in order of poverty, of overcrowding, of high





birth-rate and of high death-rate. He finds that the four orders





are generally the same. The excess of birth rate over death-rate





is lowest in the very rich and the very poor districts.





    The birth-rate in England and Wales is nominally diminishing





at about an equal rate in both town and country. But the





continuous migration of young persons from rural to industrial





areas has considerably depleted the ranks of young married women





in the rural districts; and, when allowance is made for this





fact, we find that the percentage of births to women of





childbearing ages is much higher in them than in the towns: as is





shown in the following table published by the Registrar-General





in 1907.











    Mean Annual Birth Rates in Urban and Rural Areas











Urban: 20 large towns, with an aggregate population of 9,742,404





persons at the date of the Census of 1901.











 Period         Calculated on the total population











                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in





                                     1870-72 taken as 100











 1870-72            36.7                100.0





 1880-82            35.7                 97.3





 1890-92            32.0                 87.2





 1900-02            28.8                 81.2











              Calculated on the female population, aged 15-45





years











                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in





                                     1870-72 taken as 100











 1870-72            143.1               100.0





 1880-82            140.6                98.3





 1890-92            124.6                87.1





 1900-02            111.4                77.8











 Rural: 112 entirely rural registration districts, with an





aggregate population of 1,330,319 persons at the date of the





Census of 1901.











                Calculated on the total population











                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in





                                     1870-72 taken as 100











 1870-72             31.6                100.0





 1880-82             30.3                 95.6





 1890-92             27.8                 88.0





 1900-02             26.0                 83.3











              Calculated on the female population, aged 15-45





years











                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in





                                     1870-72 taken as 100











 1870-72            158.9                100.0





 1880-82            153.5                 96.6





 1890-92            135.6                 85.3





 1900-02            120.7                 76.0











    The movements of the population of France have been studied





with exceptional care: and the great work on the subject by





Levasseur, La Population Franaise, is a mine of valuable





information as regards other nations besides France. Montesquieu,





reasoning perhaps rather a priori, accused the law of





primogeniture which ruled in his time in France of reducing the





number of children in a family: and le Play brought the same





charge against the law of compulsory division. Levasseur (l.c.





Vol. iii, pp. 171-7) calls attention to the contrast; and remark





that Malthus' expectations of the effect of the Civil Code on





population were in harmony with Montesquieu's rather than le





Play's diagnosis. But in fact the birthrate varies much from one





part of France to another. It is generally lower where a large





part of the population owns land than where it does not. If





however the Departments of France be arranged in groups in





ascending order of the property left at death (valeurs





successorales par tte d'habitant), the corresponding birth-rate





descends almost uniformly, being 23 per hundred married women





between 15 and 50 years for the ten Departments in which the





property left is 48-57 fr.; and 13.2 for the Seine, where it is





412 fr. And in Paris itself the arrondissements inhabited by the





well-to-do show a smaller percentage of families with more than





two children than the poorer arrondissements show. There is much





interest in the careful analysis which Levasseur gives of the





connection between economic conditions and birth-rate; his





general conclusion being that it is not direct but indirect,





through the mutual influence of the two on manners and the habit





of life (moeurs). He appears to hold that, however much the





decline in the numbers of the French relatively to surrounding





nations may be regretted from the political and military points





of view, there is much good mixed with the evil in its influences





on material comfort and even social progress.











22. Thus we are told that after the Black Death of 1349 most





marriages were very fertile (Rogers, History of Agriculture and





Prices, Vol. 1, p. 301).











23. There is no certain knowledge to be had as to the density of





population in England before the eighteenth century. but the





following estimates, reproduced from Steffen (Geschichte der





englischen Lohn-arbeiter, 1, pp. 463 ff.), are probably the best





as yet available. Domesday Book suggests that in 1086 the





population of England was between two, and two-and-a-half





millions. Just before the Black Death (1348) it may have been





between three-and-a-half, and four-and-a-half millions; and just





afterwards two-and-a-half millions. It began to recover quickly;





but made slow progress between 1400 and 1550: it increased rather





fast in the next hundred years, and reached five-and-a half





millions in 1700.





    If we are to trust Harrison (Description of England, Bk. II,





ch. XVI), the muster of men able for service in 1574 amounted to





1,172,674.





    The Black Death was England's only very great calamity. She





was not, like the rest of Europe, liable to devastating wars,





such as the Thirty Years' War, which destroyed more than half the





population of Germany, a loss which it required a full century to





recover. (See Rmelin's instructive article on Bevlkerungslehre





in Schnberg's Handbuch.)











24. Adam Smith is justly indignant at this. (See Wealth of





Nations, Bk. I, ch. X, Part II, and Book IV, ch. II.) The Act





recites (14 Charles II, c. 12, A.D. 1662) that " by reason of





some defects in the law, poor people are not restrained from





going from one parish to another, and thereby do endeavour to





settle themselves in those parishes where there is the best





stock, the largest wastes or commons to build cottages, and the





most woods for them to burn and destroy: etc." and it is





therefore ordered " that upon complaint made... within forty days





after any such person or persons coming, so as to settle as





aforesaid, in any tenement under the yearly value of ten





pounds... it shall be lawful for any two justices of the Peace...





to remove and convey such person or persons to such parish where





he or they were last legally settled." Several Acts purporting to





soften its harshness had been passed before Adam Smith's time;





but they had been ineffective. In 1795 however it was ordered





that no one should be removed until he became actually





chargeable.











25. Some interesting remarks on this subject are made by Eden,





History of the Poor, I, pp. 560-4.











26. But this increase in the figures shown is partly due to





improved registration of births. (Farr, Vital Statistics, p. 97.)











27. The following tables show the growth of the population of





England and Wales from the beginning of the eighteenth century.





The figures before 1801 are computed from the registers of births





and deaths, and the poll and hearth tax returns: those since 1801





from Census returns. It will be noticed that the numbers





increased nearly as much in the twenty years following 1760 as in





the preceding sixty years. The pressure of the great war and the





high price of corn is shown in the slow growth between 1790 and





1801; and the effects of indiscriminate poor law allowances, in





spite of greater pressure, is shown by the rapid increase in the





next ten years, and the still greater increase when that pressure





was removed in the decade ending 1821. The third column shows the





percentage which the increase during the preceding decade was of





the population at the beginning of that decade.











 Year       Population           Increase





            000s omitted         per cent











 1700        5,475





 1710        5,240                  -4.9





 1720        5,565                   6.2





 1730        5,796                   4.1





 1740        6,064                   4.6





 1750        6,467                   6.6





 1760        6,736                   4.1





 1770        7,428                  10.3





 1780        7,953                   7.1





 1790        8,675                   9.1





 1801        8,892                   2.5





 1811       10,164                  14.3





 1821       12,000                  18.1





 1831       13,897                  15.8





 1841       15,909                  14.5





 1851       17,928                  12.7





 1861       20,066                  11.9





 1871       22,712                  13.2





 1881       25,974                  14.4





 1891       29,022                  11.7





 1901       32,527                  11.7

















    The great growth of emigration during recent years makes it





important to correct the figures for the last three decades so as





to show the "natural increase," viz. that due to the excess of





births over deaths. The net emigration from the United Kingdom





during the decades 1871-81 and 1881-91 was 1,480,000, and





1,747,000 respectively.











28. See Farr's 17th Annual Report for 1854 as Registrar-General,





or the abstract of it in Vital Statistics (pp. 72-5).











29. For instance, representing the price of wheat in shillings





and the number of marriages in England and Wales in thousands, we





have for 1801 wheat at 119 and marriages at 67, for 1803 wheat at





59 and marriages at 94; for 1805 the numbers are 90 and 80, for





1807 they are 75 and 84, for 1812 they are 126 and 82, for 1815





they are 66 and 100, for 1917 they are 97 and 88, for 1822 they





are 45 and 99.











30. Since 1820 the average price of wheat has seldom exceeded





60s. and never 75s.: and the successive inflations of commerce





which culminated and broke in 1826, 1836-9, 1848, 1856, 1866 and





1873 exercised an influence on the marriage rate about equal with





changes in the price of corn. When the two causes act together





the effects are very striking: thus between 1829 and 1834, there





was a recovery of prosperity accompanied by a steady fall in the





price of wheat and marriages rose from a hundred and four to a





hundred and twenty-one thousand. The marriage-rate rose again





rapidly between 1842 and 1845 when the price of wheat was a





little lower than in the preceding years, and the business of the





country was reviving; and again under similar circumstances





between 1847 and 1853 and between 1862 and 1865.





    A comparison of the marriage-rate with the harvests in Sweden





for the years 1749 to 1883 is given by Sir Rawson Rawson in the





Statistical Journal for December 1885. The harvest does not





declare itself till part of the year's tale of marriages is made





up; and further the inequalities of harvests are to some extent





compensated for by the storage of grain; and therefore the





individual harvest figures do not correspond closely with the





marriage-rate. But when several good or bad harvests come





together, the effect in increasing or diminishing the





marriage-rate is very clearly marked.











31. Statistics of exports are among the most convenient





indications of the fluctuations of commercial credit and





industrial activity: and in the article already quoted, Ogle has





shown a correspondence between the marriage-rate and the exports





per head. Compare diagrams in Vol. II, p. 12 of Levasseur's La





Population Franaise; and with regard to Massachusetts by Willcox





in the Political Science Quarterly, Vol. VIII, pp. 76-82. Ogle's





inquiries have been extended and corrected in a paper read by R.





H. Hooker before the Manchester Statistical Society, in January





1898; who points out that if the marriage-rate fluctuates, the





birth-rate during an ascending phase of the marriage-rate is apt





to correspond to the marriage-rate not for that phase, but for





the preceding phase when the marriage-rate was declining: and





vice vers? "Hence the ratio of births to marriages declines when





the marriage-rate is rising and rises when the marriage-rate





falls. A curve representing the ratio of births to marriages will





move inversely to the marriage-rate." He points out that the





decline in the ratio of births to marriages is not great, and is





accounted for by the rapid decline of illegitimate births. The





ratio of legitimate births to marriages is not declining





perceptibly.











32. The following statements are based chiefly on statistics





arranged by the late Signor Bodio, by M. Levasseur, La Population





Franaise, and by the English Registrar-General in his Report for





1907.











33. Much instructive and suggestive matter connected with the





subject of this chapter is contained in the Statistical Memoranda





and Charts relating to Public Health and Social Conditions





published by the Local Government Board in 1909 [Cd. 4671].











Chapter 5











The Health and Strength of the Population











    1. We have next to consider the conditions on which depend





health and strength, physical, mental and moral. They are the





basis of industrial efficiency, on which the production of





material wealth depends; while conversely the chief importance of





material wealth lies in the fact that, when wisely used, it





increases the health and strength, physical, mental and moral of





the human race.





    In many occupations industrial efficiency requires little





else than physical vigour; that is, muscular strength, a good





constitution and energetic habits. In estimating muscular, or





indeed any other kind of strength for industrial purposes, we





must take account of the number of hours in the day, of the





number of days in the year, and the number of years in the





lifetime, during which it can be exerted. But with this





precaution we can measure a man's muscular exertion by the number





of feet through which his work would raise a pound weight, if it





were applied directly to this use; or in other words by the





number of "foot pounds" of work that he does.(1*)





    Although the power of sustaining great muscular exertion





seems to rest on constitutional strength and other physical





conditions, yet even it depends also on force of will, and





strength of character. Energy of this kind, which may perhaps be





taken to be the strength of the man, as distinguished from that





of his body, is moral rather than physical; but yet it depends on





the physical condition of nervous strength. This strength of the





man himself, this resolution, energy and self-mastery, or in





short this "vigour" is the source of all progress: it shows





itself in great deeds, in great thoughts and in the capacity for





true religious feeling.(2*)





    Vigour works itself out in so many forms, that no simple





measure of it is possible. But we are all of us constantly





estimating vigour, and thinking of one person as having more





"backbone," more "stuff in him," or as being "a stronger man"





than another. Business men even in different trades, and





University men even when engaged in different studies, get to





estimate one another's strength very closely. It soon becomes





known if less strength is required to get a "first class" in one





study than another.











    2. In discussing the growth of numbers a little has been said





incidentally of the causes which determine length of life: but





they are in the main the same as those which determine





constitutional strength and vigour, and they will occupy our





attention again in the present chapter.





    The first of these causes is the climate. In warm countries





we find early marriages and high birth-rates, and in consequence





a low respect for human life: this has probably been the cause of





a great part of the high mortality that is generally attributed





to the insalubrity of the climate.(3*)





    Vigour depends partly on race qualities: but these, so far as





they can be explained at all, seem to be chiefly due to





climate.(4*)











    3. Climate has also a large share in determining the





necessaries of life; the first of which is food. Much depends on





the proper preparation of food; and a skilled housewife with ten





shillings a week to spend on food will often do more for the





health and strength of her family than an unskilled one with





twenty. The great mortality of infants among the poor is largely





due to the want of care and judgment in preparing their food; and





those who do not entirely succumb to this want of motherly care





often grow up with enfeebled constitutions.





    In all ages of the world except the present, want of food has





caused wholesale destruction of the people. Even in London in the





seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the mortality was eight per





cent greater in years of dear corn than in years of cheap





corn.(5*) But gradually the effects of increased wealth and





improved means of communication are making themselves felt nearly





all over the world; the severity of famines is mitigated even in





such a country as India; and they are unknown in Europe and in





the New World. In England now want of food is scarcely ever the





direct cause of death: but it is a frequent cause of that general





weakening of the system which renders it unable to resist





disease; and it is a chief cause of industrial inefficiency.





    We have already seen that the necessaries for efficiency vary





with the nature of the work to be done, but we must now examine





this subject a little more closely.





    As regards muscular work in particular there is a close





connection between the supply of food that a man has, and his





available strength. If the work is intermittent, as that of some





dock labourers, a cheap but nutritious grain diet is sufficient.





But for very heavy continuous strain such as is involved in





puddlers' and the hardest navvies' work, food is required which





can be digested and assimilated even when the body is tired. This





quality is still more essential in the food of the higher grades





of labour, whose work involves great nervous strain; though the





quantity required by them is generally small.





    After food, the next necessaries of life and labour are





clothing, house-room and firing. When they are deficient, the





mind becomes torpid, and ultimately the physical constitution is





undermined. When clothing is very scanty, it is generally worn





night and day; and the skin is allowed to be enclosed in a crust





of dirt. A deficiency of house-room, or of fuel, causes people to





live in a vitiated atmosphere which is injurious to health and





vigour; and not the least of the benefits which English people





derive from the cheapness of coal, is the habit, peculiar to





them, of having well-ventilated rooms even in cold weather.





Badly-built houses with imperfect drainage cause diseases which





even in their slighter forms weaken vitality in a wonderful way;





and overcrowding leads to moral evils which diminish the numbers





and lower the character of the people.





    Rest is as essential for the growth of a vigorous population





as the more material necessaries of food, clothing, etc. Overwork





of every form lowers vitality; while anxiety, worry, and





excessive mental strain have a fatal influence in undermining the





constitution, in impairing fecundity and diminishing the vigour





of the race.











    4. Next come three closely allied conditions of vigour,





namely, hopefulness, freedom, and change. All history is full of





the record of inefficiency caused in varying degrees by slavery,





serfdom, and other forms of civil and political oppression and





repression.(6*)





    In all ages colonies have been apt to outstrip their mother





countries in vigour and energy. This has been due partly to the





abundance of land and the cheapness of necessaries at their





command; partly to that natural selection of the strongest





characters for a life of adventure, and partly to physiological





causes connected with the mixture of races: but perhaps the most





important cause of all is to be found in the hope, the freedom





and the changefulness of their lives.(7*)





    Freedom so far has been regarded as freedom from external





bonds. But that higher freedom, which comes of self-mastery, is





an even more important condition for the highest work. The





elevation of the ideals of life on which this depends, is due on





the one side to political and economic causes, and on the other





to personal and religious influences; among which the influence





of the mother in early childhood is supreme.











    5. Bodily and mental health and strength are much influenced





by occupation.(8*) At the beginning of this century the





conditions of factory work were needlessly unhealthy and





oppressive for all, and especially for young children. But





Factory and Education Acts have removed the worst of these evils





from factories; though many of them still linger about domestic





industries and the smaller workshops.





    The higher wages, the greater intelligence, and the better





medical facilities of townspeople should cause infant mortality





to be much lower among them than in the country. But it is





generally higher, especially where there are many mothers who





neglect their family duties in order to earn money wages.











    6. In almost all countries there is a constant migration





towards the towns.(9*) The large towns and especially London





absorb the very best blood from all the rest of England; the most





enterprising, the most highly gifted, those with the highest





physique. and the strongest characters go there to find scope for





their abilities. An increasing number of those who are most





capable and have most strength of character, live in suburbs,





where excellent systems of drainage, water supply and lighting,





together with good schools and opportunities for open air play,





give conditions at least as conducive to vigour as are to be





found in the country; and though there are still many town





districts only a little less injurious to vitality than were





large towns generally some time ago, yet on the whole the





increasing density of population seems to be for the present a





diminishing source of danger. The recent rapid growth of





facilities for living far from the chief centres of industry and





trade must indeed slacken in time. But there seems no sign of any





slackening in the movement of industries outwards to suburbs and





even to new Garden Cities to seek and to bring with them vigorous





workers.





    Statistical averages are indeed unduly favourable to urban





conditions, partly because many of the town influences which





lower vigour do not much affect mortality; and partly because the





majority of immigrants into the towns are in the full strength of





youth, and of more than average energy and courage; while young





people whose parents live in the country generally go home when





they become seriously ill.(10*)





    There is no better use for public and private money than in





providing public parks and playgrounds in large cities, in





contracting with railways to increase the number of the workmen's





trains run by them, and in helping those of the working classes





who are willing to leave the large towns to do so, and to take





their industries with them.(11*)











    7. And there are yet other causes for anxiety. For there is





some partial arrest of that selective influence of struggle and





competition which in the earlier stages of civilization caused





those who were strongest and most vigorous to leave the largest





progeny behind them; and to which, more than any other single





cause, the progress of the human race is due. In the later stages





of civilization the rule has indeed long been that the upper





classes marry late, and in consequence have fewer children than





the working classes: but this has been compensated for by the





fact that among the working classes themselves the old rule was





held; and the vigour of the nation that is tending to be damped





out among the upper classes is thus replenished by the fresh





stream of strength that is constantly welling up from below. But





in France for a long time, and recently in America, and England,





some of the abler and more intelligent of the working class





population have shown signs of a disinclination to have large





families; and this is a source of danger.(12*)





    Thus there are increasing reasons for fearing, that while the





progress of medical science and sanitation is saving from death a





continually increasing number of the children of those who are





feeble physically and mentally; many of those who are most





thoughtful and best endowed with energy, enterprise and





self-control are tending to defer their marriages and in other





ways to limit the number of children whom they leave behind them.





The motive is sometimes selfish, and perhaps it is best that hard





and frivolous people should leave but few descendants of their





own type. But more often it is a desire to secure a good social





position for their children. This desire contains many elements





that fall short of the highest ideals of human aims, and in some





cases, a few that are distinctly base; but after all it has been





one of the chief factors of progress, and those who are affected





by it include many of those whose children would probably be





among the best and strongest of the race.





    It must be remembered that the members of a large family





educate one another, they are usually more genial and bright,





often more vigorous in every way than the members of a small





family. Partly, no doubt, this is because their parents were of





unusual vigour; and for a like reason they in their turn are





likely to have large and vigorous families. The progress of the





race is due to a much greater extent than appears at first sight





to the descendants of a few exceptionally large and vigorous





families.





    But on the other hand there is no doubt that the parents can





often do better in many ways for a small family than a large one.





Other things being equal, an increase in the number of children





who are born causes an increase of infantile mortality; and that





is an unmixed evil. The birth of children who die early from want





of care and adequate means is a useless strain to the mother and





an injury to the rest of the family.(13*)











    8. There are other considerations of which account ought to





be taken; but so far as the points discussed in this chapter are





concerned, it seems prima facie advisable that people should not





bring children into the world till they can see their way to





giving them at least as good an education both physical and





mental as they themselves had; and that it is best to marry





moderately early provided there is sufficient self-control to





keep the family within the requisite bounds without transgressing





moral laws. The general adoption of these principles of action,





combined with an adequate provision of fresh air and of healthy





play for our town populations, could hardly fail to cause the





strength and vigour of the race to improve. And we shall





presently find reasons for believing that if the strength and





vigour of the race improves, the increase of numbers will not for





a long time to come cause a diminution of the average real income





of the people.





    Thus then the progress of knowledge, and in particular of





medical science, the ever-growing activity and wisdom of





Government in all matters relating to health, and the increase of





material wealth, all tend to lessen mortality and to increase





health and strength, and to lengthen life. On the other hand,





vitality is lowered and the death-rate raised by the rapid





increase of town life, and by the tendency of the higher strains





of the population to marry later and to have fewer children than





the lower. If the former set of causes were alone in action, but





so regulated as to avoid the danger of over-population, it is





probable that man would quickly rise to a physical and mental





excellence superior to any that the world has yet known; while if





the latter set acted unchecked, he would speedily degenerate.





    As it is, the two sets hold one another very nearly in





balance, the former slightly preponderating. While the population





of England is growing nearly as fast as ever, those who are out





of health in body or mind are certainly not an increasing part of





the whole: the rest are much better fed and clothed, and, except





in over-crowded industrial districts, are generally growing in





strength. The average duration of life both for men and women has





been increasing steadily for many years.











NOTES:











1. This measure can be applied directly to most kinds of navvies'





and porters' work, and indirectly to many kinds of agricultural





work. In a controversy that was waged after the great





agricultural lock out as to the relative efficiency of unskilled





labour in the South and North of England, the most trustworthy





measure was found in the number of tons of material that a man





would load into a cart in a day. Other measures have been found





in the number of acres reaped or mown, or the number of bushels





of corn reaped, etc.: but these are unsatisfactory, particularly





for comparing different conditions of agriculture: since the





implements used, the nature of the crop and the mode of doing the





work all vary widely. Thus nearly all comparisons between





medieval and modern work and wages based on the wages of reaping,





mowing, etc. are valueless until we have found means to allow for





the effects of changes in the methods of agriculture. It costs





for instance less labour than it did to reap by hand a crop that





yields a hundred bushels of corn; because the implements used are





better than they were: but it may not cost less labour to reap an





acre of corn; because the crops are heavier than they were.





    In backward countries, particularly where there is not much





use of horses or other draught animals, a great part of men's and





women's work may be measured fairly well by the muscular exertion





involved in it. But in England less than one-sixth of the





industrial classes are now engaged on work of this kind; while





the force exerted by steam-engines alone is more than twenty





times as much as could be exerted by the muscles of all





Englishmen.











2. This must be distinguished from nervousness, which, as a rule,





indicates a general deficiency of nervous strength; though





sometimes it proceeds from nervous irritability or want of





balance. A man who has great nervous strength in some directions





may have but little in others; the artistic temperament in





particular often develops one set of nerves at the expense of





others: but it is the weakness of some of the nerves, not the





strength of the others, that leads to nervousness. The most





perfect artistic natures seem not to have been nervous: Leonardo





da Vinci and Shakespeare for example. The term "nervous strength"





corresponds in some measure to Heart in Engel's great division of





the elements of efficiency into (a) Body, (b) Reason, and (c)





Heart (Leib, Verstand und Herz). He classifies activities





according to the permutations a, ab, ac, abc, acb, b, ba, bc,





bca, bac; c, ca, cb, cab, cba: the order in each case being that





of relative importance, and a letter being omitted where the





corresponding element plays only a very small part.





    In the war of 1870 Berlin University students, who seemed to





be weaker than the average soldier, were found to be able to bear





fatigue better.











3. A warm climate impairs vigour. It is not altogether hostile to





high intellectual and artistic work: but it prevents people from





being able to endure very hard exertion of any kind for a long





time. More sustained hard work can be done in the cooler half of





the temperate zone than anywhere else; and most of all in places





such as England and her counterpart New Zealand, where





sea-breezes keep the temperature nearly uniform. The summer heats





and winter colds of many parts of Europe and America, where the





mean temperature is moderate, have the effect of shortening the





year for working purposes by about two months. Extreme and





sustained cold is found to dull the energies, partly perhaps





because it causes people to spend much of their time in close and





confined quarters: inhabitants of the Arctic regions are





generally incapable of long-continued severe exertion. In England





popular opinion has insisted that a "warm Yule tide makes fat





churchyard"; but statistics prove beyond question that it has the





opposite effect: the average mortality is highest in the coldest





quarter of the year, and higher in cold winters than in warm.











4. Race history is a fascinating but disappointing study for the





economist: for conquering races generally incorporated the women





of the conquered; they often carried with them many slaves of





both sexes during their migrations, and slaves were less likely





than freemen to be killed in battle or to adopt a monastic life.





In consequence nearly every race had much servile, that is mixed





blood in it: and as the share of servile blood was largest in the





industrial classes, a race history of industrial habits seems





impossible.











5. This was proved by Farr, who eliminated disturbing causes by





an instructive statistical device (Vital Statistics, p. 139).











6. Freedom and hope increase not only man's willingness but also





his power for work; physiologists tell us that a given exertion





consumes less of the store of nervous energy if done under the





stimulus of pleasure than of pain: and without hope there is no





enterprise. Security of person and property are two conditions of





this hopefulness and freedom; but security always involves





restraints on freedom, and it is one of the most difficult





problems of civilization to discover how to obtain the security





which is a condition of freedom without too great a sacrifice of





freedom itself. Changes of work, of scene, and of personal





associations bring new thoughts, call attention to the





imperfections of old methods, stimulate a "divine discontent,"





and in every way develop creative energy.











7. By converse with others who come from different places, and





have different Customs, travellers learn to put on its trial many





a habit of thought or action which otherwise they would have





always acquiesced in as though it were a law of nature. Moreover,





a shifting of places enables the more powerful and original minds





to find full scope for their energies and to rise to important





positions: whereas those who stay at home are often over much





kept in their places. Few men are prophets in their own land;





neighbours and relations are generally the last to pardon the





faults and to recognize the merits of those who are less docile





and more enterprising than those around them. It is doubtless





chiefly for this reason that in almost every part of England a





disproportionately large share of the best energy and enterprise





is to be found among those who were born elsewhere.





    But change may be carried to excess; and when population





shifts so rapidly, that a man is always shaking himself loose





from his reputation, he loses some of the best external aids to





the formation of a high moral character. The extreme hopefulness





and restlessness of those who wander to new countries lead to





much waste of effort in half acquiring technical skill, and half





finishing tasks which are speedily abandoned in favour of some





new occupation.











8. The rate of mortality is low among ministers of religion and





schoolmasters; among the agricultural classes, and in some other





industries such as those of wheelwrights, shipwrights and coal





miners. It is high in lead and tin mining, in file-making and





earthenware manufacture. But neither these nor any other regular





trade show as high a rate of mortality as is found among London





general labourers and costermongers; while the highest of all is





that of servants in inns. Such occupations are not directly





injurious to health, but they attract those who are weak in





physique and in character and they encourage irregular habits. A





good account of the influence of occupation on death-rates is





given in the supplement to the forty-fifth (1885) Annual Report





of the Registrar-General, pp. xxv-lxiii. See also Farr's Vital





Statistics, pp. 392-411, Humphreys' paper on Class Mortality





Statistics in the Statistical Journal for June 1887, and the





literature of the Factory Acts generally.











9. Davenant (Balance of Trade, A.D. 1699, p. 20), following





Gregory King, proves that according to official figures London





has an excess of deaths over births of 2000 a year, but an





immigration of 5000; which is more than half of what he





calculates, by a rather risky method, to be the true net increase





of the population of the country. He reckons that 530,000 people





live in London, 870,000 in the other cities and market towns, and





4,100,000 in villages and hamlets. Compare these figures with the





census of 1901 for England and Wales; where we find London with a





population of over 4,500,000; five more towns with an average of





over 500,000; and sixty-nine more exceeding 50,000 with an





average of over 100,000. Nor is this all: for many suburbs whose





population is not counted in, are often really parts of the big





towns; and in some cases the suburbs of several adjacent towns





run into one another, making them all into one gigantic, though





rather scattered town. A suburb of Manchester is counted as a





large town with 220,000 inhabitants; and the same is true of West





Ham, a suburb of London with 275,000. The boundaries of some





large towns are extended at irregular intervals to include such





suburbs: and consequently the true population of a large town may





be growing fast, while its nominal population grows slowly or





even recedes, and then suddenly leaps forwards. Thus the nominal





population of Liverpool was 552,000 in 1881; 518,000 in 1891; and





685,000 in 1901.





    Similar changes are taking place elsewhere. Thus the





population of Paris has grown twelve times as fast during the





nineteenth century as that of France. The towns of Germany are





increasing at the expense of the country by one half per cent. of





the population yearly. In the United States there was in 1800 no





town with more than 75,000 inhabitants; in 1905 there were three





which together contained more than 7,000,000 and eleven more with





above 300,000 each. More than a third of the population of





Victoria are collected in Melbourne.





    It must be recollected that the characteristics of town life





increase in intensity for good and for evil with every increase





in the size of a town, and its suburbs. Fresh country air has to





pass over many more sources of noisome vapour before it reaches





the average Londoner than before it reaches the average





inhabitant of a small town. The Londoner has generally to go far





before he can reach the freedom and the restful sounds and sights





of the country. London therefore with 4,500,000 inhabitants adds





to the urban character of England's life far more than a hundred





times as much as a town of 45,000 inhabitants.











10. For reasons of this kind Welton (Statistical Journal, 1897)





makes the extreme proposal to omit all persons between 15 and 35





years of age in comparing the rates of mortality in different





towns. The mortality of females in London between the ages of





fifteen and thirty-five is, chiefly for this reason, abnormally





low. If however a town has a stationary population its vital





statistics are more easily interpreted; and selecting Coventry as





a typical town, Galton has calculated that the adult children of





artisan townsfolk are little more than half as numerous as those





of labouring people who live in healthy country districts. When a





place is decaying, the young and strong and hearty drift away





from it; leaving the old and the infirm behind them, and





consequently the birth-rate is generally low. On the other hand,





a centre of industry that is attracting population is likely to





have a very high birth-rate, because it has more than its share





of people in the full vigour of life. This is especially the case





in the coal and iron towns, partly because they do not suffer, as





the textile towns do, from a deficiency of males; and partly





because miners as a class marry early. In some of them, though





the death-rate is high, the excess of the birth-rate over it





exceeds 20 per thousand of the population. The death rate is





generally highest in towns of the second order, chiefly because





their sanitary arrangements are not yet as good as those of the





very largest towns.





    Prof. Haycraft (Darwinism and Race Progress) argues in the





opposite direction. He lays just stress on the dangers to the





human race which would result from a diminution of those





diseases, such as phthisis and scrofula, which attack chiefly





people of weak constitution, and thus exercise a selective





influence on the race, unless it were accompanied by





corresponding improvements in other directions. But phthisis does





not kill all its victims; there is some net gain in a diminution





of its power of weakening them.











11. See an article entitled "Where to House the London Poor" by





the present writer in the Contemporary Review, Feb. 1884.











12. In the Southern States of America, manual work became





disgraceful to the white man; so that, if unable to have slaves





himself, he led a paltry degenerate life, and seldom married.





Again, on the Pacific Slope, there were at one time just grounds





for fearing that all but highly skilled work would be left to the





Chinese; and that the white men would live in an artificial way





in which a family became a great expense. In this case Chinese





lives would have been substituted for American, and the average





quality of the human race would have been lowered.











13. The extent of the infant mortality that arises from





preventable causes may be inferred from the facts that the





percentage of deaths under one year of age to births is generally





about a third as much again in urban as in rural districts; and





yet in many urban districts which have a well-to-do population it





is lower than the average for the whole country (Registrar





General's Report for 1905, pp. xlii-xlv). A few years ago it was





found that, while the annual death rate of children under five





years of age was only about two per cent in the families of peers





and was less than three per cent for the whole of the upper





classes, it was between six and seven per cent for the whole of





England. On the other hand Prof Leroy Beaulieu says that in





France the parents of but one or two children are apt to indulge





them, and be over-careful about them to the detriment of their





boldness, enterprise and endurance. (See Statistical Journal,





Vol. 54, pp. 378-9.)











Chapter 6











Industrial Training











    1. Having discussed the causes which govern the growth of a





numerous and vigorous population, we have next to consider the





training that is required to develop its industrial efficiency.





    The natural vigour that enables a man to attain great success





in any one pursuit would generally have served him in good stead





in almost any other. But there are exceptions. Some people, for





instance, seem to be fitted from birth for an artistic career,





and for no other; and occasionally a man of great practical





genius is found to be almost devoid of artistic sensibility. But





a race that has great nervous strength seems generally able,





under favourable conditions, to develop in the course of a few





generations ability of almost any kind that it holds in specially





high esteem. A race that has acquired vigour in war or in the





ruder forms of industry sometimes gains intellectual and artistic





power of a high order very quickly; and nearly every literary and





artistic epoch of classical and medieval times has been due to a





people of great nervous strength, who have been brought into





contact with noble thoughts before they have acquired much taste





for artificial comforts and luxuries.





    The growth of this taste in our own age has prevented us from





taking full advantage of the opportunities our largely increased





resources give us of consecrating the greater part of the highest





abilities of the race to the highest aims. But perhaps the





intellectual vigour of the age appears less than it really is, in





consequence of the growth of scientific pursuits. For in art and





literature success is often achieved while genius still wears the





fascinating aspect of youth; but in modern science so much





knowledge is required for originality, that before a student can





make his mark in the world, his mind has often lost the first





bloom of its freshness; and further the real value of his work is





not often patent to the multitude as that of a picture or poem





generally is.(1*) In the same way the solid qualities of the





modern machine-tending artisan are rated more cheaply than the





lighter virtues of the medieval handicraftsman. This is partly





because we are apt to regard as commonplace those excellences





which are common in our own time; and to overlook the fact that





the term "unskilled labourer" is constantly changing its meaning.











    2. Very backward races are unable to keep on at any kind of





work for a long time; and even the simplest form of what we





regard as unskilled work is skilled work relatively to them; for





they have not the requisite assiduity, and they can acquire it





only by a long course of training. But where education is





universal, an occupation may fairly be classed as unskilled,





though it requires a knowledge of reading and writing. Again, in





districts in which manufactures have long been domiciled, a habit





of responsibility, of carefulness and promptitude in handling





expensive machinery and materials becomes the common property of





all; and then much of the work of tending machinery is said to be





entirely mechanical and unskilled, and to call forth no human





faculty that is worthy of esteem. But in fact it is probable that





not one-tenth of the present populations of the world have the





mental and moral faculties, the intelligence, and, the





self-control that are required for it: perhaps not one-half could





be made to do the work well by steady training for two





generations. Even of a manufacturing population only a small part





are capable of doing many of the tasks that appear at first sight





to be entirely monotonous. Machine-weaving, for instance, simple





as it seems, is divided into higher and lower grades; and most of





those who work in the lower grades have not "the stuff in them"





that is required for weaving with several colours. And the





differences are even greater in industries that deal with hard





materials, wood, metals, or ceramics.





    Some kinds of manual work require long-continued practice in





one set of operations, but these cases are not very common, and





they are becoming rarer: for machinery is constantly taking over





work that requires manual skill of this kind. It is indeed true





that a general command over the use of one's fingers is a very





important element of industrial efficiency; but this is the





result chiefly of nervous strength, and self-mastery. It is of





course developed by training, but the greater part of this may be





of a general character and not special to the particular





occupation; just as a good cricketer soon learns to play tennis





well, so a skilled artisan can often move into other trades





without any great and lasting loss of efficiency.





    Manual skill that is so specialized that it is quite





incapable of being transferred from one occupation to another is





becoming steadily a less and less important factor in production.





Putting aside for the present the faculties of artistic





perception and artistic creation, we may say that what makes one





occupation higher than another, what makes the workers of one





town or country more efficient than those of another, is chiefly





a superiority in general sagacity and energy which are not





specialized to any one occupation.





    To be able to bear in mind many things at a time, to have





everything ready when wanted, to act promptly and show resource





when anything goes wrong, to accommodate oneself quickly to





changes in detail of the work done, to be steady and trustworthy,





to have always a reserve of force which will come out in





emergency, these are the qualities which make a great industrial





people. They are not peculiar to any occupation, but are wanted





in all; and if they cannot always be easily transferred from one





trade to other kindred trades, the chief reason is that they





require to be supplemented by some knowledge of materials and





familiarity with special processes.





    We may then use the term general ability to denote those





faculties and that general knowledge and intelligence which are





in varying degrees the common property of all the higher grades





of industry; while that manual dexterity and that acquaintance





with particular materials and processes which are required for





the special purposes of individual trades may be classed as





specialized ability.











    3. General ability depends largely on the surroundings of





childhood and youth. In this the first and far the most powerful





influence is that of the mother.(2*) Next comes the influence of





the father, of other children, and in some cases of servants.(3*)





As years pass on the child of the working man learns a great deal





from what he sees and hears going on around him; and when we





inquire into the advantages for starting in life which children





of the well-to-do classes have over those of artisans, and which





these in their turn have over the children of unskilled





labourers, we shall have to consider these influences of home





more in detail. But at present we may pass to consider the more





general influences of school education.





    Little need be said of general education; though the





influence even of that on industrial efficiency is greater than





it appears. It is true that. the children of the working classes





must very often leave school, when they have but learnt the





elements of reading, writing, arithmetic and drawing; and it is





sometimes argued that part of the little time spent on these





subjects would be better given to practical work. But the advance





made at school is important not so much on its own account, as





for the power of future advance which a school education gives.





For a truly liberal general education adapts the mind to use its





best faculties in business and to use business itself as a means





of increasing culture; though it does not concern itself with the





details of particular trades: that is left for technical





education.(4*)











    4. Technical education has in like manner raised its aims in





recent years. It used to mean little more than imparting that





manual dexterity and that elementary knowledge of machinery and





processes which an intelligent lad quickly picks up for himself





when his work has begun; though if he has learnt it beforehand,





he can perhaps earn a few shillings more at starting than if he





had been quite ignorant. But such so-called education does not





develop faculties; it rather hinders them from being developed. A





lad, who has picked up the knowledge for himself, has educated





himself by so doing; and he is likely to make better progress in





the future than one who has been taught in a school of this





old-fashioned kind. Technical education is however outgrowing its





mistakes; and is aiming, firstly, at giving a general command





over the use of eyes and fingers (though there are signs that





this work is being taken over by general education, to which it





properly belongs); and secondly at imparting artistic skill and





knowledge, and methods of investigation, which are useful in





particular occupations, but are seldom properly acquired in the





course of practical work. It is however to be remembered that





every advance in the accuracy and versatility of automatic





machinery narrows the range of manual work in which command over





hand and eye is at a high premium; and that those faculties which





are trained by general education in its best forms are ever





rising in importance.(5*)





    According to the best English opinions, technical education





for the higher ranks of industry should keep the aim of





developing the faculties almost as constantly before it as





general education does. It should rest on the same basis as a





thorough general education, but should go on to work out in





detail special branches of knowledge for the benefit of





particular trades.(6*) Our aim should be to add the scientific





training in which the countries of Western Europe are ahead of us





to that daring and restless energy and those practical instincts,





which seldom flourish unless the best years of youth are spent in





the workshop; recollecting always that whatever a youth learns





for himself by direct experience in well-conducted works, teaches





him more and stimulates his mental activity more than if it were





taught him by a master in a technical school with model





instruments.(7*)





    The old apprenticeship system is not exactly suited to modern





conditions and it has fallen into disuse; but a substitute for it





is wanted. Within the last few years many of the ablest





manufacturers have begun to set the fashion of making their sons





work through every stage in succession of the business they will





ultimately have to control; but this splendid education can be





had only by a few. So many and various are the branches of any





great modern industry that it would be impossible for the





employers to undertake, as they used to do, that every youth





committed to their care should learn all; and indeed a lad of





ordinary ability would be bewildered by the attempt. But it does





not seem impracticable to revive the apprenticeship system in a





modified form.(8*)





    The great epoch-making inventions in industry came till





recently almost exclusively from England. But now other nations





are joining in the race. The excellence of the common schools of





the Americans, the variety of their lives, the interchange of





ideas between different races among them, and the peculiar





conditions of their agriculture have developed a restless spirit





of inquiry; while technical education is now being pushed on with





great vigour. On the other hand, the diffusion of scientific





knowledge among the middle and even the working classes of





Germany, combined with their familiarity with modern languages





and their habits of travelling in pursuit of instruction, has





enabled them to keep up with English and American mechanics and





to take the lead in many of the applications of chemistry to





business.(9*)











    5. It is true that there are many kinds of work which can be





done as efficiently by an uneducated as by an educated workman:





and that the higher branches of education are of little direct





use except to employers and foremen and a comparatively small





number of artisans. But a good education confers great indirect





benefits even on the ordinary workman. It stimulates his mental





activity; it fosters in him a habit of wise inquisitiveness; it





makes him more intelligent, more ready, more trustworthy in his





ordinary work; it raises the tone of his life in working hours





and out of working hours; it is thus an important means towards





the production of material wealth; at the same time that,





regarded as an end in itself, it is inferior to none of those





which the production of material wealth can be made to subserve.





    We must however look in another direction for a part, perhaps





the greater part, of the immediate economic gain which the nation





may derive from an improvement in the general and technical





education of the mass of the people. We must look not so much at





those who stay in the rank and file of the working classes, as at





those who rise from a humble birth to join the higher ranks of





skilled artisans, to become foremen or employers, to advance the





boundaries of science, or possibly to add to the national wealth





in art and literature.





    The laws which govern the birth of genius are inscrutable. It





is probable that the percentage of children of the working





classes who are endowed with natural abilities of the highest





order is not so great as that of the children of people who have





attained or have inherited a higher position in society. But





since the manual labour classes are four or five times as





numerous as all other classes put together, it is not unlikely





that more than half the best natural genius that is born into the





country belongs to them; and of this a great part is fruitless





for want of opportunity. There is no extravagance more





prejudicial to the growth of national wealth than that wasteful





negligence which allows genius that happens to be born of lowly





parentage to expend itself in lowly work. No change would conduce





so much to a rapid increase of material wealth as an improvement





in our schools, and especially those of the middle grades,





provided it be combined with an extensive system of scholarships,





which will enable the clever son of a working man to rise





gradually from school to school till he has the best theoretical





and practical education which the age can give.





    To the abilities of children of the working classes may be





ascribed the greater part of the success of the free towns in the





Middle Ages and of Scotland in recent times. Even within England





itself there is a lesson of the same kind to be learnt: progress





is most rapid in those parts of the country in which the greatest





proportion of the leaders of industry are the sons of working





men. For instance, the beginning of the manufacturing era found





social distinctions more closely marked and more firmly





established in the South than in the North of England. In the





South something of a spirit of caste has held back the working





men and the sons of working men from rising to posts of command;





and the old established families have been wanting in that





elasticity and freshness of mind which no social advantages can





supply, and which comes only from natural gifts. This spirit of





caste, and this deficiency of new blood among the leaders of





industry, have mutually sustained one another; and there are not





a few towns in the South of England whose decadence within living





memory can be traced in a great measure to this cause.











    6. Education in art stands on a somewhat different footing





from education in hard thinking: for while the latter nearly





always strengthens the character, the former not unfrequently





fails to do this. Nevertheless the development of the artistic





faculties of the people is in itself an aim of the very highest





importance, and is becoming a chief factor of industrial





efficiency.





    We are here concerned almost exclusively with those branches





of art which appeal to the eye. For though literature and music





contribute as much and more to the fulness of life, yet their





development does not directly affect, and does not depend upon,





the methods of business, the processes of manufacture and the





skill of artisans.





    The artisan of Europe in the Middle Ages, and of eastern





countries now, has perhaps obtained credit for more originality





than he has really possessed. Eastern carpets, for instance, are





full of grand conceptions: but if we examine a great many





examples of the art of any one place, selected perhaps from the





work of several centuries, we often find very little variety in





their fundamental ideas. But in the modern era of rapid changes





-- some caused by fashion and some by the beneficial movements of





industrial and social progress -- everyone feels free to make a





new departure, everyone has to rely in the main on his own





resources: there is no slowly matured public criticism to guide





him.(10*)





    This is however not the only, perhaps not the chief





disadvantage under which artistic design labours in our own age.





There is no good reason for believing that the children of





ordinary workmen in the Middle Ages had more power of artistic





origination than those of ordinary village carpenters or





blacksmiths of to-day; but if one among ten thousand happened to





have genius, it found vent in his work and was stimulated by the





competition of the gilds and in other ways. But the modern





artisan is apt to be occupied in the management of machinery; and





though the faculties which he develops may be more solid and may





help more in the long run towards the highest progress of the





human race, than did the taste and fancy of his medieval





predecessor, yet they do not contribute directly towards the





progress of art. And if he should find in himself a higher order





of ability than among his fellows, he will probably endeavour to





take a leading part in the management of a trades-union or some





other society, or to collect together a little store of capital





and to rise out of that trade in which he was educated. These are





not ignoble aims; but his ambition would perhaps have been nobler





and more fruitful of good to the world, if he had stayed in his





old trade and striven to create works of beauty which should live





after he had gone.





    It must however be admitted that he would have great





difficulties in doing this. The shortness of the time which we





allow ourselves for changes in the arts of decoration is scarcely





a greater evil than the width of the area of the world over which





they are spread; for that causes a further distraction of the





hasty and hurried efforts of the designer, by compelling him to





be always watching the world movements of the supply of and





demand for art products. This is a task for which the artisan,





who works with his own hands, is not well fitted; and in





consequence now-a-days the ordinary artisan finds it best to





follow and not to lead. Even the supreme skill of the Lyons





weaver shows itself now almost exclusively in an inherited power





of delicate manipulation, and fine perception of colour, that





enable him to carry out perfectly the ideas of professional





designers.





    Increasing wealth is enabling people to buy things of all





kinds to suit the fancy, with but a secondary regard to their





powers of wearing; so that in all kinds of clothing and furniture





it is every day more true that it is the pattern which sells the





things. The influence of the late William Morris and others,





combined with the lead which many English designers have derived





from Oriental and especially Persian and Indian masters of colour





is acknowledged by Frenchmen themselves to have attained the





first rank for certain classes of English fabrics and decorative





products. But in other directions France is supreme. Some English





manufacturers who hold their own against the world would, it is





said, be driven out of the market if they had to depend on





English patterns. This is partly due to the fact that Paris





having the lead in fashions, as the result of an inherited quick





and subtle taste in women's dress, a Parisian design is likely to





be in harmony with the coming fashions and to sell better than a





design of equal intrinsic worth from elsewhere.(11*)





    Technical education, then, though it cannot add much directly





to the supply of genius in art, any more than it can in science





or in business, can yet save much natural artistic genius from





running to waste; and it is called on to do this all the more





because the training that was given by the older forms of





handicraft can never be revived on a large scale.(12*)











    7. We may then conclude that the wisdom of expending public





and private funds on education is not to be measured by its





direct fruits alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment,





to give the masses of the people much greater opportunities than





they can generally avail themselves of. For by this means many,





who would have died unknown, are enabled to get the start needed





for bringing out their latent abilities. And the economic value





of one great industrial genius is sufficient to cover the





expenses of the education of a whole town; for one new idea, such





as Bessemer's chief invention, adds as much to England's





productive power as the labour of a hundred thousand men. Less





direct, but not less in importance, is the aid given to





production by medical discoveries such as those of Jenner or





Pasteur, which increase our health and working power; and again





by scientific work such as that of mathematics or biology, even





though many generations may pass away before it bears visible





fruit in greater material well-being. All that is spent during





many years in opening the means of higher education to the masses





would be well paid for if it called out one more Newton or





Darwin, Shakespeare or Beethoven.





    There are few practical problems in which the economist has a





more direct interest than those relating to the principles on





which the expense of the education of children should be divided





between the State and the parents. But we must now consider the





conditions that determine the power and the will of the parents





to bear their share of the expense, whatever it may be.





    Most parents are willing enough to do for their children what





their own parents did for them; and perhaps even to go a little





beyond it if they find themselves among neighbours who happen to





have a rather higher standard. But to do more than this requires,





in addition to the moral qualities of unselfishness and a warmth





of affection that are perhaps not rare, a certain habit of mind





which is as yet not very common. It requires the habit of





distinctly realizing the future, of regarding a distant event as





of nearly the same importance as if it were close at hand





(discounting the future at a low rate of interest); this habit is





at once a chief product and a chief cause of civilization, and is





seldom fully. developed except among the middle and upper classes





of the more cultivated nations.











    8. Parents generally bring up their children to occupations





in their own grade, and therefore the total supply of labour in





any grade in one generation is in a great measure determined by





the numbers in that grade in the preceding generation, yet within





the grade itself there is greater. mobility. If the advantages of





any one occupation in it rise above the average, there is a quick





influx of youth from other occupations within the grade. The





vertical movement from one grade to another is seldom very rapid





or on a very large scale; but, when the advantages of a grade





have risen relatively to the difficulty of the work required of





it, many small streams of labour, both youthful and adult, will





begin to flow towards it; and though none of them may be very





large, they will together have a sufficient volume to satisfy





before long the increased demand for labour in that grade.





    We must defer to a later stage a fuller discussion of the





obstacles which the conditions of any place and time oppose to





the free mobility of labour, and also of the inducements which





they offer to anyone to change his occupation or to bring up his





son to an occupation different from his own. But we have seen





enough to conclude that, other things being equal, an increase in





the earnings that are to be got by labour increases its rate of





growth; or, in other words, a rise in its demand price increases





the supply of it. If the state of knowledge, and of ethical,





social and domestic habits be given; then the vigour of the





people as a whole if not their numbers, and both the numbers and





vigour of any trade in particular, may be said to have a supply





price in this sense, that there is a certain level of the demand





price which will keep them stationary; that a higher price would





cause them to increase, and that a lower price would cause them





to decrease. Thus economic causes play a part in governing the





growth of population as a whole as well as the supply of labour





in any particular grade. But their influence on the numbers of





the population as a whole is largely indirect; and is exerted by





way of the ethical, social and domestic habits of life. For these





habits are themselves influenced by economic causes deeply,





though slowly, and in ways some of which are difficult to trace,





and impossible to predict.(13*)











NOTES:











1. In this connection it is worth while to notice that the full





importance of an epoch-making idea is often not perceived in the





generation in which it is made: it starts the thoughts of the





world on a new track, but the change of direction is not obvious





until the turning-point has been left some way behind. In the





same way the mechanical inventions of every age are apt to be





underrated relatively to those of earlier times. For a new





discovery is seldom fully effective for practical purposes till





many minor improvements and subsidiary discoveries have gathered





themselves around it: an invention that makes an epoch is very





often a generation older than the epoch which it makes. Thus it





is that each generation seems to be chiefly occupied in working





out the thoughts of the preceding one; while the full importance





of its own thoughts is as yet not clearly seen.











2. According to Galton the statement that all great men have had





great mothers goes too far: but that shows only that the mother's





influence does not outweigh all others; not that it is not





greater than any one of them. He says that the mother's influence





is most easily traceable among theologians and men of science,





because an earnest mother leads her child to feel deeply about





great things; and a thoughtful mother does not repress, but





encourages that childish curiosity which is the raw material of





scientific habits of thought.











3. There are many fine natures among domestic servants. But those





who live in very rich houses are apt to get self-indulgent





habits, to overestimate the importance of wealth, and generally





to put the lower aims of life above the higher, in a way that is





not common with independent working people. The company in which





the children of some of our best houses spend much of their time,





is less ennobling than that of the average cottage. Yet in these





very houses, no servant who is not specially qualified, is





allowed to take charge of a young retriever or a young horse.











4. The absence of a careful general education for the children of





the working classes, has been hardly less detrimental to





industrial progress than the narrow range of the old





grammar-school education of the middle classes. Till recently





indeed it was the only one by which the average schoolmaster





could induce his pupils to use their minds in anything higher





than the absorption of knowledge. It was therefore rightly called





liberal, because it was the best that was to be had. But it





failed in its aim of familiarizing the citizen with the great





thoughts of antiquity; it was generally forgotten as soon as





school-time was over; and it raised an injurious antagonism





between business and culture. Now however the advance of





knowledge is enabling us to use science and art to supplement the





curriculum of the grammar-school, and to give to those who can





afford it an education that develops their best faculties, and





starts them on the track of thoughts which will most stimulate





the higher activities of their minds in after-life. The time





spent on learning to spell is almost wasted: if spelling and





pronunciation are brought into harmony in the English language as





in most others, about a year will be added to the effective





school education without any additional cost.











5. As Nasmyth says; if a lad, having dropped two peas at random





on a table, can readily put a third pea midway in a line between





them, he is on the way to become a good mechanic. Command over





eye and hand is gained in the ordinary English games, no less





than in the playful work of the Kinder-garten. Drawing has always





been on the border line between work and play.











6. One of the weakest points of technical education is that it





does not educate the sense of proportion and the desire for





simplicity of detail. The English, and to an even greater extent,





the Americans, have acquired in actual business the faculty of





rejecting intricacies in machinery and processes, which are not





worth what they cost, and practical instinct of this kind often





enables them to succeed in competition with Continental rivals





who are much better educated.











7. A good plan is that of spending the six winter months of





several years after leaving school in learning science in





College, and the six summer months as articled pupils in large





workshops. The present writer introduced this plan about forty





years ago at University College, Bristol (now the University of





Bristol). But it has practical difficulties which can be overcome





only by the cordial and generous co-operation of the heads of





large firms with the College authorities. Another excellent plan





is that adopted in the school attached to the works of Messrs





Mather and Platt at Manchester. "The drawings made in the school





are of work actually in progress in the shops. One day the





teacher gives the necessary explanations and calculations, and





the next day the scholars see, as it were on the anvil, the very





thing which has been the subject of his lecture."











8. The employer binds himself to see that the apprentice is





thoroughly taught in the workshop all the subdivisions of one





great division of his trade, instead of letting him learn only





one of these subdivisions, as too often happens now. The





apprentice's training would then often be as broad as if he had





been taught the whole of the trade as it existed a few





generations ago; and it might be supplemented by a theoretical





knowledge of all branches of the trade, acquired in a technical





school. Something resembling the old apprenticeship system has





recently come into vogue for young Englishmen who desire to learn





the business of farming under the peculiar conditions of a new





country... and there are some signs that the plan may be extended





to the business of farming in this country, for which it is in





many respects admirably adapted. But there remains a great deal





of education suitable to the farmer and to the farm-labourer





which can best be given in agricultural colleges and dairy





schools.





    Meanwhile many great agencies for the technical education of





adults are being rapidly developed, such as public exhibitions,





trade associations and congresses, and trade journals. Each of





them has its own work to do. In agriculture and some other trades





the greatest aid to progress is perhaps found in public shows.





But those industries, which are more advanced and in the hands of





persons of studious habits, owe more to the diffusion of





practical and scientific knowledge by trade journals; which,





aided by changes in the methods of industry and also in its





social conditions, are breaking up trade secrets and helping men





of small means in competition with their richer rivals.











9. The heads of almost every progressive firm on the Continent





have carefully studied processes and machinery in foreign lands.





The English are great travellers; but partly perhaps on account





of their ignorance of other languages they seem hardly to set





enough store on the technical education that can be gained by the





wise use of travel.











10. In fact every designer in a primitive age is governed by





precedent: only very daring people depart from it; even they do





not depart far, and their innovations are subjected to the test





of experience, which, in the long run, is infallible. For though





the crudest and most ridiculous fashions in art and in literature





will be accepted by the people for a time at the bidding of their





social superiors, nothing but true artistic excellence has





enabled a ballad or a melody, a style of dress or a pattern of





furniture to retain its popularity among a whole nation for many





generations together. These innovations, then, which were





inconsistent with the true spirit of art were suppressed, and





those that were on the right track were retained, and became the





starting-point for further progress; and thus traditional





instincts played a great part in preserving the purity of the





industrial arts in Oriental countries, and to a less extent in





medieval Europe.











11. French designers find it best to live in Paris: if they stay





for long out of contact with the central movements of fashion





they seem to fall behindhand. Most of them have been educated as





artists, but have failed of their highest ambition. It is only in





exceptional cases, as for instance for the Svres china, that





those who have succeeded as artists find it worth their while to





design. Englishmen can, however, hold their own in designing for





Oriental markets, and there is evidence that the English are at





least equal to the French in originality; though they are





inferior in quickness in seeing how to group forms and colours so





as to obtain an effective result. (See the Report on Technical





Education, Vol. 1, pp. 256, 261, 324, 325 and Vol. III, pp.





151-2, 202-3, 211 and passim.) It is probable that the profession





of the modern designer has not yet risen to the best position





which it is capable of holding. For it has been to a





disproportionate extent under the influence of one nation; and





that nation is one whose works in the highest branches of art





have seldom borne to be transplanted. They have indeed often been





applauded and imitated at the time by other nations, but they





have as yet seldom struck a key-note for the best work of later





generations.











12. The painters themselves have put on record in the





portrait-galleries the fact that in medieval times, and even





later, their art attracted a larger share of the best intellect





than it does now; when the ambition of youth is tempted by the





excitement of modern business, when its zeal for imperishable





achievements finds a field in the discoveries of modern science,





and, lastly, when a great deal of excellent talent is insensibly





diverted from high aims by the ready pay to be got by hastily





writing half-thoughts for periodical literature.











13. Mill was so much impressed by the difficulties that beset a





parent in the attempt to bring up his son to an occupation widely





different in character from his own, that he said (Principles,





II, XIV, 2): --  "So complete, indeed, has hitherto been the





separation, so strongly marked the line of demarcation, between





the different grades of labourers, as to be almost equivalent to





an hereditary distinction of caste; each employment being chiefly





recruited from the children of those already employed in it, or





in employments of the same rank with it in social estimation, or





from the children of persons who, if originally of a lower rank,





have succeeded in raising themselves by their exertions. The





liberal professions are mostly supplied by the sons of either the





professional or the idle classes: the more highly skilled manual





employments are filled up from the sons of skilled artisans or





the class of tradesmen who rank with them: the lower classes of





skilled employments are in a similar case; and unskilled





labourers, with occasional exceptions, remain from father to son





in their pristine condition. Consequently the wages of each class





have hitherto been regulated by the increase of its own





population, rather than that of the general population of the





country." But he goes on, "The changes, however, now so rapidly





taking place in usages and ideas are undermining all these





distinctions."





    His prescience has been vindicated by the progress of change





since he wrote. The broad lines of division which he pointed out





have been almost obliterated by the rapid action of those causes





which, as we saw earlier in the chapter, are reducing the amount





of skill and ability required in some occupations and increasing





it in others. We cannot any longer regard different occupations





as distributed among four great planes; but we may perhaps think





of them as resembling a long flight of steps of unequal breadth,





some of them being so broad as to act as landing stages. Or even





better still we might picture to ourselves two flights of stairs,





one representing the "hard-handed industries" and the other "the





soft handed industries"; because the vertical division between





these two is in fact as broad and as clearly marked as the





horizontal division between any two grades.





    Mill's classification had lost great part of its value when





Cairnes adopted it (Leading Principles, p. 72). A classification





more suited to our existing conditions is offered by Giddings





(Political Science Quarterly, Vol. II, pp. 69-71). It is open to





the objection that it draws broad lines of division where nature





has made no broad lines; but it is perhaps as good as any





division of industry into four grades can be. His divisions are







(i) automatic manual labour, including common labourers and





machine tenders; (ii) responsible manual labour, including those





who can be entrusted with some responsibility and labour of





self-direction; (iii) automatic brain workers, such as book





keepers, and (iv) responsible brain workers, including the





superintendents and directors.





    The conditions and methods of the large and incessant





movement of the population upwards and downwards from grade to





grade are studied more fully below, VI, IV, V and VII.





    The growing demand for boys to run errands, and to do other





work that has no educational value, has increased the danger that





parents may send their sons into avenues that have no outlook for





good employment in later years: and something is being done by





public agency, and more by the devotion and energy of men and





women in unofficial association, in giving out notes of warning





against such "blind alley" occupations, and assisting lads to





prepare themselves for skilled work. These efforts may be of





great national value. But care must be taken that this guidance





and help is as accessible to the higher strains of the working





class population when in need of it as to the lower; lest the





race should degenerate.











Chapter 7











The Growth of Wealth











    1. In this chapter it is not necessary to distinguish the





points of view in which wealth is regarded as the object of





consumption and as an agent of production; we are concerned with





the growth of wealth simply, and we have no need to emphasize its





uses as capital.





    The earliest forms of wealth were probably implements for





hunting and fishing, and personal ornaments; and, in cold





countries, clothing and huts.(1*) During this stage the





domestication of animals began; but at first they were probably





cared for chiefly for their own sake, because they were





beautiful, and it was pleasant to have them; they were, like





articles of personal ornament, desired because of the immediate





gratification to be derived from their possession rather than as





a provision against future needs.(2*) Gradually the herds of





domesticated animals increased; and during the pastoral stage





they were at once the pleasure and the pride of their possessors,





the outward emblems of social rank, and by far the most important





store of wealth accumulated as a provision against future needs.





    As numbers thickened and the people settled down to





agriculture, cultivated land took the first place in the





inventory of wealth; and that part of the value of the land which





was due to improvements (among which wells held a conspicuous





place) became the chief element of capital, in the narrower sense





of the term. Next in importance came houses, domesticated





animals, and in some places boats and ships; but the implements





of production, whether for use in agriculture or in domestic





manufactures, remained for a long time of little value. In some





places, however, precious stones and the precious metals in





various forms became early a leading object of desire and a





recognized means of hoarding wealth; while, to say nothing of the





palaces of monarchs, a large part of social wealth in many





comparatively rude civilizations took the form of edifices for





public purposes, chiefly religious, and of roads and bridges, of





canals and irrigation works.





    For some thousands of years these remained the chief forms of





accumulated wealth. In towns indeed houses and household





furniture took the first place, and stocks of the more expensive





of raw materials counted for a good deal; but though the





inhabitants of the towns had often more wealth per head than





those of the country, their total numbers were small; and their





aggregate wealth was very much less than that of the country.





During all this time the only trade that used very expensive





implements was the trade of carrying goods by water: the weaver's





looms, the husbandman's ploughs and the blacksmith's anvils were





of simple construction and were of little account beside the





merchant's ships. But in the eighteenth century England





inaugurated the era of expensive implements.





    The implements of the English farmer had been rising slowly





in value for a long time; but the progress was quickened in the





eighteenth century. After a while the use first of water power





and then of steam power caused the rapid Substitution of





expensive machinery for inexpensive hand tools in one department





of production after another. As in earlier times the most





expensive implements were ships and in some cases canals for





navigation and irrigation, so now they are the means of





locomotion in general; -- railways. and tramways, canals, docks





and ships, telegraph and telephone systems and water-works: even





gas-works might almost come under this head, on the ground that a





great part of their plant is devoted to distributing the gas.





After these come mines and iron and chemical works, ship-building





yards, printing-presses, and other large factories full of





expensive machinery.





    On whichever side we look we find that the progress and





diffusion of knowledge are constantly leading to the adoption of





new processes and new machinery which economize human effort on





condition that some of the effort is spent a good while before





the attainment of the ultimate ends to which it is directed. It





is not easy to measure this progress exactly, because many modern





industries had no counterpart in ancient times. But let us





compare the past and present conditions of the four great





industries the products of which have not changed their general





character: viz. agriculture, the building, the cloth-making, and





the carrying trades. In the first two of these hand work still





retains an important place: but even in them there is a great





development of expensive machinery. Compare for instance the rude





implements of an Indian Ryot even of to-day with the equipment of





a progressive Lowland farmer;(3*) and consider the brick-making,





mortar-making, sawing, planing, moulding and slotting machines of





a modern builder, his steam cranes and his electric light. And if





we turn to the textile trades, or at least to those of them which





make the simpler products, we find each operative in early times





content with implements the cost of which was equivalent to but a





few months of his labour; while in modern times it is estimated





that for each man, woman and child employed there is a capital in





plant alone of more than ?00, or say the equivalent of five





years' labour. Again the cost of a steam-ship is perhaps





equivalent to the labour for fifteen years or more of those who





work her; while a capital of about ?,000,000,000 invested in





railways in England and Wales is equivalent to the work for more





than twenty years of the 300,000 wage-earners employed on them.











    2. As civilization has progressed, man has always been





developing new wants, and new and more expensive ways of





gratifying them. The rate of progress has sometimes been slow,





and occasionally there has even been a great retrograde movement;





but now we are moving on at a rapid pace that grows quicker every





year; and we cannot guess where it will stop. On every side





further openings are sure to offer themselves, all of which will





tend to change the character of our social and industrial life,





and to enable us to turn to account vast stores of capital in





providing new gratifications and new ways of economizing effort





by expending it in anticipation of distant wants. There seems to





be no good reason for believing that we are anywhere near a





stationary state in which there will be no new important wants to





be satisfied; in which there will be no more room for profitably





investing present effort in providing for the future, and in





which the accumulation of wealth will cease to have any reward.





The whole history of man shows that his wants expand with the





growth of his wealth and knowledge.(4*)





    And with the growth of openings for the investment of capital





there is a constant increase in that surplus of production over





the necessaries of life, which gives the power to save. When the





arts of production were rude, there was very little surplus,





except where a strong ruling race kept the subject masses hard at





work on the bare necessaries of life, and where the climate was





so mild that those necessaries were small and easily obtained.





But every increase in the arts of production, and in the capital





accumulated to assist and support labour in future production,





increased the surplus out of which more wealth could be





accumulated. After a time civilization became possible in





temperate and even in cold climates; the increase of material





wealth was possible under conditions which did not enervate the





worker, and did not therefore destroy the foundations on which it





rested.(5*) Thus from step to step wealth and knowledge have





grown, and with every step the power of saving wealth and





extending knowledge has increased.











    3. The habit of distinctly realizing the future and providing





for it has developed itself slowly and fitfully in the course of





man's history. Travellers tell us of tribes who might double





their resources and enjoyments without increasing their total





labour, if they would only apply a little in advance the means





that lie within their power and their knowledge; as, for





instance, by fencing in their little plots of vegetables against





the intrusion of wild animals.





    But even this apathy is perhaps less strange than the





wastefulness that is found now among some classes in our own





country. Cases are not rare of men who alternate between earning





two or three pounds a week and being reduced to the verge of





starvation: the utility of a shilling to them when they are in





employment is less than that of a penny when they are out of it,





and yet they never attempt to make provision for the time of





need.(6*) At the opposite extreme there are misers, in some of





whom the passion for saving borders on insanity; while, even





among peasant proprietors and some other classes, we meet not





unfrequently with people who carry thrift so far as to stint





themselves of necessaries, and to impair their power of future





work. Thus they lose every way: they never really enjoy life;





while the income. which their stored-up wealth brings them is





less than they would have got from the increase of their earning





power, if they bad invested in themselves the wealth that they





have accumulated in a material form.





    In India, and to a less extent in Ireland, we find people who





do indeed abstain from immediate enjoyment and save up





considerable sums with great self-sacrifice, but spend all their





savings in lavish festivities at funerals and marriages. They





make intermittent provision for the near future, but scarcely any





permanent provision for the distant future: the great engineering





works by which their productive resources have been so much





increased, have been made chiefly with the capital of the much





less self-denying race of Englishmen.





    Thus the causes which control the accumulation of wealth





differ widely in different countries and different ages. They are





not quite the same among any two races, and perhaps not even





among any two social classes in the same race. They depend much





on social and religious sanctions; and it is remarkable how, when





the binding force of custom has been in any degree loosened,





differences of personal character will cause neighbours brought





up under like conditions to differ from one another more widely





and more frequently in their habits of extravagance or thrift





than in almost any other respect.











    4. The thriftlessness of early times was in a great measure





due to the want of security that those who made provision for the





future would enjoy it: only those who were already wealthy were





strong enough to hold what they had saved; the laborious and





self-denying peasant who had heaped up a little store of wealth





only to see it taken from him by a stronger hand, was a constant





warning to his neighbours to enjoy their pleasure and their rest





when they could. The border country between England and Scotland





made little progress so long as it was liable to incessant





forays; there was very little saving by the French peasants in





the eighteenth century when they could escape the plunder of the





tax-gatherer only by appearing to be poor, or by Irish cottiers,





who, on many estates, even forty years ago, were compelled to





follow the same course in order to avoid the landlords' claims of





exorbitant rents.





    Insecurity of this kind has nearly passed away from the





civilized world. But we are still suffering in England from the





effects of the Poor-law which ruled at the beginning of last





century, and which introduced a new form of insecurity for the





working classes. For it arranged that part of their wages should,





in effect, be given in the form of poor relief; and that this





should be distributed among them in inverse proportion to their





industry and thrift and forethought, so that many thought it





foolish to make provision for the future. The traditions and





instincts which were fostered by that evil experience are even





now a great hindrance to the progress of the working classes; and





the principle which nominally at least underlies the present





Poor-law, that the State should take account only of destitution





and not at all of merit, acts in the same direction, though with





less force.





    Insecurity of this kind also is being diminished: the growth





of enlightened views as to the duties of the State and of private





persons towards the poor, is tending to make it every day more





true that those who have helped themselves and endeavoured to





provide for their own future will be cared for by society better





than the idle and the thoughtless. But the progress in this





direction is still slow, and there remains much to be done yet.











    5. The growth of a money-economy and of modern habits of





business does indeed hinder the accumulation of wealth by putting





new temptations in the way of those who are inclined to live





extravagantly. In old times if a man wanted a good house to live





in he must build it himself; now he finds plenty of good houses





to be hired at a rent. Formerly, if he wanted good beer he must





have a good brewhouse, now he can buy it more cheaply and better





than he could brew it. Now he can borrow books from a library





instead of buying them; and he can even furnish his house before





he is ready to pay for his furniture. Thus in many ways the





modern systems of buying and selling, and lending and borrowing,





together with the growth of new wants, lead to new extravagances,





and to a subordination of the interests of the future to those of





the present.





    But on the other hand, a money-economy increases the variety





of the uses between which a person can distribute his future





expenditure. A person who in a primitive state of society stores





up some things against a future need, may find that after all he





does not need those things as much as others which he has not





stored up: and there are many future wants against which it is





impossible to provide directly by storing up goods. But he who





has stored up capital from which he derives a money income can





buy what he will to meet his needs as they arise.(7*)





    Again, modern methods of business have brought with them





opportunities for the safe investment of capital in such ways as





to yield a revenue to persons who have no good opportunity of





engaging in any business, -- not even in that of agriculture,





where the land will under some conditions act as a trustworthy





savings-bank. These new opportunities have induced some people





who would not otherwise have attempted it to put by something for





their own old age. And, what has had a far greater effect on the





growth of wealth, it has rendered it far easier for a man to





provide a secure income for his wife and children after his





death: for, after all, family affection is the main motive of





saving.











    6. There are indeed some who find an intense pleasure in





seeing their hoards of wealth grow up under their hands, with





scarcely any thought for the happiness that may be got from its





use by themselves or by others. They are prompted partly by the





instincts of the chase, by the desire to outstrip their rivals;





by the ambition to have shown ability in getting the wealth, and





to acquire power and social position by its possession. And





sometimes the force of habit, started when they were really in





need of money, has given them, by a sort of reflex action, an





artificial and unreasoning pleasure in amassing wealth for its





own sake. But were it not for the family affections, many who now





work hard and save carefully would not exert themselves to do





more than secure a comfortable annuity for their own lives;





either by purchase from an insurance company, or by arranging to





spend every year, after they had retired from work, part of their





capital as well as all their income. In the one case they would





leave nothing behind them: in the other only provision for that





part of their hoped-for old age, from which they had been cut off





by death. That men labour and save chiefly for the sake of their





families and not for themselves, is shown by the fact that they





seldom spend, after they have retired from work, more than the





income that comes in from their savings, preferring to leave





their stored-up wealth intact for their families; while in this





country alone twenty millions a year are saved in the form of





insurance policies and are available only after the death of





those who save them.





    A man can have no stronger stimulus to energy and enterprise





than the hope of rising in life, and leaving his family to start





from a higher round of the social ladder than that on which he





began. It may even give him an over-mastering passion which





reduces to insignificance the desire for ease, and for all





ordinary pleasures, and sometimes even destroys in him the finer





sensibilities and nobler aspirations. But, as is shown by the





marvellous growth of wealth in America during the present





generation, it makes him a mighty producer and accumulator of





riches; unless indeed he is in too great a hurry to grasp the





social position which his wealth will give him: for his ambition





may then lead him into as great extravagance as could have been





induced by an improvident and self-indulgent temperament.





    The greatest savings are made by those who have been brought





up on narrow means to stern hard work, who have retained their





simple habits, in spite of success in business, and who nourish a





contempt for showy expenditure and a desire to be found at their





death richer than they had been thought to be. This type of





character is frequent in the quieter parts of old but vigorous





countries, and it was very common among the middle classes in the





rural districts of England for more than a generation after the





pressure of the great French war and the heavy taxes that





lingered in its wake.











    7. Next, as to the sources of accumulation. The power to save





depends on an excess of income over necessary expenditure; and





this is greatest among the wealthy, In this country most of the





larger incomes, but only a few of the smaller, are chiefly





derived from capital. And, early in the present century, the





commercial classes in England had much more saving habits than





either the country gentlemen or the working classes. These causes





combined to make English economists of the last generation regard





savings as made almost exclusively from the profits of capital.





    But even in modern England rent and the earnings of





professional men and hired workers are an important source of





accumulation: and they have been the chief source of it in all





the earlier stages of civilization.(8*) Moreover, the middle and





especially the professional classes have always denied themselves





much in order to invest capital in the education of their





children; while a great part of the wages of the working classes





is invested in the physical health and strength of their





children. The older economists took too little account of the





fact that the human faculties are as important a means of





production as any other kind of capital; and we may conclude, in





opposition to them, that any change in the distribution of wealth





which gives more to the wage receivers and less to the





capitalists is likely, other things being equal, to hasten the





increase of material production, and that it will not perceptibly





retard the storing-up of material wealth. Of course other things





would not be equal if the change were brought about by violent





methods which gave a shock to public security. But a slight and





temporary check to the accumulation of material wealth need not





necessarily be an evil, even from a purely economic point of





view, if, being made quietly and without disturbance, it provided





better opportunities for the great mass of the people, increased





their efficiency, and developed in them such habits of





self-respect as to result in the growth of a much more efficient





race of producers in the next generation. For then it might do





more in the long-run to promote the growth of even material





wealth than great additions to our stock of factories and





steam-engines.





    A people among whom wealth is well distributed, and who have





high ambitions, are likely to accumulate a great deal of public





property; and the savings made in this form alone by some





well-to-do democracies form no inconsiderable part of the best





possessions which our own age has inherited from its





predecessors. The growth of the co-operative movement in all its





many forms, of building societies, friendly societies,





trades-unions, of working men's savings-banks etc., shows that,





even so far as the immediate accumulation of material wealth





goes, the resources of the country are not, as the older





economists assumed, entirely lost when they are spent in paying





wages.(9*)











    8. Having looked at the development of the methods of saving





and the accumulation of wealth, we may now return to that





analysis of the relations between present and deferred





gratifications, which we began from another point of view in our





study of Demand.(10*)





    We there saw that anyone, who has a stock of a commodity





which is applicable to several uses, endeavours to distribute it





between them all in such a way as to give him the greatest





satisfaction. If he thinks he could obtain more satisfaction by





transferring some of it from one use to another he will do so.





If, therefore, he makes his distribution rightly, he stops in





applying it to each several use at such a point that he gets an





equal amount of good out of the application that he is only just





induced to make of it to each separate use; (in other words, he





distributes it between the different uses in such a way that it





has the same marginal utility in each).





    We saw, further, that the principle remains the same whether





all the uses are present, or some are present and others





deferred: but that in this latter case some new considerations





enter, of which the chief are, firstly, that the deferring of a





gratification necessarily introduces some uncertainty as to its





ever being enjoyed; and secondly, that, as human nature is





constituted, a present gratification is generally, though not





always, preferred to a gratification that is expected to be equal





to it, and is as certain as anything can be in human life.





    A prudent person who thought that he would derive equal





gratifications from equal means at all stages of his life, would





perhaps endeavour to distribute his means equally over his whole





life: and if he thought that there was a danger that his power of





earning income at a future date would run short, he would





certainly save some of his means for a future date. He would do





this not only if he thought that his savings would increase in





his hands, but even if he thought they would diminish. He would





put by a few fruit and eggs for the winter, because they would





then be scarce, though they would not improve by keeping. If he





did not see his way to investing his earnings in trade or on





loan, so as to derive interest or profits from them, he would





follow the example of some of our own forefathers who accumulated





small stores of guineas which they carried into the country, when





they retired from active life. They reckoned that the extra





gratification which they could get by spending a few more guineas





while money was coming in fast, would be of less service to them





than the comfort which those guineas would buy for them in their





old age. The care of the guineas cost them a great deal of





trouble; and no doubt they would have been willing to pay some





small charge to any one who would have relieved them from the





trouble without occasioning them any sort of risk.





    We can therefore imagine a state of things in which stored-up





wealth could be put to but little good use; in which many persons





wanted to make provision for their own future; while but few of





those who wanted to borrow goods, were able to offer good





security for returning them, or equivalent goods, at a future





date. In such a state of things the postponement of, and waiting





for enjoyments would be an action that incurred a penalty rather





than reaped a reward: by handing over his means to another to be





taken care of, a person could only expect to get a sure promise





of something less, and not of something more than that which he





lent: the rate of interest would be negative.(11*)





    Such a state of things is conceivable. But it is also





conceivable, and almost equally probable, that people may be so





anxious to work that they will undergo some penalty as a





condition of obtaining leave to work. For, as deferring the





consumption of some of his means is a thing which a prudent





person would desire on its own account, so doing some work is a





desirable object on its own account to a healthy person.





Political prisoners, for instance, generally regard it as a





favour to be allowed to do a little work. And human nature being





what it is, we are justified in speaking of the interest on





capital as the reward of the sacrifice involved in the waiting





for the enjoyment of material resources, because few people would





save much without reward; just as we speak of wages as the reward





of labour, because few people would work hard without reward.





    The sacrifice of present pleasure for the sake of future, has





been called abstinence by economists. But this term has been





misunderstood: for the greatest accumulators of wealth are very





rich persons, some of whom live in luxury, and certainly do not





practise abstinence in that sense of the term in which it is





convertible with abstemiousness. What economists meant was that,





when a person abstained from consuming anything which he had the





power of consuming, with the purpose of increasing his resources





in the future, his abstinence from that particular act of





consumption increased the accumulation of wealth. Since, however,





the term is liable to be misunderstood, we may with advantage





avoid its use, and say that the accumulation of wealth is





generally the result of a postponement of enjoyment, or of a





waiting for it.(12*) Or, in other words again, it is dependent on





man's prospectiveness; that is, his faculty of realizing the





future.





    The "demand price" of accumulation, that is, the future





pleasure which his surroundings enable a person to obtain by





working and waiting for the future, takes many forms: but the





substance is always the same. The extra pleasure which a peasant





who has built a weatherproof hut derives from its usance, while





the snow is drifting into those of his neighbours who have spent





less labour on building theirs, is the price earned by his





working and waiting. It represents the extra productiveness of





efforts wisely spent in providing against distant evils, or for





the satisfaction of future wants, as compared with that which





would have been derived from an impulsive grasping at immediate





satisfactions. Thus it is similar in all fundamental respects to





the interest which the retired physician derives from the capital





he has lent to a factory or a mine to enable it to improve its





machinery; and on account of the numerical definiteness of the





form in which it is expressed, we may take that interest to be





the type of and to represent the usance of wealth in other forms.





    It matters not for our immediate purpose whether the power





over the enjoyment for which the person waits, was earned by him





directly by labour, which is the original source of nearly all





enjoyment; or was acquired by him from others, by exchange or by





inheritance, by legitimate trade or by unscrupulous forms of





speculation, by spoliation or by fraud: the only points with





which we are just now concerned are that the growth of wealth





involves in general a deliberate waiting for a pleasure which a





person has (rightly or wrongly) the power of commanding in the





immediate present, and that his willingness so to wait depends on





his habit of vividly realizing the future and providing for it.











    9. But let us look more closely at the statement that, as





human nature is constituted, an increase in the future pleasure





which can be secured by a present given sacrifice will in general





increase the amount of present sacrifice that people will make.





Suppose, for instance, that villagers have to get timber for





building their cottages from the forests; the more distant these





are, the smaller will be the return of future comfort got by each





day's work in fetching the wood, the less will be their future





gain from the wealth accumulated probably by each day's work: and





this smallness of the return of future pleasure, to be got at a





given present sacrifice, will tend to prevent them from





increasing the size of their cottages; and will perhaps diminish





on the whole the amount of labour they spend in getting timber.





But this rule is not without exception. For, if custom has made





them familiar with cottages of only one fashion, the further they





are from the woods, and the smaller the usance to be got from the





produce of one day's work, the more days' work will they give.





    And similarly if a person expects, not to use his wealth





himself, but to let it out on interest, the higher the rate of





interest the higher his reward for saving. If the rate of





interest on sound investments is 4 per cent., and he gives up





?00 worth of enjoyment now, he may expect an annuity of ? worth





of enjoyment: but he can expect only ? worth, if the rate is 3





per cent. And a fall in the rate of interest will generally lower





the margin at which a person finds it just not worth while to





give up present pleasures for the sake of those future pleasures





that are to be secured by saving some of his means. It will





therefore generally cause people to consume a little more now,





and to make less provision for future enjoyment. But this rule is





not without exception.





    Sir Josiah Child remarked more than two centuries ago, that





in countries in which the rate of interest is high, merchants





"when they have gotten great wealth, leave trading" and lend out





their money at interest, "the gain thereof being so easy, certain





and great; whereas in other countries where interest is at a





lower rate, they continue merchants from generation to





generation, and enrich themselves and the state." And it is as





true now, as it was then, that many men retire from business when





they are yet almost in the prime of life, and when their





knowledge of men and things might enable them to conduct their





business more efficiently than ever. Again, as Sargant has





pointed out, if a man has decided to go on working and saving





till he has provided a certain income for his old age, or for his





family after his death, he will find that he has to save more if





the rate of interest is low than if it is high. Suppose, for





instance, that he wishes to provide an income of ?00 a year on





which he may retire from business, or to insure ?00 a year for





his wife and children after his death: if then then the current





rate of interest is 5 per cent., he need only put by ?,000, or





insure his life for ?,000; but if it is 4 per cent., he must





save ?0,000, or insure his life for ?0,000.





    It is then possible that a continued fall in the rate of





interest may be accompanied by a continued increase in the yearly





additions to the world's capital. But none the less is it true





that a fall in the distant benefits to be got by a given amount





of working and waiting for the future does tend on the whole to





diminish the provision which people make for the future; or in





more modern phrase, that a fall in the rate of interest tends to





check the accumulation of wealth. For though with man's growing





command over the resources of nature, he may continue to save





much even with a low rate of interest; yet while human nature





remains as it is every fall in that rate is likely to cause many





more people to save less than to save more than they would





otherwise have done.(13*)











    10. The causes which govern the accumulation of wealth and





its relation to the rate of interest have so many points of





contact with various parts. of economic science, that the study





of them cannot easily be brought together in one part of our





inquiry. And although in the present Book we are concerned mainly





with the side of supply; it has seemed necessary to indicate





provisionally here something of the general relations between the





demand for and the supply of capital. And we have seen that: --





    The accumulation of wealth is governed by a great variety of





causes: by custom, by habits of self-control and realizing the





future, and above all by the power of family affection. Security





is a necessary condition for it, and the progress of knowledge





and intelligence furthers it in many ways.





    A rise in the rate of interest offered for capital, i.e. in





the demand price for saving, tends to increase the volume of





saving. For in spite of the fact that a few people who have





determined to secure an income of a certain fixed amount for





themselves or their family will save less with a high rate of





interest than with a low rate, it is a nearly universal rule that





a rise in the rate increases the desire to save; and it often





increases the power to save, or rather it is often an indication





of an increased efficiency of our productive resources: but the





older economists went too far in suggesting that a rise of





interest (or of profits) at the expense of wages always increased





the power of saving: they forgot that from the national point of





view the investment of wealth in the child of the working man is





as productive as its investment in horses or machinery.





    It must however be recollected that the annual investment of





wealth is a small part of the already existing stock, and that





therefore the stock would not be increased perceptibly in any one





year by even a considerable increase in the annual rate of





saving.











 NOTE ON THE STATISTICS OF THE GROWTH OF WEALTH











    11. The statistical history of the growth of wealth is





singularly poor and misleading. This is partly due to





difficulties inherent in any attempt to give a numerical measure





of wealth which shall be applicable to different places and





times, partly to the absence of systematic attempts to collect





the necessary facts. The Government of the United States does





indeed ask for returns of every person's property; and though the





results thus obtained are not satisfactory, yet they are perhaps





the best we have.





    Estimates of the wealth of other countries have to be based





almost exclusively on estimates of income, which are capitalized





at various numbers of years' purchase; this number being chosen





with reference (i) to the general rate of interest current at the





time, (ii) to the extent to which the income derived from the use





of wealth in any particular form is to be credited (a) to the





permanent income-yielding power of the wealth itself; and (b) to





either the labour spent in applying it, or the using up of the





capital itself. This last head is specially important in the case





of ironworks which depreciate rapidly, and still more in the case





of such mines as are likely to be speedily exhausted; both must





be capitalized at only a few years' purchase. On the other hand,





the income-yielding power of land is likely to increase; and





where that is the case, the income from land has to be





capitalized at a great number of years' purchase (which may be





regarded as making a negative provision under the head of ii, b).





    Land, houses, and live stock are the three forms of wealth





which have been in the first rank of importance always and





everywhere. But land differs from other things in this, that an





increase in its value is often chiefly due to an increase in its





scarcity; and is therefore a measure rather of growing wants,





than of growing means of meeting wants. Thus the land of the





United States in 1880 counted as of about equal value with the





land of the United Kingdom, and about half that of France. Its





money value was insignificant a hundred years ago; and if the





density of population two or three hundred years hence is nearly





the same in the United States as in the United Kingdom, the land





of the former will then be worth at least twenty times as much as





that of the latter.





    In the early middle ages the whole value of the land of





England was much less than that of the few large-boned but





small-sized animals that starved through the winter on it: now,





though much of the best land is entered under the heads of





houses, railways, etc.; though the live stock is now probably





more than ten times as heavy in aggregate weight, and of better





quality; and though there is now abundant farming capital of





kinds which were then unknown; yet agricultural land is now worth





more than three times as much as the farm stock. The few years of





the pressure of the great French war nearly doubled the nominal





value of the land of England. Since then free trade, improvements





in transport, the opening of new countries, and other causes have





lowered the nominal value of that part of the land which is





devoted to agriculture. And they have made the general purchasing





power of money in terms of commodities rise in England relatively





to the Continent. Early in the last century 25 fr. would buy





more, and especially more of the things needed by the working





classes, in France and Germany than ? would in England. But now





the advantage is the other way: and this causes the recent growth





of the wealth of France and Germany to appear to be greater





relatively to that of England than it really is.





    When account is taken of facts of this class, and also of the





fact that a fall in the rate of interest increases the number of





years' purchase at which any income has to be capitalized, and





therefore increases the value of a property which yields a given





income; we see that the estimates of national wealth would be





very misleading, even if the statistics of income on which they





were based were accurate. But still such estimates are not wholly





without value.





    Sir R. Giffen's Growth of Capital and Mr Chiozza Money's





Riches and Poverty contain suggestive discussions on many of the





figures in the following table.











Country and                 Land       Houses   Farm-Capital





 Author of                million    million    million





 Estimate











England





 1679 (Petty)                144         30          36





 1690 (Gregory King)         180         45          25





 1812 (Colquhoun)            750        300         143





 1885 (Giffen)             1,333      1,700         382











United Kingdom





 1812 (Colquhoun)          1,200        400         228





 1855 (Edleston)           1,700        550         472





 1865 (Giffen)             1,864      1,031         620





 1875   --                 2,007      1,420         668





 1885   --                 1,691      2,827         522





 1905 (Money)                966      2,827         285











United States





 1880 (Census)             2,040      2,000         480





 1890   --





 1900   --











France





 1892 (de Foville)         3,000      2,000         400











Italy





 1884 (Pantaleoni)         1,160        360











                        Other         Total         Wealth





                        Wealth        Wealth        per cap.





                        million      million        ?











England





 1679 (Petty)              40             250            42





 1690 (Gregory King)       70             320            58





 1812 (Colquhoun)         653           1,846           180





 1885 (Giffen)          3,012           6,427           315











United Kingdom





 1812 (Colquhoun)         908           2,736           160





 1855 (Edleston)        1,048           3,760           130





 1865 (Giffen)          2,598           6,113           200





 1875   --              4,453           8,548           260





 1885   --              5,897          10,037           270





 1905 (Money)           7,326          11,414           265











United States





 1880 (Census)          4,208           8,728           175





 1890   --                             13,200           208





 1900   --                             18,860           247











France





 1892 (de Foville)      4,000           9,400           247











Italy





 1884 (Pantaleoni)                      1,920            65

















But their divergences show the great uncertainty of all such





estimates. Mr Money's estimate of the value of land, i.e.





agricultural land with farm buildings, is probably too low. Sir





R. Giffen estimates the value of public property at m. 500: and





he omits public loans held at home, on the ground that the





entries for them would cancel one another, as much being debited





under the head of public property as is credited under that of





private property. But Mr Money reckons the gross value of public





roads, parks, buildings, bridges, sewers, lighting and water





works, tramways etc. at m. 1,650: and, after deducting from this





m. 1,200 for public loans he gets m. 450 for the net value of





public property; and he thus becomes free to count public loans





held at home under private property. He estimates the value of





foreign stock exchange securities and other foreign property held





in the United Kingdom at m. 1,821. These estimates of wealth are





mainly based on estimates of income: and, as regards the





statistics of income, attention may be directed to Mr Bowley's





instructive analysis in National progress since 1882; and in The





Economic Journal for September 1904.





    Sir R. Giffen estimates the wealth of the British Empire in





1903 (Statistical Journal, Vol. 66, p. 584) thus:











     United Kingdom...... m. 15,000





     Canada.........       "   1,350





     Australasia.........  "   1,100





     India.........        "   3,000





     South Africa......    "     600





     Remainder of Empire..."   1,200











    A tentative history of changes in the relative wealth of





different parts of England has been deduced by Rogers from the





assessment of the several counties for the purpose of taxation.





Le Vicomte d' Avenel's great work L'Histoire conomique de la





Proprit?&c. 1200-1800 contains a rich store of materials as to





France; and comparative studies of the growth of wealth in France





and other nations have been made by Levasseur, Leroy Beaulieu,





Neymarck and de Foville.





    Mr Crammond, addressing the institute of Bankers in March





1919, estimated the national wealth of the United Kingdom to be





m. 24,000, and the national income to be m. 3,600. He reckoned





the net value of the country's foreign investments to have fallen





to m. 1,600, she having recently sold securities amounting to





m. 1,600; and borrowed another m. 1,400. On the balance she





appeared to be a creditor to the amount of m. 2,600: but a great





part of this amount cannot be reckoned as adequately secured.











NOTES:











1. A short but suggestive study of the growth of wealth in its





early forms, and of the arts of life, is given in Tylor's





Anthropology.











2. Bagehot (Economic Studies, pp. 163-5), after quoting the





evidence which Galton has collected on the keeping of pet animals





by savage tribes, points out that we find here a good





illustration of the fact that however careless a savage race may





be for the future, it cannot avoid making some provision for it.





A bow, a fishing-net, which will do its work well in getting food





for to-day, must be of service for many days to come: a horse or





a canoe that will carry one well to-day, must be a stored-up





source of many future enjoyments. The least provident of barbaric





despots may raise a massive pile of buildings, because it is the





most palpable proof of his present wealth and power.











3. The farm implements for a first class Ryot family, including





six or seven adult males, are a few light ploughs and hoes





chiefly of wood, of the total value of about 13 rupees (Sir G.





Phear, Aryan Village, p. 233) or the equivalent of their work for





about a month; while the value of the machinery alone on a well





equipped large modern arable farm amounts to ? an acre





(Equipment of the Farm, edited by J. C. Morton) or say a year's





work for each person employed. They include steam engines,





trench, subsoil and ordinary ploughs, some to be worked by steam





and some by horse power; various grubbers, harrows, rollers,





clod-crushers, seed and manure drills, horse hoes, rakes,





hay-making, mowing and reaping machines, steam or horse





threshing, chaff cutting, turnip cutting, hay-pressing machines





and a multitude of others. Meanwhile there is an increasing use





of silos and covered yards, and constant improvements in the





fittings of the dairy and other farm buildings, all of which give





great economy of effort in the long run, but require a larger





share of it to be spent in preparing the way for the direct work





of the farmer in raising agricultural produce.











4. For instance, improvements which have recently been made in





some American cities indicate that by a sufficient outlay of





capital each house could be supplied with what it does require,





and relieved of what it does not, much more effectively than now,





so as to enable a large part of the population to live in towns





and yet be free from many of the present evils of town life. The





first step is to make under all the streets large tunnels, in





which many pipes and wires can be laid side by side, and repaired





when they get out of order, without any interruption of the





general traffic and without great expense. Motive power, and





possibly even heat, might then be generated at great distances





from the towns (in some cases in coal-mines), and laid on





wherever wanted. Soft water and spring water, and perhaps even





sea water and ozonized air, might be laid on in separate pipes to





nearly every house; while steam-pipes might be used for giving





warmth in winter, and compressed air for lowering the heat of





summer; or the heat might be supplied by gas of great heating





power laid on in special pipes, while light was derived from gas





specially suited for the purpose or from electricity; and every





house might be in electric communication with the rest of the





town. All unwholesome vapours, including those given off by any





domestic fires which were still used, might be carried away by





strong draughts through long conduits, to be purified by passing





through large furnaces and thence away through huge chimneys into





the higher air. To carry out such a scheme in the towns of





England would require the outlay of a much larger capital than





has been absorbed by our railways. This conjecture as to the





ultimate course of town improvement may be wide of the truth; but





it serves to indicate one of very many ways in which the





experience of the past foreshadows broad openings for investing





present effort in providing the means of satisfying our wants in





the future.











5. Comp. Appendix A.











6. They "discount" future benefits (comp. Book III, ch. v,





section 3) at the rate of many thousands per cent per annum.











7. Comp. III, v, section 2.











8. Comp. Principles of Political Economy, by Richard Jones.











9. It must however be admitted that what passes by the name of





public property is often only private wealth borrowed on a





mortgage of future public revenue. Municipal gas-works for





instance are not generally the results of public accumulations.





They were built with wealth saved by private persons, and





borrowed on public account.











10. Above, III, v.











11. The suggestion that the rate of interest may conceivably





become a negative quantity was discussed by Foxwell in a paper on





Some Social Aspects of Banking, read before the Bankers'





Institute in January, 1886.











12. Karl Marx and his followers have found much amusement in





contemplating the accumulations of wealth which result from the





abstinence of Baron Rothschild, which they contrast with the





extravagance of a labourer who feeds a family of seven on seven





shillings a week; and who, living up to his full income,





practises no economic abstinence at all. The argument that it is





Waiting rather than Abstinence, which is rewarded by Interest and





is a factor of production, was given by Macvane in the Harvard





Journal of Economics for July, 1887.











13. See also VI, vi. It may however be observed here that the





dependence of the growth of capital on the high estimation of





"future goods" appears to have been over-estimated by earlier





writers; not under-estimated, as is argued by Prof. Bhm-Bawerk.











Chapter VIII











Industrial Organization











    1. Writers on social science from the time of Plato downwards





have delighted to dwell on the increased efficiency which labour





derives from organization. But in this, as in other cases, Adam





Smith gave a new and larger significance to an old doctrine by





the philosophic thoroughness with which he explained it, and the





practical knowledge with which he illustrated it. After insisting





on the advantages of the division of labour, and pointing out how





they render it possible for increased numbers to live in comfort





on a limited territory, he argued that the pressure of population





on the means of subsistence tends to weed out those races who





through want of organization or for any other cause are unable to





turn to the best account the advantages of the place in which





they live.





    Before Adam Smith's book had yet found many readers,





biologists were already beginning to make great advances towards





understanding the real nature of the differences in organization





which separate the higher from the lower animals; and before two





more generations had elapsed, Malthus' historical account of





man's struggle for existence started Darwin on that inquiry as to





the effects of the struggle for existence in the animal and







vegetable world, which issued in his discovery of the selective





influence constantly played by it. Since that time biology has





more than repaid her debt; and economists have in their turn owed





much to the many profound analogies which have been discovered





between social and especially industrial organization on the one





side and the physical organization of the higher animals on the





other. In a few cases indeed the apparent analogies disappeared





on closer inquiry: but many of those which seemed at first sight





most fanciful, have gradually been supplemented by others, and





have at last established their claim to illustrate a fundamental





unity of action between the laws of nature in the physical and in





the moral world. This central unity is set forth in the general





rule, to which there are not very many exceptions, that the





development of the organism, whether social or physical, involves





an increasing subdivision of functions between its separate parts





on the one hand, and on the other a more intimate connection





between them.(1*) Each part gets to be less and less





self-sufficient, to depend for its wellbeing more and more on





other parts, so that any disorder in any part of a





highly-developed organism will affect other parts also.





    This increased subdivision of functions, or





"differentiation," as it is called, manifests itself with regard





to industry is such forms as the division of labour, and the





development of specialized skill, knowledge and machinery: while





"integration," that is, a growing intimacy and firmness of the





connections between the separate parts of the industrial





organism, shows itself in such forms as the increase of security





of commercial credit, and of the means and habits of





communication by sea and road, by railway and telegraph, by post





and printing-press.





    The doctrine that those organisms which are the most highly





developed, in the sense in which we have just used the phrase,





are those which are most likely to survive in the struggle for





existence, is itself in process of development. It is not yet





completely thought out either in its biological or its economic





relations. But we may pass to consider the main bearings in





economics of the law that the struggle for existence causes those





organisms to multiply which are best fitted to derive benefit





from their environment.





    The law requires to be interpreted carefully: for the fact





that a thing is beneficial to its environment will not by itself





secure its survival either in the physical or in the moral world.





The law of "survival of the fittest" states that those organisms





tend to survive which are best fitted to utilize the environment





for their own purposes. Those that utilize the environment most,





often turn out to be those that benefit those around them most;





but sometimes they are injurious.





    Conversely, the struggle for survival may fail to bring into





existence organisms that would be highly beneficial: and in the





economic world the demand for any industrial arrangement is not





certain to call forth a supply, unless it is something more than





a mere desire for the arrangement, or a need for it. It must be





an efficient demand; that is, it must take effect by offering





adequate payment or some other benefit to those who supply





it.(2*) A mere desire on the part of employees for a share in the





management and the profits of the factory in which they work, or





the need on the part of clever youths for a good technical





education, is not a demand in the sense in which the term is used





when it is said that supply naturally and surely follows demand.





This seems a hard truth: but some of its harshest features are





softened down by the fact that those races, whose members render





services to one another without exacting direct recompense are





not only the most likely to flourish for the time, but most





likely to rear a large number of descendants who inherit their





beneficial habits.











    2. Even in the vegetable world a species of plants, however





vigorous in its growth, which should be neglectful of the





interests of its seeds, would soon perish from the earth. The





standard of family and race duty is often high in the animal





kingdom; and even those predatory animals which we are accustomed





to regard as the types of cruelty, which fiercely utilize the





environment and do nothing for it in return, must yet be willing





as individuals to exert themselves for the benefit of their





offspring. And going beyond the narrower interests of the family





to those of the race, we find that among so-called social





animals, such as bees and ants, those races survive in which the





individual is most energetic in performing varied services for





the society without the prompting of direct gain to himself.





    But when we come to human beings, endowed with reason and





speech, the influence of a tribal sense of duty in strengthening





the tribe takes a more varied form. It is true that in the ruder





stages of human life many of the services rendered by the





individual to others are nearly as much due to hereditary habit





and unreasoning impulse, as are those of the bees and ants. But





deliberate, and therefore moral, self-sacrifice soon makes its





appearance; it is fostered by the far-seeing guidance of prophets





and priests and legislators, and is inculcated by parable and





legend. Gradually the unreasoning sympathy, of which there are





germs in the lower animals, extends its area and gets to be





deliberately adopted as a basis of action: tribal affection,





starting from a level hardly higher than that which prevails in a





pack of wolves or a horde of banditti, gradually grows into a





notable patriotism; and religious ideals are raised and purified.





The races in which these qualities are the most highly developed





are sure, other things being equal, to be stronger than others in





war and in contests with famine and disease; and ultimately to





prevail. Thus the struggle for existence causes in the long run





those races of men to survive in which the individual is most





willing to sacrifice himself for the benefit of those around him;





and which are consequently the best adapted collectively to make





use of their environment.





    Unfortunately however not all the qualities which enable one





race to prevail over another benefit mankind as a whole. It would





no doubt be wrong to lay very much stress on the fact that





warlike habits have often enabled half-savage races to reduce to





submission others who were their superiors in every peaceful





virtue; for such conquests have gradually increased the physical





vigour of the world, and its capacity for great things, and





ultimately perhaps have done more good than harm. But there is no





such qualification to the statement that a race does not





establish its claim to deserve well of the world by the mere fact





that it flourishes in the midst or on the surface of another





race. For, though biology and social science alike show that





parasites sometimes benefit in unexpected ways the race on which





they thrive; yet in many cases they turn the peculiarities of





that race to good account for their own purposes without giving





any good return. The fact that there is an economic demand for





the services of Jewish and Armenian money-dealers in Eastern





Europe and Asia, or for Chinese labour in California, is not by





itself a proof, nor even a very strong ground for believing, that





such arrangements tend to raise the quality of human life as a





whole. For, though a race entirely dependent on its own resources





can scarcely prosper unless it is fairly endowed with the most





important social virtues; yet a race, which has not these virtues





and which is not capable of independent greatness, may be able to





thrive on its relations with another race. But on the whole, and





subject to grave exceptions, those races survive and predominate





in which the best qualities are most strongly developed.











    3. This influence of heredity shows itself nowhere more





markedly than in social organization. For that must necessarily





be a slow growth, the product of many generations: it must be





based on those customs and aptitudes of the great mass of the





people which are incapable of quick change. In early times when





religious, ceremonial, political, military and industrial





organization were intimately connected, and were indeed but





different sides of the same thing, nearly all those nations which





were leading the van of the world's progress were found to agree





in having adopted a more or less strict system of caste: and this





fact by itself proved that the distinction of castes was well





suited to its environment, and that on the whole it strengthened





the races or nations which adopted it. For since it was a





controlling factor of life, the nations which adopted it could





not have generally prevailed over others, if the influence





exerted by it had not been in the main beneficial. Their





pre-eminence proved not that it was free from defects, but that





its excellences, relatively to that particular stage of progress,





outweighed its defects.





    Again we know that an animal or a vegetable species may





differ from its competitors by having two qualities, one of which





is of great advantage to it; while the other is unimportant,





perhaps even slightly injurious, and that the former of these





qualities will make the species succeed in spite of its having





the latter: the survival of which will then be no proof that it





is beneficial. Similarly the struggle for existence has kept





alive many qualities and habits in the human race which were in





themselves of no advantage, but which are associated by a more or





less permanent bond with others that are great sources of





strength. Such instances are found in the tendency to an





overbearing demeanour and a scorn for patient industry among





nations that owe their advance chiefly to military victories; and





again in the tendency among commercial nations to think too much





of wealth and to use it for the purposes of display. But the most





striking instances are found in matters of organization; the





excellent adaptation of the system of caste for the special work





which it had to do, enabled it to flourish in spite of its great





faults, the chief of which were its rigidity, and its sacrifice





of the individual to the interests of society, or rather to





certain special exigencies of society.





    Passing over intermediate stages and coming at once to the





modern organization of the Western world, we find it offering a





striking contrast, and a no less striking resemblance, to the





system of caste. On the one hand, rigidity has been succeeded by





plasticity: the methods of industry which were then stereotyped,





now change with bewildering quickness; the social relations of





classes, and the position of the individual in his class, which





were then definitely fixed by traditional rules, are now





perfectly variable and change their forms with the changing





circumstances of the day. But on the other hand, the sacrifice of





the individual to the exigencies of society as regards the





production of material wealth seems in some respects to be a case





of atavism, a reversion to conditions which prevailed in the





far-away times of the rule of caste. For the division of labour





between the different ranks of industry and between different





individuals in the same rank is so thorough and uncompromising,





that the real interests of the producer are sometimes in danger





of being sacrificed for the sake of increasing the addition which





his work makes to the aggregate production of material wealth.











    4. Adam Smith, while insisting on the general advantages of





that minute division of labour and of that subtle industrial





organization which were being developed with unexampled rapidity





in his time, was yet careful to indicate many points in which the





system failed, and many incidental evils which it involved.(3*)





But many of his followers with less philosophic insight, and in





some cases with less real knowledge of the world, argued boldly





that whatever is, is right. They argued for instance that, if a





man had a talent for managing business, he would be surely led to





use that talent for the benefit of mankind: that meanwhile a like





pursuit of their own interests would lead others to provide for





his use such capital as he could turn to best account; and that





his own interest would lead him so to arrange those in his





employment that everyone should do the highest work of which he





was capable, and no other; and that it would lead him to purchase





and use all machinery and other aids to production, which could





in his hands contribute more than the equivalent of their own





cost towards supplying the wants of the world.





    This doctrine of natural organization contains more truth of





the highest importance to humanity than almost any other which is





equally likely to evade the comprehension of those who discuss





grave social problems without adequate study: and it had a





singular fascination for earnest and thoughtful minds. But its





exaggeration worked much harm, especially to those who delighted





most in it. For it prevented them from seeing and removing the





evil that was intertwined with the good in the changes that were





going on around them. It hindered them from inquiring whether





many even of the broader features of modern industry might not be





transitional, having indeed good work to do in their time, as the





caste system had in its time; but being, like it, serviceable





chiefly in leading the way towards better arrangements for a





happier age. And it did harm by preparing the way for exaggerated





reaction against it.











    5. Moreover the doctrine took no account of the manner in





which organs are strengthened by being used. Herbert Spencer has





insisted with much force on the rule that, if any physical or





mental exercise gives pleasure and is therefore frequent, those





physical or mental organs which are used in it are likely to grow





rapidly. Among the lower animals indeed the action of this rule





is so intimately interwoven with that of the survival of the





fittest, that the distinction between the two need not often be





emphasized. For as it might be guessed a priori, and as seems to





be proved by observation, the struggle for survival tends to





prevent animals from taking much pleasure in the exercise of





functions which do not contribute to their well-being.





    But man, with his strong individuality, has greater freedom.





He delights in the use of his faculties for their own sake;





sometimes using them nobly, whether with the abandon of the great





Greek burst of life, or under the control of a deliberate and





steadfast striving towards important ends; sometimes ignobly, as





in the case of a morbid development of the taste for drink. The





religious, the moral, the intellectual and the artistic faculties





on which the progress of industry depends, are not acquired





solely for the sake of the things that may be got by them; but





are developed by exercise for the sake of the pleasure and the





happiness which they themselves bring: and, in the same way, that





greater factor of economic prosperity, the organization of a





well-ordered state, is the product of an infinite variety of





motives; many of which have no direct connection with the pursuit





of national wealth.(4*)





    No doubt it is true that physical peculiarities acquired by





the parents during their life-time are seldom if ever transmitted





to their offspring. But no conclusive case seems to have been





made out for the assertion that the children of those who have





led healthy lives, physically and morally, will not be born with





a firmer fibre than they would have been had the same parents





grown up under unwholesome influences which had enfeebled the





fibre of their minds and their bodies. And it is certain that in





the former case the children are likely after birth to be better





nourished, and better trained; to acquire more wholesome





instincts; and to have more of that regard for others and that





self-respect, which are the mainsprings of human progress, than





in the latter case.(5*)





    It is needful then diligently to inquire whether the present





industrial organization might not with advantage be so modified





as to increase the opportunities, which the lower grades of





industry have for using latent mental faculties, for deriving





pleasure from their use, and for strengthening them by use; since





the argument that if such a change had been beneficial, it would





have been already brought about by the struggle for survival,





must be rejected as invalid. Man's prerogative extends to a





limited but effective control over natural development by





forecasting the future and preparing the way for the next step.





    Thus progress may be hastened by thought and work; by the





application of the principles of Eugenics to the replenishment of





the race from its higher rather than its lower strains, and by





the appropriate education of the faculties of either sex: but





however hastened it must be gradual and relatively slow. It must





be slow relatively to man's growing command over technique and





the forces of nature; a command which is making ever growing





calls for courage and caution, for resource and steadfastness,





for penetrating insight and for breadth of view. And it must be





very much too slow to keep pace with the rapid inflow of





proposals for the prompt reorganization of society on a new





basis. In fact our new command over nature, while opening the





door to much larger schemes for industrial organization than were





physically possible even a short time ago, places greater





responsibilities on those who would advocate new developments of





social and industrial structure. For though institutions may be





changed rapidly; yet if they are to endure they must be





appropriate to man: they cannot retain their stability if they





change very much faster than he does. Thus progress itself





increases the urgency of the warning that in the economic world,





Natura non facit saltum.(6*)





    Progress must be slow; but even from the merely material





point of view it is to be remembered that changes, which add only





a little to the immediate efficiency of production, may be worth





having if they make mankind ready and fit for an organization,





which will be more effective in the production of wealth and more





equal in its distribution; and that every system, which allows





the higher faculties of the lower grades of industry to go to





waste, is open to grave suspicion.











NOTES:











1. See a brilliant paper by Hckel on Arbeitsteilung in Menschen-





und Tierleben and Schffle's Bau und Leben des sozialen Krpers.











2. Like all other doctrines of the same class, this requires to





be interpreted in the light of the fact that the effective demand





of a purchaser depends on his means, as well as on his wants: a





small want on the part of a rich man often has more effective





force in controlling the business arrangements of the world than





a great want on the part of a poor man.











3. See above I, IV, section 6; and below Appendix B, sections 3





and 6.











4. Man with his many motives, as he may set himself deliberately





to encourage the growth of one peculiarity, may equally set





himself to check the growth of another: the slowness of progress





during the Middle Ages was partly due to a deliberate detestation





of learning.











5. See Note XI in the Mathematical Appendix. Considerations of





this class have little application to the development of mere





animals, such as mice; and none at all to that of peas and other





vegetables. And therefore the marvellous arithmetical results





which have been established, provisionally at all events, in





regard to heredity in such cases, have very little bearing on the





full problems of inheritance with which students of social





science are concerned: and some negative utterances on this





subject by eminent Mendelians seem to lack due reserve. Excellent





remarks on the subject will be found in Prof Pigou's Wealth and





Warfare, Part I, ch. IV.











6. Compare Appendix A, section 16.











Chapter IX











Industrial Organization, Continued.





Division of Labour.





The Influence of Machinery











    1. The first condition of an efficient organization of





industry is that it should keep everyone employed at such work as





his abilities and training fit him to do well, and should equip





him with the best machinery and other appliances for his work. We





shall leave on one side for the present the distribution of work





between those who carry out the details of production on the one





hand, and those who manage its general arrangement and undertake





its risk on the other; and confine ourselves to the division of





labour between different classes of operatives, with special





reference to the influence of machinery. In the following chapter





we shall consider the reciprocal effects of division of labour





and localization of industry; in a third chapter we shall inquire





how far the advantages of division of labour depend upon the





aggregation of large capitals into the hands of single





individuals or firms, or, as is commonly said, on production on a





large scale; and lastly, we shall examine the growing





specialization of the work of business management.





    Everyone is familiar with the fact that "practice makes





perfect," that it enables an operation, which at first seemed





difficult, to be done after a time with comparatively little





exertion, and yet much better than before; and physiology in some





measure explains this fact. For it gives reasons for believing





that the change is due to the gradual growth of new habits of





more or less "reflex" or automatic action. Perfectly reflex





actions, such as that of breathing during sleep, are performed by





the responsibility of the local nerve centres without any





reference to the supreme central authority of the thinking power,





which is supposed to reside in the cerebrum. But all deliberate





movements require the attention of the chief central authority:





it receives information from the nerve centres or local





authorities and perhaps in some cases direct from the sentient





nerves, and sends back detailed and complex instructions to the





local authorities, or in some cases direct to the muscular





nerves, and so co-ordinates their action as to bring about the





required results.(1*)





    The physiological basis of purely mental work is not yet well





understood; but what little we do know of the growth of brain





structure seems to indicate that practice in any kind of thinking





develops new connections between different parts of the brain.





Anyhow we know for a fact that practice will enable a person to





solve quickly, and without any considerable exertion, questions





which he could have dealt with but very imperfectly a little





while before, even by the greatest effort. The mind of the





merchant, the lawyer, the physician, and the man of science,





becomes gradually equipped with a store of knowledge and a





faculty of intuition, which can be obtained in no other way than





by the continual application of the best efforts of a powerful





thinker for many years together to one more or less narrow class





of questions. Of course the mind cannot work hard for many hours





a day in one direction: and a hard-worked man will sometimes find





recreation in work that does not belong to his business, but





would be fatiguing enough to a person who had to do it all day





long.





    Some social reformers have indeed maintained that those who





do the most important brain work might do a fair share of manual





work also, without diminishing their power of acquiring knowledge





or thinking out hard questions. But experience seems to show that





the best relief from overstrain is in occupations taken up to





suit the mood of the moment and stopped when the mood is passed,





that is, in what popular instinct classes as "relaxation." Any





occupation which is so far business-like that a person must





sometimes force himself by an effort of the will to go on with





it, draws on his nervous force and is not perfect relaxation: and





therefore it is not economical from the point of view of the





community unless its value is sufficient to outweigh a





considerable injury to his main work.(2*)











    2. It is a difficult and unsettled question how far





specialization should be carried in the highest branches of work.





In science it seems to be a sound rule that the area of study





should be broad during youth, and should gradually be narrowed as





years go on. A medical man who has always given his attention





exclusively to one class of diseases, may perhaps give less wise





advice even in his special subject than another who, having





learnt by wider experience to think of those diseases in relation





to general health, gradually concentrates his study more and more





on them, and accumulates a vast store of special experiences and





subtle instincts. But there is no doubt that greatly increased





efficiency can be attained through division of labour in those





occupations in which there is much demand for mere manual skill.





    Adam Smith pointed out that a lad who had made nothing but





nails all his life could make them twice as quickly as a





first-rate smith who only took to nail-making occasionally.





Anyone who has to perform exactly the same set of operations day





after day on things of exactly the same shape, gradually learns





to move his fingers exactly as they are wanted, by almost





automatic action and with greater rapidity than would be possible





if every movement had to wait for a deliberate instruction of the





will. One familiar instance is seen in the tying of threads by





children in a cotton-mill. Again, in a clothing or a boot





factory, a person who sews, whether by hand or machinery, just





the same seam on a piece of leather or cloth of just the same





size, hour after hour, day after day, is able to do it with far





less effort and far more quickly than a worker with much greater





quickness of eye and hand, and of a much higher order of general





skill, who was accustomed to make the whole of a coat or the





whole of a boot.(3*)





    Again, in the wood and the metal industries, if a man has to





perform exactly the same operations over and over again on the





same piece of material, he gets into the habit of holding it





exactly in the way in which it is wanted, and of arranging the





tools and other things which he has to handle in such positions





that he is able to bring them to work on one another with the





least possible loss of time and of force in the movements of his





own body. Accustomed to find them always in the same position and





to take them in the same order, his hands work in harmony with





one another almost automatically: and with increased practice his





expenditure of nervous force diminishes even more rapidly than





his expenditure of muscular force.





    But when the action has thus been reduced to routine it has





nearly arrived at the stage at which it can be taken over by





machinery. The chief difficulty to be overcome is that of getting





the machinery to hold the material firmly in exactly the position





in which the machine tool can be brought to bear on it in the





right way, and without wasting too much time in taking grip of





it. But this can generally be contrived when it is worth while to





spend some labour and expense on it; and then the whole operation





can often be controlled by a worker who, sitting before a





machine, takes with the left hand a piece of wood or metal from a





heap and puts it in a socket, while with the right he draws down





a lever, or in some other way sets the machine tool at work, and





finally with his left hand throws on to another heap the material





which has been cut or punched or drilled or planed exactly after





a given pattern. It is in these industries especially that we





find the reports of modern trades-unions to be full of complaints





that unskilled labourers, and even their wives and children, are





put to do work which used to require the skill and judgment of a





trained mechanic, but which has been reduced to mere routine by





the improvement of machinery and the ever-increasing minuteness





of the subdivision of labour.











    3. We are thus led to a general rule, the action of which is





more prominent in some branches of manufacture than others, but





which applies to all. It is, that any manufacturing operation





that can be reduced to uniformity, so that exactly the same thing





has to be done over and over again in the same way, is sure to be





taken over sooner or later by machinery. There may be delays and





difficulties; but if the work to be done by it is on a sufficient





scale, money and inventive power will be spent without stint on





the task till it is achieved.(4*)





    Thus the two movements of the improvement of machinery and





the growing subdivision of labour have gone together and are in





some measure connected. But the connection is not so close as is





generally supposed. It is the largeness of markets, the increased





demand for great numbers of things of the same kind, and in some





cases of things made with great accuracy, that leads to





subdivision of labour; the chief effect of the improvement of





machinery is to cheapen and make more accurate the work which





would anyhow have been subdivided. For instance, "in organizing





the works at Soho, Boulton and Watt found it necessary to carry





division of labour to the furthest practicable point. There were





no slide-lathes, planing machines or boring tools, such as now





render mechanical accuracy of construction almost a matter of





certainty. Everything depended on the individual mechanic's





accuracy of hand and eye; yet mechanics generally were much less





skilled then than they are now. The way in which Boulton and Watt





contrived partially to get over the difficulty was to confine





their workmen to special classes of work, and make them as expert





in them as possible. By continued practice in handling the same





tools and fabricating the same articles, they thus acquired great





individual proficiency."(5*) Thus machinery constantly supplants





and renders unnecessary that purely manual skill, the attainment





of which was, even up to Adam Smith's time, the chief advantage





of division of labour. But this influence is more than





countervailed by its tendency to increase the scale of





manufactures and to make them more complex; and therefore to





increase the opportunities for division of labour of all kinds,





and especially in the matter of business management.











    4. The powers of machinery to do work that requires too much





accuracy to be done by hand are perhaps best seen in some





branches of the metal industries in which the system of





Interchangeable Parts is being rapidly developed. It is only





after long training and with much care and labour that the hand





can make one piece of metal accurately to resemble or to fit into





another: and after all the accuracy is not perfect. But this is





just the work which a well made machine can do most easily and





most perfectly. For instance, if sowing and reaping machines had





to be made by hand, their first cost would be very high; and when





any part of them was broken, it could be replaced only at a great





cost by sending the machine back to the manufacturer or by





bringing a highly skilled mechanic to the machine. But as it is,





the manufacturer keeps in a store many facsimiles of the broken





part, which were made by the same machinery, and are therefore





interchangeable with it. A farmer in the North-West of America,





perhaps a hundred miles away from any good mechanic's shop, can





yet use complicated machinery with confidence; since he knows





that by telegraphing the number of the machine and the number of





any part of it which he has broken, he will get by the next train





a new piece which he can himself fit into its place. The





importance of this principle of interchangeable parts has been





but recently grasped; there are however many signs that it will





do more than any other to extend the use of machine-made





machinery to every branch of production, including even domestic





and agricultural work.(6*)





    The influences which machinery exerts over the character of





modern industry are well illustrated in the manufacture of





watches. Some years ago the chief seat of this business was in





French Switzerland; where the subdivision of labour was carried





far, though a great part of the work was done by a more or less





scattered population. There were about fifty distinct branches of





trade each of which did one small part of the work. In almost all





of them a highly specialized manual skill was required, but very





little judgment; the earnings were generally low, because the





trade had been established too long for those in it to have





anything like a monopoly, and there was no difficulty in bringing





up to it any child with ordinary intelligence. But this industry





is now yielding ground to the American system of making watches





by machinery, which requires very little specialized manual





skill. In fact the machinery is becoming every year more and more





automatic, and is getting to require less and less assistance





from the human hand. But the more delicate the machine's power,





the greater is the judgment and carefulness which is called for





from those who see after it. Take for instance a beautiful





machine which feeds itself with steel wire at one end, and





delivers at the other tiny screws of exquisite form; it displaces





a great many operatives who had indeed acquired a very high and





specialized manual skill, but who lived sedentary lives,





straining their eyesight through microscopes, and finding in





their work very little scope for any faculty except a mere





command over the use of their fingers. But the machine is





intricate and costly, and the person who minds it must have an





intelligence, and an energetic sense of responsibility, which go





a long way towards making a fine character; and which, though





more common than they were, are yet sufficiently rare to be able





to earn a very high rate of pay. No doubt this is an extreme





case; and the greater part of the work done in a watch factory is





much simpler. But much of it requires higher faculties than the





old system did, and those engaged in it earn on the average





higher wages; at the same time it has already brought the price





of a trustworthy watch within the range of the poorest classes of





the community, and it is showing signs of being able soon to





accomplish the very highest class of work.(7*)





    Those who finish and put together the different parts of a





watch must always have highly specialized skill: but most of the





machines which are in use in a watch factory are not different in





general character from those which are used in any other of the





lighter metal trades: in fact many of them are mere modifications





of the turning lathes and of the slotting, punching, drilling,





planing, shaping, milling machines and a few others, which are





familiar to all engineering trades. This is a good illustration





of the fact that while there is a constantly increasing





subdivision of labour, many of the lines of division between





trades which are nominally distinct are becoming narrower and





less difficult to be passed. In old times it would have been very





small comfort to watch-makers, who happened to be suffering from





a diminished demand for their wares, to be told that the





gun-making trade was in want of extra hands; but most of the





operatives in a watch factory would find machines very similar to





those with which they were familiar, if they strayed into a





gun-making factory or sewing-machine factory, or a factory for





making textile machinery. A watch factory with those who worked





in it could be converted without any overwhelming loss into a





sewing-machine factory; almost the only condition would be that





in the new factory no one should be put to work which required a





higher order of general intelligence, than that to which he was





already accustomed.











    5. The printing trade affords another instance of the way in





which an improvement of machinery and an increase in the volume





of production causes an elaborate subdivision of labour. Everyone





is familiar with the pioneer newspaper editor of newly settled





districts of America, who sets up the type of his articles as he





composes them; and with the aid of a boy prints off his sheets





and distributes them to his scattered neighbours. When however





the mystery of printing was new, the printer had to do all this





for himself, and in addition to make all his own appliances.(8*)





These are now provided for him by separate "subsidiary" trades,





from whom even the printer in the backwoods can obtain everything





that he wants to use. But in spite of the assistance which it





thus gets from outside, a large printing establishment has to





find room for many different classes of workers within its walls.





To say nothing of those who organize and superintend the





business, of those who do its office work and keep its stores, of





the skilled "readers" who correct any errors that may have crept





into the "proofs," of its engineers and repairers of machinery,





of those who cast, and who correct and prepare its stereotype





plates; of the warehousemen and the boys and girls who assist





them, and several other minor classes; there are the two great





groups of the compositors who set up the type, and the machinists





and pressmen who print impressions from them. Each of these two





groups is divided into many smaller groups, especially in the





large centres of the printing trade. In London, for instance, a





minder who was accustomed to one class of machine, or a





compositor who was accustomed to one class of work, if thrown out





of employment would not willingly abandon the advantage of his





specialized skill, and falling back on his general knowledge of





the trade seek work at another kind of machine or in another





class of work.(9*) These barriers between minute subdivisions of





a trade count for a great deal in many descriptions of the modern





tendency towards specialization of industry; and to some extent





rightly, because though many of them are so slight that a man





thrown out of work in one subdivision could pass into one of its





neighbours without any great loss of efficiency, yet he does not





do so until he has tried for a while to get employment in his old





lines; and therefore the barriers are as effective as stronger





ones would be so far as the minor fluctuations of trade from week





to week are concerned. But they are of an altogether different





kind from the deep and broad partitions which divided one group





of medieval handicraftsmen from another, and which caused the





lifelong suffering of the handloom-weavers when their trade had





left them.(10*)





    In the printing trades, as in the watch trade, we see





mechanical and scientific appliances attaining results that would





be impossible without them; at the same time that they





persistently take over work that used to require manual skill and





dexterity, but not much judgment; while they leave for man's hand





all those parts which do require the use of judgment, and open up





all sorts of new occupations in which there is a great demand for





it. Every improvement and cheapening of the printer's appliances





increases the demand for the judgment and discretion and literary







knowledge of the reader, for the skill and taste of those who





know how to set up a good title-page, or how to make ready a





sheet on which an engraving is to be printed, so that light and





shade will be distributed properly. It increases the demand for





the gifted and highly-trained artists who draw or engrave on wood





and stone and metal, and for those who know how to give an





accurate report in ten lines of the substance of a speech that





occupied ten minutes -- an intellectual feat the difficulty of





which we underrate, because it is so frequently performed. And





again, it tends to increase the work of photographers and





electrotypers, and stereotypers, of the makers of printer's





machinery, and many others who get a higher training and a higher





income from their work than did those layers on and takers off,





and those folders of newspapers who have found their work taken





over by iron fingers and iron arms.











    6. We may now pass to consider the effects which machinery





has in relieving that excessive muscular strain which a few





generations ago was the common lot of more than half the working





men even in such a country as England. The most marvellous





instances of the power of machinery are seen in large iron-works,





and especially in those for making armour plates, where the force





to be exerted is so great that man's muscles count for nothing,





and where every movement, whether horizontal or vertical, has to





be effected by hydraulic or steam force, and man stands by ready





to govern the machinery and clear away ashes or perform some such





secondary task.





    Machinery of this class has increased our command over





nature, but it has not directly altered the character of man's





work very much; for that which it does he could not have done





without it. But in other trades machinery has lightened man's





labours. The house carpenters, for instance, make things of the





same kind as those used by our forefathers, with much less toil





for themselves. They now give themselves chiefly to those parts





of the task which are most pleasant and most interesting; while





in every country town and almost every village there are found





steam mills for sawing, planing and moulding, which relieve them





of that grievous fatigue which not very long ago used to make





them prematurely old.(11*)





    New machinery, when just invented, generally requires a great





deal of care and attention. But the work of its attendant is





always being sifted; that which is uniform and monotonous is





gradually taken over by the machine, which thus becomes steadily





more and more automatic and self-acting; till at last there is





nothing for the hand to do, but to supply the material at certain





intervals and to take away the work when finished. There still





remains the responsibility for seeing that the machinery is in





good order and working smoothly; but even this task is often made





light by the introduction of an automatic movement, which brings





he machine to a stop the instant anything goes wrong.





    Nothing could be more narrow or monotonous than the





occupation of a weaver of plain stuffs in the old time. But now





one woman will manage four or more looms, each of which does many





times as much work in the course of the day as the old hand-loom





did; and her work is much less monotonous and calls for much more





judgment than his did. So that for every hundred yards of cloth





that are woven, the purely monotonous work done by human beings





is probably not a twentieth part of what it was.(12*)





    Facts of this kind are to be found in the recent history of





many trades: and they are of great importance when we are





considering the way in which the modern organization of industry





is tending to narrow the scope of each person's work, and thereby





to render it monotonous. For those trades in which the work is





most subdivided are those in which the chief muscular strain is





most certain to be taken off by machinery; and thus the chief





evil of monotonous work is much diminished. As Roscher says, it





is monotony of life much more than monotony of work that is to be





dreaded: monotony of work is an evil of the first order only when





it involves monotony of life. Now when a person's employment





requires much physical exertion, he is fit for nothing after his





work; and unless his mental faculties are called forth in his





work, they have little chance of being developed at all. But the





nervous force is not very much exhausted in the ordinary work of





a factory, at all events where there is not excessive noise, and





where the hours of labour are not too long. The social





surroundings of factory life stimulate mental activity in and out





of working hours; and many of those factory workers, whose





occupations are seemingly the most monotonous, have considerable





intelligence and mental resource.(13*)





    It is true that the American agriculturist is an able man,





and that his children rise rapidly in the world. But partly





because land is plentiful, and he generally owns the farm that he





cultivates, he has better social conditions than the English; he





has always had to think for himself, and has long had to use and





to repair complex machines. The English agricultural labourer has





had many great disadvantages to contend with. Till recently he





had little education; and he was in a great measure under a





semi-feudal rule, which was not without its advantages, but which





repressed enterprise and even in some degree self-respect. These





narrowing causes are removed. He is now fairly well educated in





youth. He learns to handle various machinery; he is less





dependent on the good-will of any particular squire or group of





farmers; and, since his work is more various, and educates





intelligence more than the lowest grades of town work do, he is





tending to rise both absolutely and relatively.











    7. We must now proceed to consider what are the conditions





under which the economies in production arising from division of





labour can best be secured. It is obvious that the efficiency of





specialized machinery or specialized skill is but one condition





of its economic use; the other is that sufficient work should be





found to keep it well employed. As Babbage pointed out, in a





large factory "the master manufacturer by dividing the work to be





executed into different processes, each requiring different





degrees of skill or force, can purchase exactly that precise





quantity of both which is necessary for each process; whereas if





the whole work were executed by one workman that person must





possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult and





sufficient strength to execute the most laborious of the





operations into which the work is divided." The economy of





production requires not only that each person should be employed





constantly in a narrow range of work, but also that, when it is





necessary for him to undertake different tasks, each of these





tasks should be such as to call forth as much as possible of his





skill and ability. Just in the same way the economy of machinery





requires that a powerful turning-lathe when specially arranged





for one class of work should be kept employed as long as possible





on that work; and if there is occasion to employ it on other





work, that should be such as to be worthy of the lathe, and not





such as could have been done equally well by a much smaller





machine.





    Here then, so far as the economy of production goes, men and





machines stand on much the same footing: but while machinery is a





mere implement of production, man's welfare is also its ultimate





aim. We have already been occupied with the question whether the





human race as a whole gains by carrying to an extreme that





specialization of function which causes all the most difficult





work to be done by a few people: but we have now to consider it





more nearly with special reference to the work of business





management. The main drift of the next three chapters is to





inquire what are the causes which make different forms of





business management the fittest to profit by their environment,





and the most likely to prevail over others; but it is well that





meanwhile we should have in our minds the question, how far they





are severally fitted to benefit their environment.





    Many of those economies in the use of specialized skill and





machinery which are commonly regarded as within the reach of very





large establishments, do not depend on the size of individual





factories. Some depend on the aggregate volume of production of





the kind in the neighbourhood; while others again, especially





those connected with the growth of knowledge and the progress of





the arts, depend chiefly on the aggregate volume of production in





the whole civilized world. And here we may introduce two





technical terms.





    We may divide the economies arising from an increase in the





scale of production of any kind of goods, into two classes --





firstly, those dependent on the general development of the





industry; and, secondly, those dependent on the resources of the





individual houses of business engaged in it, on their





organization and the efficiency of their management. We may call





the former external economies, and the latter internal economies.





In the present chapter we have been chiefly discussing internal





economies; but we now proceed to examine those very important





external economies which can often be secured by the





concentration of many small businesses of a similar character in





particular localities: or, as is commonly said, by the





localization of industry.











NOTES:











1. For instance, the first time a man attempts to skate he must





give his whole attention to keeping his balance, his cerebrum has





to exercise a direct control over every movement, and he has not





much mental energy left for other things. But after a good deal





of practice the action becomes semi-automatic, the local nerve





centres undertake nearly all the work of regulating the muscles,





the cerebrum is set free, and the man can carry on an independent





train of thought; he can even alter his course to avoid an





obstacle in his path, or to recover his balance after it has been





disturbed by a slight unevenness, without in any way interrupting





the course of his thoughts. It seems that the exercise of nerve





force under the immediate direction of the thinking power





residing in the cerebrum has gradually built up a set of





connections, involving probably distinct physical change, between





the nerves and nerve centres concerned; and these new connections





may be regarded as a sort of capital of nerve force. There is





probably something like an organized bureaucracy of the local





nerve centres: the medulla, the spinal axis, and the larger





ganglia generally acting the part of provincial authorities, and





being able after a time to regulate the district and village





authorities without troubling the supreme government. Very likely





they send up messages as to what is going on: but if nothing much





out of the way has happened, these are very little attended to.





When however a new feat has to be accomplished, as for instance





learning to skate backwards, the whole thinking force will be





called into requisition for the time; and will now be able by aid





of the special skating organization of the nerves and nerve





centres, which has been built up in ordinary skating, to do what





would have been altogether impossible without such aid.





    To take a higher instance: when an artist is painting at his





best, his cerebrum is fully occupied with his work: his whole





mental force is thrown into it, and the strain is too great to be





kept up for a long time together. In a few hours of happy





inspiration he may give utterance to thoughts that exert a





perceptible influence on the character of coming generations. But





his power of expression had been earned by numberless hours of





plodding work in which he had gradually built up an intimate





connection between eye and hand, sufficient to enable him to make





good rough sketches of things with which he is tolerably





familiar, even while he is engaged in an engrossing conversation





and is scarcely conscious that he has a pencil in his hand.











2. J. S. Mill went so far as to maintain that his occupations at





the India Office did not interfere with his pursuit of





philosophical inquiries. But it seems probable that this





diversion of his freshest powers lowered the quality of his best





thought more than he was aware; and though it may have diminished





but little his remarkable usefulness in his own generation, it





probably affected very much his power of doing that kind of work





which influences the course of thought in future generations. It





was by husbanding every atom of his small physical strength that





Darwin was enabled to do so much work of just that kind: and a





social reformer who had succeeded in exploiting Darwin' s leisure





hours in useful work on behalf of the community, would have done





a very bad piece of business for it.











3. The best and most expensive clothes are made by highly skilled





and highly paid tailors, each of whom works right through first





one garment and then another: while the cheapest and worst





clothes are made for starvation wages by unskilled women who take





the cloth to their own homes and do every part of the sewing





themselves. But clothes of intermediate qualities are made in





workshops or factories, in which the division and subdivisions of





labour are carried as far as the size of the staff will permit;





and this method is rapidly gaining ground at both ends at the





expense of the rival method. Lord Lauderdale (Inquiry, p. 282)





quotes Xenophon's argument that the best work is done when each





confines himself to one simple department, as when one man makes





shoes for men, and another for women; or better when one man only





sews shoes or garments, another cuts them out: the king's cooking





is much better than anybody else's, because he has one cook who





only boils, another who only roasts meat; one who only boils





fish, another who only fries it: there is not one man to make all





sorts of bread but a special man for special qualities.











4. One great inventor is rumoured to have spent ?00,000 on





experiments relating to textile machinery, and his outlay is said





to have been abundantly returned to him. Some of his inventions





were of such a kind as can be made only by a man of genius; and





however great the need, they must have waited till the right man





was found for them. He charged not unreasonably ?000 as royalty





for each of his combing machines; and a worsted manufacturer,





being full of work, found it worth his while to buy an additional





machine, and pay this extra charge for it, only six months before





the expiry of the patent. But such cases are exceptional: as a





rule, patented machines are not very dear. In some cases the





economy of having them all produced at one place by special





machinery has been so great that the patentee has found it to his





advantage to sell them at a price lower than the old price of the





inferior machines which they displaced: for that old price gave





him so high a profit, that it was worth his while to lower the





price still further in order to induce the use of the machines





for new purposes and in new markets. In almost every trade many





things are done by hand, though it is well known that they could





easily be done by some adaptations of machines that are already





in use in that or some other trade, and which are not made only





because there would not as yet be enough employment for them to





remunerate the trouble and expense of making them.











5. Smiles, Boulton and Watts, pp. 170-1.











6. The system owes its origin in great measure to Sir Joseph





Whitworth's standard gauges; but it has been worked out with most





enterprise and thoroughness in America. Standardization is most





helpful in regard to things which are to be built up with others





into complex machines, buildings, bridges, etc.











7. The perfection which the machinery has already attained is





shown by the fact that at the Inventions Exhibition held in





London in 1885, the representative of an American watch factory





took to pieces fifty watches before some English representatives





of the older system of manufacture, and after throwing the





different parts into different heaps, asked them to select for





him one piece from each heap in succession; he then set these





pieces up in one of the watch-cases and handed them back a watch





in perfect order.











8. "The type-founder was probably the first to secede from the





concern; then printers delegated to others the making of presses;





afterwards the ink and the rollers found separate and distinct





manufacturers; and there arose a class of persons who, though





belonging to other trades, made printing appliances a speciality,





such as printers' smiths, printers' joiners and printers'





engineers" (Mr Southward in the Article on Typography in the





Encyclopaedia Britannica).











9. For instance, Mr Southward tells us "a minder may understand





only book machines or only news machines; he may know all about"





machines that print from flat surfaces or those that print from





cylinders; "or of cylinders he may know only one kind. Entirely





novel machines create a new class of artisans. There are men





perfectly competent to manage a Walter press who are ignorant how





to work two-colour or fine book-work machines. In the





compositor's department division of labour is carried out to a





still minuter degree. An old-fashioned printer would set up





indifferently a placard, a title-page, or a book. At the present





day we have jobbing hands, book hands, and news hands, the word





'hand' suggesting the factory-like nature of the business. There





are jobbing hands who confine themselves to posters. Book hands





comprise those who set up the titles and those who set up the





body of the work. Of these latter again, while one man composes,





another, the 'maker-up,' arranges the pages."











10. Let us follow still further the progress of machinery in





supplanting manual labour in some directions and opening out new





fields for its employment in others. Let us watch the process by





which large editions of a great newspaper are set up and printed





off in a few hours. To begin with, a good part of the





type-setting is itself often done by a machine; but in any case





the types are in the first instance on a plane surface, from





which it is impossible to print very rapidly. The next step





therefore is to make a papier-mach?cast of them, which is bent





on to a cylinder, and is then used as the mould from which a new





metal plate is cast that fits the cylinders of the printing





machine. Fixed on these it rotates alternately against the inking





cylinders and the paper. The paper is arranged in a huge roll at





the bottom of the machine and unrolls itself automatically, first





against the damping cylinders and then against the printing





cylinders, the first of which prints it on one side, and the





second on the other: thence to the cutting cylinders, which cut





it into equal lengths, and thence to the folding apparatus, which





folds it ready for sale.





    More recently the casting of the type has been brought under





the new methods. The compositor plays on a keyboard like that of





the type-writer, and the matrix of a corresponding letter goes





into line: then after spacing out, molten lead is poured on the





line of matrices, and a solid line of type is ready . And in a





further development each letter is cast separately from its





matrix; the machine reckons up the space taken by the letters,





stops when there are enough for a line, divides out the free





space equally into the requisite number of small spaces between







the words; and finally casts the line. It is claimed that one





compositor can work several such machines simultaneously in





distant towns by electric currents.











11. The jack-plane, used for making smooth large boards for





floors and other purposes, used to cause heart disease, making





carpenters as a rule old men by the time they were forty . Adam





Smith tells us that "workmen, when they are liberally paid, are





very apt to overwork themselves and to ruin their health and





constitution in a few years. A carpenter in London, and in some





other places, is not supposed to last in his utmost vigour above





eight years... Almost every class of artificers is subject to





some particular infirmity occasioned by excessive application to





their peculiar species of work." Wealth of Nations, Book I,





chapter VII.











12. The efficiency of labour in weaving has been increased twelve





fold and that in spinning six fold during the last seventy years.





In the preceding seventy years the improvements in spinning had





already increased the efficiency of labour two-hundred-fold (see





Ellison's Cotton Trade of Great Britain, ch. IV and V).











13. Perhaps the textile industries afford the best instance of





work that used to be done by hand and is now done by machinery





They are especially prominent in England, where they give





employment to nearly half a million males and more than half a





million females, or more than one in ten of those persons who are





earning independent incomes. The strain that is taken off human





muscles in dealing even with those soft materials is shown by the





fact that for every one of these million operatives there is used





about one horse-power of steam, that is, about ten times as much





as they would themselves exert if they were all strong men; and





the history of these industries will serve to remind us that many





of those who perform the more monotonous parts of manufacturing





work are as a rule not skilled workers who have come down to it





from a higher class of work, but unskilled workers who have risen





to it. A great number of those who work in the Lancashire





cotton-mills have come there from poverty-stricken districts of





Ireland, while others are the descendants of paupers and people





of weak physique, who were sent there in large numbers early in





the last century from the most miserable conditions of life in





the poorest agricultural districts, where the labourers were fed





and housed almost worse than the animals whom they tended. Again,





when regret is expressed that the cotton factory hands of New





England have not the high standard of culture which prevailed





among them a century ago, we must remember that the descendants





of those factory workers have moved up to higher and more





responsible posts, and include many of the ablest and wealthiest





of the citizens of America. Those who have taken their places are





in the process of being raised; they are chiefly French Canadians





and Irish, who though they may learn in their new homes some of





the vices of civilization, are yet much better off and have on





the whole better opportunities of developing the higher faculties





of themselves and their children than they had in their old





homes.

















Chapter X











Industrial Organization Continued.





The Concentration of Specialized Industries in Particular





Localities











    1. In an early stage of civilization every place had to





depend on its own resources for most of the heavy wares which it





consumed; unless indeed it happened to have special facilities





for water carriage. But wants and customs changed slowly: and





this made it easy for producers to meet the wants even of





consumers with whom they had little communication; and it enabled





comparatively poor people to buy a few expensive goods from a





distance, in the security that they would add to the pleasure of





festivals and holidays during a life-time, or perhaps even during





two or three lifetimes. Consequently the lighter and more





expensive articles of dress and personal adornment, together with





spices and some kinds of metal implements used by all classes,





and many other things for the special use of the rich, often came





from astonishing distances. Some of these were produced only in a





few places, or even only in one place; and they were diffused all





over Europe partly by the agency of fairs(1*) and professional





pedlers, and partly by the producers themselves, who would vary





their work by travelling on foot for many thousand miles to sell





their goods and see the world. These sturdy travellers took on





themselves the risks of their little businesses; they enabled the





production of certain classes of goods to be kept on the right





track for satisfying the needs of purchasers far away; and they





created new wants among consumers, by showing them at fairs or at





their own houses new goods from distant lands. An industry





concentrated in certain localities is commonly, though perhaps





not quite accurately, described as a localized industry.(2*)





    This elementary localization of industry gradually prepared





the way for many of the modern developments of division of labour





in the mechanical arts and in the task of business management.





Even now we find industries of a primitive fashion localized in





retired villages of central Europe, and sending their simple





wares even to the busiest haunts of modern industry. In Russia





the expansion of a family group into a village has often been the





cause of a localized industry; and there are an immense number of





villages each of which carries on only one branch of production,





or even only a part of one.(3*)











    2. Many various causes have led to the localization of





industries; but the chief causes have been physical conditions;





such as the character of the climate and the soil, the existence





of mines and quarries in the neighbourhood, or within easy access





by land or water. Thus metallic industries have generally been





either near mines or in places where fuel was cheap. The iron





industries in England first sought those districts in which





charcoal was plentiful, and afterwards they went to the





neighbourhood of collieries.(4*) Staffordshire makes many kinds





of pottery, all the materials of which are imported from a long





distance; but she has cheap coal and excellent clay for making





the heavy "saggars" or boxes in which the pottery is placed while





being fired. Straw plaiting has its chief home in Bedfordshire,





where straw has just the right proportion of silex to give





strength without brittleness; and Buckinghamshire beeches have





afforded the material for the Wycombe chairmaking. The Sheffield





cutlery trade is due chiefly to the excellent grit of which its





grindstones are made.





    Another chief cause has been the patronage of a court. The





rich folk there assembled make a demand for goods of specially





high quality, and this attracts skilled workmen from a distance,





and educates those on the spot. When an Eastern potentate changed





his residence -- and, partly for sanitary reasons, this was





constantly done -- the deserted town was apt to take refuge in





the development of a specialized industry, which had owed its





origin to the presence of the court. But very often the rulers





deliberately invited artisans from a distance and settled them in





a group together. Thus the mechanical faculty of Lancashire is





said to be due to the influence of Norman smiths who were settled





at Warrington by Hugo de Lupus in William the Conqueror's time.





And the greater part of England's manufacturing industry before





the era of cotton and steam had its course directed by





settlements of Flemish and other artisans; many of which were





made under the immediate direction of Plantagenet and Tudor





kings. These immigrants taught us how to weave woollen and





worsted stuffs, though for a long time we sent our cloths to the





Netherlands to be fulled and dyed. They taught us how to cure





herrings, how to manufacture silk, how to make lace, glass, and





paper, and to provide for many other of our wants.(5*)





    But how did these immigrants learn their skill? Their





ancestors had no doubt profited by the traditional arts of





earlier civilizations on the shores of the Mediterranean and in





the far East: for nearly all important knowledge has long deep





roots stretching downwards to distant times; and so widely spread





have been these roots, so ready to send up shoots of vigorous





life, that there is perhaps no part of the old world in which





there might not long ago have flourished many beautiful and





highly skilled industries, if their growth had been favoured by





the character of the people, and by their social and political





institutions. This accident or that may have determined whether





any particular industry flourished in any one town; the





industrial character of a whole country even may have been





largely influenced by the richness of her soil and her mines, and





her facilities for commerce. Such natural advantages may





themselves have stimulated free industry and enterprise: but it





is the existence of these last, by whatever means they may have





been promoted, which has been the supreme condition for the





growth of noble forms of the arts of life. In stretching the





history of free industry and enterprise we have already





incidentally traced the outlines of the causes which have





localized the industrial leadership of the world now in this





country and now in that. We have seen how physical nature acts on





man's energies, how he is stimulated by an invigorating climate,





and how he is encouraged to bold ventures by the opening out of





rich fields for his work: but we have also seen how the use he





makes of these advantages depends on his ideals of life, and how





inextricably therefore the religious, political and economic





threads of the world's history are interwoven; while together





they have been bent this way or that by great political events





and the influence of the strong personalities of individuals.





    The causes which determine the economic progress of nations





belong to the study of international trade and therefore lie





outside of our present view. But for the present we must turn





aside from these broader movements of the localization of





industry, and follow the fortunes of groups of skilled workers





who are gathered within the narrow boundaries of a manufacturing





town or a thickly peopled industrial district.











    3. When an industry has thus chosen a locality for itself, it





is likely to stay there long: so great are the advantages which





people following the same skilled trade get from near





neighbourhood to one another. The mysteries of the trade become





no mysteries; but are as it were in the air, and children learn





many of them unconsciously. Good work is rightly appreciated,





inventions and improvements in machinery, in processes and the





general organization of the business have their merits promptly





discussed: if one man starts a new idea, it is taken up by others





and combined with suggestions of their own; and thus it becomes





the source of further new ideas. And presently subsidiary trades





grow up in the neighbourhood, supplying it with implements and





materials, organizing its traffic, and in many ways conducing to





the economy of its material.





    Again, the economic use of expensive machinery can sometimes





be attained in a very high degree in a district in which there is





a large aggregate production of the same kind, even though no





individual capital employed in the trade be very large. For





subsidiary industries devoting themselves each to one small





branch of the process of production, and working it for a great





many of their neighbours, are able to keep in constant use





machinery of the most highly specialized character, and to make





it pay its expenses, though its original cost may have been high,





and its rate of depreciation very rapid.





    Again, in all but the earliest stages of economic development





a localized industry gains a great advantage from the fact that





it offers a constant market for skill. Employers are apt to





resort to any place where they are likely to find a good choice





of workers with the special skill which they require; while men





seeking employment naturally go to places where there are many





employers who need such skill as theirs and where therefore it is





likely to find a good market. The owner of an isolated factory,





even if he has access to a plentiful supply of general labour, is





often put to great shifts for want of some special skilled





labour; and a skilled workman, when thrown out of employment in





it, has no easy refuge. Social forces here co-operate with





economic: there are often strong friendships between employers





and employed: but neither side likes to feel that in case of any





disagreeable incident happening between them, they must go on





rubbing against one another: both sides like to be able easily to





break off old associations should they become irksome. These





difficulties are still a great obstacle to the success of any





business in which special skill is needed, but which is not in





the neighbourhood of others like it: they are however being





diminished by the railway, the printing-press and the telegraph.





    On the other hand a localized industry has some disadvantages





as a market for labour if the work done in it is chiefly of one





kind, such for instance as can be done only by strong men. In





those iron districts in which there are no textile or other





factories to give employment to women and children, wages are





high and the cost of labour dear to the employer, while the





average money earnings of each family are low. But the remedy for





this evil is obvious, and is found in the growth in the same





neighbourhood of industries of a supplementary character. Thus





textile industries are constantly found congregated in the





neighbourhood of mining and engineering industries, in some cases





having been attracted by almost imperceptible steps; in others,





as for instance at Barrow, having been started deliberately on a





large scale in order to give variety of employment in a place





where previously there had been but little demand for the work of





women and children.





    The advantages of variety of employment are combined with





those of localized industries in some of our manufacturing towns,





and this is a chief cause of their continued growth. But on the





other hand the value which the central sites of a large town have





for trading purposes, enables them to command much higher





ground-rents than the situations are worth for factories, even





when account is taKen of this combination of advantages: and





there is a similar competition for dwelling space between the





employees of the trading houses and the factory workers. The





result is that factories now congregate in the outskirts of large





towns and in manufacturing districts in their neighbourhood





rather than in the towns themselves.(6*)





    A district which is dependent chiefly on one industry is





liable to extreme depression, in case of a falling-off in the





demand for its produce, or of a failure in the supply of the raw





material which it uses. This evil again is in a great measure





avoided by those large towns or large industrial districts in





which several distinct industries are strongly developed. If one





of them fails for a time, the others are likely to support it





indirectly; and they enable local shopkeepers to continue their





assistance to workpeople in it.





    So far we have discussed localization from the point of view





of the economy of production. But there is also the convenience





of the customer to be considered. He will go to the nearest shop





for a trifling purchase; but for an important purchase he will





take the trouble of visiting any part of the town where he knows





that there are specially good shops for his purpose. Consequently





shops which deal in expensive and choice objects tend to





congregate together; and those which supply ordinary domestic





needs do not.(7*)











    4. Every cheapening of the means of communication, every new





facility for the free interchange of ideas between distant places





alters the action of the forces which tend to localize





industries. Speaking generally we must say that a lowering of





tariffs, or of freights for the transport of goods, tends to make





each locality buy more largely from a distance what it requires;





and thus tends to concentrate particular industries in special





localities: but on the other hand everything that increases





people's readiness to migrate from one place to another tends to





bring skilled artisans to ply their crafts near to the consumers





who will purchase their wares. These two opposing tendencies are





well illustrated by the recent history of the English people.





    On the one hand the steady cheapening of freights, the





opening of railways from the agricultural districts of America





and India to the sea-board, and the adoption by England of a





free-trade policy, have led to a great increase in her





importation of raw produce. But on the other hand the growing





cheapness, rapidity and comfort of foreign travel, are inducing





her trained business men and her skilled artisans to pioneer the





way for new industries in other lands, and to help them to





manufacture for themselves goods which they have been wont to buy





from England. English mechanics have taught people in almost





every part of the world how to use English machinery, and even





how to make similar machinery; and English miners have opened out





mines of ore which have diminished the foreign demand for many of





England's products.





    One of the most striking movements towards the specialization





of a country's industries, which history records, is the rapid





increase of the non-agricultural population of England in recent





times. The exact nature of this change is however liable to be





misunderstood; and its interest is so great, both for its own





sake, and on account of the illustrations it affords of the





general principles which we have been discussing in the preceding





chapter and in this, that we may with advantage pause here to





consider it a little.





    In the first place, the real diminution of England's





agricultural industries is not so great as at first sight





appears. It is true that in the Middle Ages three-fourths of the





people were reckoned as agriculturists; that only one in nine was





returned to the last census as engaged in agriculture, and that





perhaps not more than one in twelve will be so returned at the





next census. But it must be remembered that the so-called





agricultural population of the Middle Ages were not exclusively





occupied with agriculture; they did for themselves a great part





of the work that is now done by brewers and bakers, by spinners





and weavers, by bricklayers and carpenters, by dressmakers and





tailors and by many other trades. These self-sufficing habits





died slowly; but most of them had nearly disappeared by the





beginning of the last century; and it is probable that the labour





spent on the land at this time was not a much less part of the





whole industry of the country than in the Middle Ages: for, in





spite of her ceasing to export wool and wheat, there was so great





an increase in the produce forced from her soil, that the rapid





improvement in the arts of her agriculturists scarcely availed to





hold in check the action of the law of diminishing return. But





gradually a great deal of labour has been diverted from the





fields to making expensive machinery for agricultural purposes.





This change did not exert its full influence upon the numbers of





those who were reckoned as agriculturists so long as the





machinery was drawn by horses: for the work of tending them and





supplying them with food was regarded as agricultural. But in





recent years a rapid growth of the use of steam power in the





fields has coincided with the increased importation of farm





produce. The coal-miners who supply these steam-engines with





fuel, and the mechanics who make them and manage them in the





fields are not reckoned as occupied on the land, though the





ultimate aim of their labour is to promote its cultivation. The





real diminution then of England's agriculture is not so great as





at first sight appears; but there has been a change in its





distribution. Many tasks which used once to be performed by





agricultural labourers are now done by specialized workers who





are classed as in the building, or road-making industries, as





carriers and so on. And, partly for this reason the number of





people who reside in purely agricultural districts has seldom





diminished fast; and has often increased, even though the number





of those engaged in agriculture has been diminishing rapidly.





    Attention has already been called to the influence which the





importation of agricultural produce exerts in altering the





relative values of different soils: those falling most in value





which depended chiefly on their wheat crops, and which were not





naturally fertile, though they were capable of being made to





yield fairly good crops by expensive methods of cultivation.





Districts in which such soils predominate, have contributed more





than their share to the crowds of agricultural labourers who have





migrated to the large towns; and thus the geographical





distribution of industries within the country has been still





further altered. A striking instance of the influence of the new





means of transport is seen in those pastoral districts in the





remoter parts of the United Kingdom, which send dairy products by





special express trains to London and other large towns, meanwhile





drawing their own supplies of wheat from the further shores of





the Atlantic or even the Pacific Ocean.





    But next, the changes of recent years have not, as would at





first sight appear probable, increased the proportion of the





English people who are occupied in manufactures. The output of





England's manufactures is certainly many times as great now as it





was at the middle of the last century; but those occupied in





manufacture of every kind were as large a percentage of the





population in 1851 as in 1901; although those who make the





machinery and implements which do a great part of the work of





English agriculture, swell the numbers of the manufacturers.





    The chief explanation of this result lies in the wonderful





increase in recent years of the power of machinery. This has





enabled us to produce ever increasing supplies of manufactures of





almost every kind both for our own use and for exportation





without requiring any considerable increase in the number of





people who tend the machines. And therefore we have been able to





devote the labour set free from agriculture chiefly to supplying





those wants in regard to which the improvements of machinery help





us but little: the efficiency of machinery has prevented the





industries localized in England from becoming as exclusively





mechanical as they otherwise would. Prominent among the





occupations which have increased rapidly since 1851 in England at





the expense of agriculture are the service of Government, central





and local; education of all grades; medical service; musical,





theatrical and other entertainments, besides mining, building,





dealing and transport by road and railway. In none of these is





very much direct help got from new inventions: man's labour is





not much more efficient in them now than it was a century ago:





and therefore if the wants for which they make provision increase





in proportion to our general wealth, it is only to be expected





that they should absorb a constantly growing proportion of the





industrial population. Domestic servants increased rapidly for





some years; and the total amount of work which used to fall to





them is now increasing faster than ever. But much of it is now





done, often with the aid of machinery, by persons in the





employment of clothiers of all kinds, of hotel proprietors,





confectioners, and even by various messengers from grocers,





fishmongers and others who call for orders, unless they are sent





by telephone. These changes have tended to increase the





specialization and the localization of industries.





    Passing away from this illustration of the action of modern





forces on the geographical distribution of industries, we will





resume our inquiry as to how far the full economies of division





of labour can be obtained by the concentration of large numbers





of small businesses of a similar kind in the same locality; and





how far they are attainable only by the aggregation of a large





part of the business of the country into the hands of a





comparatively small number of rich and powerful firms, or, as is





commonly said, by production on a large scale; or, in other





words, how far the economies of production on a large scale must





needs be internal, and how far they can be external.(8*)











NOTES:











1. Thus in the records of the Stourbridge Fair held near





Cambridge we find an endless variety of light and precious goods





from the older seats of civilization in the East and on the





Mediterranean; some having been brought in Italian ships, and





others having travelled by land as far as the shores of the North





Sea.











2. Not very long ago travellers in western Tyrol could find a





strange and characteristic relic of this habit in a village





called Imst. The villagers had somehow acquired a special art in





breeding canaries: and their young men started for a tour to





distant parts of Europe each with about fifty small cages hung





from a pole over his shoulder, and walked on till they had sold





all.











3. There are for instance over 500 villages devoted to various





branches of woodwork; one village makes nothing but spokes for





the wheels of vehicles, another nothing but the bodies and so on;





and indications of a like state of things are found in the





histories of oriental civilizations and in the chronicles of





medieval Europe. Thus for instance we read (Rogers' Six Centuries





of Work and Wages, ch. IV) of a lawyer's handy book written about





1250, which makes note of scarlet at Lincoln; blanket at Bligh;





burnet at Beverley; russet at Colchester; linen fabrics at





Shaftesbury, Lewes, and Aylsham; cord at Warwick and Bridport;





knives at Marstead; needles at Wilton; razors at Leicester; soap





at Coventry; horse girths at Doncaster; skins and furs at Chester





and Shrewsbury and so on.





    The localization of trades in England at the beginning of the





eighteenth century is well described by Defoe, Plan of English





Commerce, 85-7; English Tradesman, II, 282-3.











4. The later wanderings of the iron industry from Wales,





Staffordshire and Shropshire to Scotland and the North of England





are well shown in the tables submitted by Sir Lowthian Bell to





the recent Commission on the Depression of Trade and Industry.





See their Second Report, Part I, p. 320.











5. Fuller says that Flemings started manufactures of cloths and





fustians in Norwich, of baizes in Sudbury, of serges in





Colchester and Taunton, of cloths in Kent, Gloucestershire,





Worcestershire, Westmorland, Yorkshire, Hants, Berks and Sussex,





of kerseys in Devonshire and of Levant cottons in Lancashire.





Smiles' Huguenots in England and Ireland, p. 109. See also





Lecky's History of England in the eighteenth century, ch. II.











6. The movement has been specially conspicuous in the case of the





textile manufacturers. Manchester, Leeds and Lyons are still





chief centres of the trade in cotton, woollen and silk stuffs,





but they do not now themselves produce any great part of the





goods to which they owe their chief fame. On the other hand





London and Paris retain their positions as the two largest





manufacturing towns of the world, Philadelphia coming third. The





mutual influences of the localization of industry, the growth of





towns and habits of town life, and the development of machinery





are well discussed in Hobson's Evolution of Capitalism.











7. Comp. Hobson, l. c. p. 114.











8. The percentage of the population occupied in the textile





industries in the United Kingdom fell from 3.13 in 1881 to 2.43





in 1901; partly because much of the work done by them has been





rendered so simple by semi-automatic machinery that it can be





done fairly well by peoples that are in a relatively backward





industrial condition; and partly because the chief textile goods





retain nearly the same simple character as they had thirty or





even three thousand years ago. On the other hand manufactures of





iron and steel (including shipbuilding) have increased so greatly





in complexity as well as in volume of output, that the percentage





of the population occupied in them rose from 2.39 in 1881 to 3.01





in 1901; although much greater advance has been meanwhile made in





the machinery and methods employed in them than in the textile





group. The remaining manufacturing industries employed about the





same percentage of the people in 1901 as in 1881. In the same





time the tonnage of British shipping cleared from British ports





increased by one half; and the number of dock labourers doubled,





but that of seamen has slightly diminished. These facts are to be





explained partly by vast improvements in the construction of





ships and all appliances connected with them, and partly by the





transference to dock labourers of nearly all tasks connected with





handling the cargo some of which were even recently performed by





the crew. Another marked change is the increased aggregate





occupation of women in manufactures, though that of married women





appears to have diminished, and that of children has certainly





diminished greatly.





    The Summary Tables of the Census of 1911, published in 1915,





show so many changes in classification since 1991 that no general





view of recent developments can be safely made. But Table 64 of





that Report and Prof. D. Caradog Jones' paper read before the





Royal Statistical Society in December 1914 show that the





developments of 1901-11 differ from their predecessors in detail





rather than in general character.

















Chapter XI











Industrial Organization Continued.





Production on a Large Scale











    1. The advantages of production on a large scale are best





shown in manufacture; under which head we may include all





businesses engaged in working up material into forms in which it





will be adapted for sale in distant markets. The characteristic





of manufacturing industries which makes them offer generally the





best illustrations of the advantages of production on a large





scale, is their power of choosing freely the locality in which





they will do their work. They are thus contrasted on the one hand





with agriculture and other extractive industries (mining,





quarrying, fishing, etc.), the geographical distribution of which





is determined by nature; and on the other hand with industries





that make or repair things to suit the special needs of





individual consumers, from whom they cannot be far removed, at





all events without great loss.(1*)





    The chief advantages of production on a large scale are





economy of skill, economy of machinery and economy of materials:





but the last of these is rapidly losing importance relatively to





the other two. It is true that an isolated workman often throws





away a number of small things which would have been collected and





turned to good account in a factory;(2*) but waste of this kind





can scarcely occur in a localized manufacture even if it is in





the hands of small men; and there is not very much of it in any





branch of industry in modern England, except agriculture and





domestic cooking. No doubt many of the most important advances of





recent years have been due to the utilizing of what had been a





waste product; but this has been generally due to a distinct





invention, either chemical or mechanical, the use of which has





been indeed promoted by minute subdivision of labour, but has not





been directly dependent on it.(3*)





    Again, it is true that when a hundred sets of furniture, or





of clothing, have to be cut out on exactly the same pattern, it





is worth while to spend great care on so planning the cutting out





of the boards or the cloth, that only a few small pieces are





wasted. But this is properly an economy of skill; one planning is





made to suffice for many tasks, and therefore can be done well





and carefully. We may pass then to the economy of machinery.











    2. In spite of the aid which subsidiary industries can give





to small manufactures, where many in the same branch of trade are





collected in one neighbourhood,(4*) they are still placed under a





great disadvantage by the growing variety and expensiveness of





machinery. For in a large establishment there are often many





expensive machines each made specially for one small use. Each of





them requires space in a good light, and thus stands for





something considerable in the rent and general expenses of the





factory; and independently of interest and the expense of keeping





it in repair, a heavy allowance must be made for depreciation in





consequence of its being probably improved upon before long.(5*)





A small manufacturer must therefore have many things done by hand





or by imperfect machinery, though he knows how to have them done





better and cheaper by special machinery, if only he could find





constant employment for it.





    But next, a small manufacturer may not always be acquainted





with the best machinery for his purpose. It is true that if the





industry in which he is engaged has been long established on a





large scale, his machinery will be well up to the mark, provided





he can afford to buy the best in the market. In agriculture and





the cotton industries, for instance, improvements in machinery





are devised almost exclusively by machine makers; and they are





accessible to all, at any rate on the payment of a royalty for





patent right. But this is not the case in industries that are as





yet in an early stage of development or are rapidly changing





their form; such as the chemical industries, the watchmaking





industry and some branches of the jute and silk manufactures; and





in a host of trades that are constantly springing up to supply





some new want or to work up some new material.





    In all such trades new machinery and new processes are for





the greater part devised by manufacturers for their own use. Each





new departure is an experiment which may fail; those which





succeed must pay for themselves and for the failure of others;





and though a small manufacturer may think he sees his way to an





improvement, he must reckon on having to work it out tentatively,





at considerable risk and expense and with much interruption to





his other work: and even if he should be able to perfect it, he





is not likely to be able to make the most of it. For instance, he





may have devised a new speciality, which would get a large sale





if it could be brought under general notice: but to do this would





perhaps cost many thousand pounds; and, if so, he will probably





have to turn his back on it. For it is almost impossible for him





to discharge, what Roscher calls a characteristic task of the





modern manufacturer, that of creating new wants by showing people





something which they had never thought of having before; but





which they want to have as soon as the notion s suggested to





them: in the pottery trade for example the small manufacturer





cannot afford even to make experiments with new patterns and





designs except in a very tentative way. His chance is better with





regard to an improvement in making things for which there is





already a good market. But even here he cannot get the full





benefit of his invention unless he patents it; and sells the





right to use it; or borrows some capital and extends his





business; or lastly changes the character of his business and





devotes his capital to that particular stage of the manufacture





to which his improvement applies. But after all such cases are





exceptional: the growth of machinery in variety and expensiveness





presses hard on the small manufacturer everywhere. It has already





driven him completely out of some trades and is fast driving him





out of others.(6*)





    There are however some trades in which the advantages which a





large factory derives from the economy of machinery almost vanish





as soon as a moderate size has been reached. For instance in





cotton spinning, and calico weaving, a comparatively small





factory will hold its own and give constant employment to the





best known machines for every process: so that a large factory is





only several parallel smaller factories under one roof; and





indeed some cotton-spinners, when enlarging their works, think it





best to add a weaving department. In such cases the large





business gains little or no economy in machinery; and even then





it generally saves something in building, particularly as regards





chimneys, and in the economy of steam power, and in the





management and repairs of engines and machinery. Large soft-goods





factories have carpenters' and mechanics' shops, which diminish





the cost of repairs, and prevent delays from accidents to the





plant.(7*)





    Akin to these last, there are a great many advantages which a





large factory, or indeed a large business of almost any kind,





nearly always has over a small one. A large business buys in





great quantities and therefore cheaply; it pays low freights and





saves on carriage in many ways, particularly if it has a railway





siding. It often sells in large quantities, and thus saves itself





trouble; and yet at the same time it gets a good price, because





it offers conveniences to the customer by having a large stock





from which he can select and at once fill up a varied order;





while its reputation gives him confidence. It can spend large





sums on advertising by commercial travellers and in other ways;





its agents give it trustworthy information on trade and personal





matters in distant places, and its own goods advertise one





another.





    The economies of highly organized buying and selling are





among the chief causes of the present tendency towards the fusion





of many businesses in the same industry or trade into single huge





aggregates; and also of trading federations of various kinds,





including German cartels and centralized co-operative





associations. They have also always promoted the concentration of





business risks in the hands of large capitalists who put out the





work to be done by smaller men.(8*)











    3. Next, with regard to the economy of skill. Everything that





has been said with regard to the advantages which a large





establishment has in being able to afford highly specialized





machinery applies equally with regard to highly specialized





skill. It can contrive to keep each of its employees constantly





engaged in the most difficult work of which he is capable, and





yet so to narrow the range of his work that he can attain that





facility and excellence which come from long-continued practice.





But enough has already been said on the advantage of division of





labour: and we may pass to an important though indirect advantage





which a manufacturer derives from having a great many men in his





employment.





    The large manufacturer has a much better chance than a small





one has, of getting hold of men with exceptional natural





abilities, to do the most difficult part of his work -- that on





which the reputation of his establishment chiefly depends. This





is occasionally important as regards mere handiwork in trades





which require much taste and originality, as for instance that of





a house decorator, and in those which require exceptionally fine





workmanship, as for instance that of a manufacturer of delicate





mechanism.(9*) But in most businesses its chief importance lies





in the facilities which it gives to the employer for the





selection of able and tried men, men whom he trusts and who trust





him, to be his foremen and heads of departments. We are thus





brought to the central problem of the modern organization of





industry, viz. that which relates to the advantages and





disadvantages of the subdivision of the work of business





management.











    4. The head of a large business can reserve all his strength





for the broadest and most fundamental problems of his trade: he





must indeed assure himself that his managers, clerks and foremen





are the right men for their work, and are doing their work well;





but beyond this he need not trouble himself much about details.





He can keep his mind fresh and clear for thinking out the most





difficult and vital problems of his business.. for studying the





broader movements of the markets, the yet undeveloped results of





current events at home and abroad; and for contriving how to





improve the organization of the internal and external relations





of his business.





    For much of this work the small employer has not the time if





he has the ability; he cannot take so broad a survey of his





trade, or look so far ahead; he must often be content to follow





the lead of others. And he must spend much of his time on work





that is below him; for if he is to succeed at all, his mind must





be in some respects of a high quality, and must have a good deal





of originating and organizing force; and yet he must do much





routine work.





    On the other hand the small employer has advantages of his





own. The master's eye is everywhere; there is no shirking by his





foremen or workmen, no divided responsibility, no sending





half-understood messages backwards and forwards from one





department to another. He saves much of the book-keeping, and





nearly all of the cumbrous system of checks that are necessary in





the business of a large firm; and the gain from this source is of





very great importance in trades which use the more valuable





metals and other expensive materials.





    And though he must always remain at a great disadvantage in





getting information and in making experiments, yet in this matter





the general course of progress is on his side. For external





economies are constantly growing in importance relatively to





internal in all matters of trade-knowledge: newspapers, and trade





and technical publications of all kinds are perpetually scouting





for him and bringing him much of the knowledge he wants-knowledge





which a little while ago would have been beyond the reach of





anyone who could not afford to have well-paid agents in many





distant I places. Again, it is to his interest also that the





secrecy of business is on the whole diminishing, and that the





most important improvements in method seldom remain secret for





long after they have passed from the experimental stage. It is to





his advantage that changes in manufacture depend less on mere





rules of thumb and more on broad developments of scientific





principle; and that many of these are made by students in the





pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, and are promptly published





in the general interest. Although therefore the small





manufacturer can seldom be in the front of the race of progress,





he need not be far from it, if he has the time and the ability





for availing himself of the modern facilities for obtaining





knowledge. But it is true that he must be exceptionally strong if





he can do this without neglecting the minor but necessary details





of the business.











    5. In agriculture and other trades in which a man gains no





very great new economies by increasing the scale of his





production, it often happens that a business remains of about the





same size for many years, if not for many generations. But it is





otherwise in trades in which a large business can command very





important advantages, which are beyond the reach of a small





business. A new man, working his way up in such a trade, has to





set his energy and flexibility, his industry and care for small





details, against the broader economies of his rivals with their





larger capital, their higher specialization of machinery and





labour, and their larger trade connection. If then he can double





his production, and sell at anything like his old rate, he will





have more than doubled his profits. This will raise his credit





with bankers and other shrewd lenders; and will enable him to





increase his business further, and to attain yet further





economies, and yet higher profits: and this again will increase





his business and so on. It seems at first that no point is marked





out at which he need stop. And it is true that, if, as his





business increased, his faculties adapted themselves to his





larger sphere, as they had done to his smaller; if he retained





his originality, and versatility and power of initiation, his





perseverance, his tact and his good luck for very many years





together; he might then gather into his hands the whole volume of





production in his branch of trade for his district. And if his





goods were not very difficult of transport, nor of marketing, he





might extend this district very wide, and attain something like a





limited monopoly; that is, of a monopoly limited by the





consideration that a very high price would bring rival producers





into the field.





    But long before this end is reached, his progress is likely





to be arrested by the decay, if not of his faculties, yet of his





liking for energetic work. The rise of his firm may be prolonged





if he can hand down his business to a successor almost as





energetic as himself.(10*) But the continued very rapid growth of





his firm requires the presence of two conditions which are seldom





combined in the same industry. There are many trades in which an





individual producer could secure much increased "internal"





economies by a great increase of his output; and there are many





in which he could market that output easily; yet there are few in





which he could do both. And this is not an accidental, but almost





a necessary result.





    For in most of those trades in which the economies of





production on a large scale are of first-rate importance,





marketing is difficult. There are, no doubt, important





exceptions. A producer may, for instance, obtain access to the





whole of a large market in the case of goods which are so simple





and uniform that they can be sold wholesale in vast quantities.





But, most goods of this kind are raw produce; and nearly all the





rest are plain and common, such as steel rails or calico; and





their production can be reduced to routine, for the very reason





that they are plain and common. Therefore in the industries which





produce them, no firm can hold its own at all unless equipped





with expensive appliances of nearly the latest type for its main





work; while subordinate operations can be performed by subsidiary





industries; and in short there remains no very great difference





between the economies available by a large and by a very large





firm; and the tendency of large firms to drive out small ones has





already gone so far as to exhaust most of the strength of those





forces by which it was originally promoted.





    But many commodities with regard to which the tendency to





increasing return acts strongly are, more or less, specialities:





some of them aim at creating a new want, or at meeting an old





want in a new way. Some of them are adapted to special tastes,





and can never have a very large market; and some have merits that





are not easily tested, and must win their way to general favour





slowly. In all such cases the sales of each business are limited,





more or less according to circumstances, to the particular market





which it has slowly and expensively acquired; and though the





production itself might be economically increased very fast, the





sale could not.





    Lastly, the very conditions of an industry which enable a new





firm to attain quickly command over new economies of production,





render that firm liable to be supplanted quickly by still younger





firms with yet newer methods. Especially where the powerful





economies of production on a large scale are associated with the





use of new appliances and new methods, a firm which has lost the





exceptional energy which enabled it to rise, is likely ere long





quickly to decay; and the full life of a large firm seldom lasts





very long.











    6. The advantages which a large business has over a small one





are conspicuous in manufacture, because, as we have noticed, it





has special facilities for concentrating a great deal of work in





a small area. But there is a strong tendency for large





establishments to drive out small ones in many other industries.





In particular the retail trade is being transformed, the small





shopkeeper is losing ground daily.





    Let us look at the advantages which a large retail shop or





store has in competing with its smaller neighbours. To begin





with, it can obviously buy on better terms, it can get its goods





carried more cheaply, and can offer a larger variety to meet the





taste of customers. Next, it has a great economy of skill: the





small shopkeeper, like the small manufacturer, must spend much of





his time in routine work that requires no judgment: whereas the





head of a large establishment, and even in some cases his chief





assistants, spend their whole time in using their judgment. Until





lately these advantages have been generally outweighed by the





greater facilities which the small shopkeeper has for bringing





his goods to the door of his customers; for humouring their





several tastes; and for knowing enough of them individually to be





able safely to lend them capital, in the form of selling them





goods on credit.





    But within recent years there have been many changes all





telling on the side of large establishments. The habit of buying





on credit is passing away; and the personal relations between





shopkeeper and customer are becoming more distant. The first





change is a great step forwards: the second is on some accounts





to be regretted, but not on all; for it is partly due to the fact





that the increase of true self-respect among the wealthier





classes is making them no longer care for the subservient





personal attentions they used to require. Again, the growing





value of time makes people less willing than they were to spend





several hours in shopping; they now often prefer to spend a few





minutes in writing out a long list of orders from a varied and





detailed price-list; and this they are enabled to do easily by





the growing facilities for ordering and receiving parcels by post





and in other ways. And when they do go shopping, tramcars and





local trains are often at hand to take them easily and cheaply to





the large central shops of a neighbouring town. All these changes





render it more difficult than it was for the small shopkeeper to





hold his own even in the provision trade, and others in which no





great variety of stock is required.





    But in many trades the ever-growing variety of commodities,





and those rapid changes of fashion which now extend their baneful





influence through almost every rank of society, weight the





balance even more heavily against the small dealer, for he cannot





keep a sufficient stock to offer much variety of choice, and if





he tries to follow any movement of fashion closely, a larger





proportion of his stock will be left stranded by the receding





tide than in the case of a large shopkeeper. Again, in some





branches of the clothing and furniture and other trades the





increasing cheapness of machine-made goods is leading people to





buy ready-made things from a large store instead of having them





made to order by some small maker and dealer in their





neighbourhood. Again, the large shopkeeper, not content with





receiving travellers from the manufacturers, makes tours either





himself or by his agent in the most important manufacturing





districts at home and abroad; and he thus often dispenses with





middlemen between him and the manufacturer. A tailor with





moderate capital shows his customers specimens of many hundreds





of the newest cloths, and perhaps orders by telegraph the





selected cloth to be sent by parcels' post. Again, ladies often





buy their materials direct from the manufacturer, and get them





made up by dressmakers who have scarcely any capital. Small





shopkeepers seem likely always to retain some hold of the minor





repairing trades: and they keep their own fairly well in the sale





of perishable food, especially to the working classes, partly in





consequence of their being able to sell goods on credit and to





collect small debts. In many trades however a firm with a large





capital prefers having many small shops to one large one. Buying,





and whatever production is desirable, is concentrated under a





central management; and exceptional demands are met from a





central reserve, so that each branch has large resources, without





the expense of keeping a large stock. The branch manager has





nothing to divert his attention from his customers; and, if an





active man, with direct interest in the success of his branch,





may prove himself a formidable rival to the small shopkeeper; as





has been shown in many trades connected with clothing and food.











    7. We may next consider those industries whose geographical





position is determined by the nature of their work.





    Country carriers and a few cabmen are almost the only





survivals of small industry in the carrying trade. Railways and





tramways are constantly increasing in size, and the capital





required to work them is increasing at an even greater rate. The





growing intricacy and variety of commerce is adding to the





advantages which a large fleet of ships under one management





derives from its power of delivering goods promptly, and without





breach of responsibility, in many different ports; and as regards





the vessels themselves time is on the side of large ships,





especially in the passenger trade.(11*) As a consequence the





arguments in favour of the State's undertaking business are





stronger in some branches of the carrying trade than in any





other, except the allied undertakings of carrying away refuse,





and bringing in water, gas, etc.(12*)





    The contest between large and small mines and quarries has





not so clearly marked a tendency. The history of the State





management of mines is full of very dark shadows; for the





business of mining depends too much on the probity of its





managers and their energy and judgment in matters of detail as





well as of general principle, to be well managed by State





officials: and for the same reason the small mine or quarry may





fairly be expected, other things being equal, to hold its own





against the large one. But in some cases the cost of deep shafts,





of machinery and of establishing means of communication, are too





great to be borne by any but a very large business.





    In agriculture there is not much division of labour, and





there is no production on a very large scale; for a so-called





"large farm" does not employ a tenth part of the labour which is





collected in a factory of moderate dimensions. This is partly due





to natural causes, to the changes of the seasons and to the





difficulty of concentrating a great deal of labour in any one





place; but it is partly also due to causes connected with





varieties of land tenure. And it will be best to postpone





discussion of all of them till we come to study demand and supply





in relation to land in the sixth Book.











NOTES:











1. "Manufacture" is a term which has long lost any connection





with its original use: and is now applied to those branches of





production where machine and not hand work is most prominent.





Roscher made the attempt to bring it back nearer to its old use





by applying it to domestic as opposed to factory industries: but





it is too late to do this now.











2. See Babbage's instance of the manufacture of horn. Economy of





Manufactures, ch. XXII.











3. Instances are the utilization of the waste from cotton, wool,





silk and other textile materials; and of the by-products in the





metallurgical industries, in the manufacture of soda and gas, and





in the American mineral oil and meat packing industries.











4. See the preceding chapter, section 3.











5. The average time which a machine will last before being





superseded is in many trades not more than fifteen years, while





in some it is ten years or even less. There is often a loss on





the use of a machine unless it earns every year twenty per cent.





on its cost; and when the operation performed by such a machine





costing ?00 adds only a hundredth part to the value of the





material that passes through it -- and this is not an extreme





case -- there will be a loss on its use unless it can be applied





in producing at least ?0,000 worth of goods annually.











6. In many businesses only a small percentage of improvements are





patented. They consist of many small steps, which it would not be





worth while to patent one at a time. Or their chief point lies in





noticing that a certain thing ought to be done; and to patent one





way of doing it, is only to set other people to work to find out





other ways of doing it against which the patent cannot guard. If





one patent is taken out, it is often necessary to "block" it, by





patenting other methods of arriving at the same result; the





patentee does not expect to use them himself, but he wants to





prevent others from using them. All this involves worry and loss





of time and money: and the large manufacturer prefers to keep his





improvement to himself and get what benefit he can by using it.





While if the small manufacturer takes out a patent, he is likely





to be harassed by infringements: and even though he may win "with





costs" the actions in which he tries to defend himself, he is





sure to be ruined by them if they are numerous. It is generally





in the public interest that an improvement should be published,





even though it is at the same time patented. But if it is





patented in England and not in other countries, as is often the





case, English manufacturers may not use it, even though they were





just on the point of finding it out for themselves before it was





patented; while foreign manufacturers learn all about it and can





use it freely.











7. It is a remarkable fact that cotton and some other textile





factories form an exception to the general rule that the capital





required per head of the workers is generally greater in a large





factory than in a small one. The reason is that in most other





businesses the large factory has many things done by expensive





machines which are done by hand in a small factory; so that while





the wages bill is less in proportion to the output in a large





factory than in a small one, the value of the machinery and the





factory space occupied by the machinery is much greater. But in





the simpler branches of the textile trades, small works have the





same machinery as large works have; and since small





steam-engines, etc. are proportionately more expensive than large





ones, they require a greater fixed capital in proportion to their





output than larger factories do; and they are likely to require a





floating capital also rather greater in proportion.











8. See below IV, xii, section 3.











9. Thus Boulton writing in 1770 when he had 700 or 800 persons





employed as metallic artists and workers in tortoiseshell,





stones, glass, and enamel, says: "I have trained up many, and am





training up more, plain country lads into good workmen; and





wherever I find indications of skill and ability, I encourage





them. I have likewise established correspondence with almost





every mercantile town in Europe, and am thus regularly supplied





with orders for the grosser articles in common demand, by which I





am enabled to employ such a number of hands as to provide me with





an ample choice of artists for the finer branches of work: and I





am thus encouraged to erect and employ a more extensive apparatus





than it would be prudent to employ for the production of the





finer articles only." Smiles, Life of Boulton, p. 128.











10. Means to this end and their practical limitations are





discussed in the latter half of the following chapter.











11. A ship's carrying power varies as the cube of her dimensions,





while the resistance offered by the water increases only a little





faster than the square of her dimensions; so that a large ship





requires less coal in proportion to its tonnage than a small one.





It also requires less labour, especially that of navigation:





while to passengers it offers greater safety and comfort, more





choice of company and better professional attendance. In short,





the small ship has no chance of competing with the large ship





between ports which large ships can easily enter, and between





which the traffic is sufficient to enable them to fill up





quickly.











12. It is characteristic of the great economic change of the last





hundred years that when the first railway bills were passed,





provision was made for allowing private individuals to run their





own conveyances on them, just as they do on a highway or a canal;





and now we find it difficult to imagine how people could have





expected, as they certainly did, that this plan would prove a





practicable one.

















Chapter XII











Industrial Organization Continued.





Business Management











    1. Hitherto we have been considering the work of management





chiefly in regard to the operations of a manufacturing or other





business employing a good deal of manual labour. But we now have





to consider more carefully the variety of the functions which





business men discharge; the manner in which they are distributed





among the heads of a large business, and again between different





classes of business which co-operate in allied branches of





production and marketing. And incidentally we have to inquire how





it occurs that, though in manufacturing at least nearly every





individual business, so long as it is well managed, tends to





become stronger the larger it has grown; and though prim?facie





we might therefore expect to see large firms driving their





smaller rivals completely out of many branches of industry, yet





they do not in fact do so.





    "Business" is taken here broadly to include all provision for





the wants of others which is made in the expectation of payment





direct or indirect from those who are to be benefited. It is thus





contrasted with the provision for his wants which each one makes





for himself, and with those kindly services which are prompted by





friendship and family affection.





    The primitive handicraftsman managed his whole business for





himself; but since his customers were with few exceptions his





immediate neighbours, since he required very little capital,





since the plan of production was arranged for him by custom, and





since he had no labour to superintend outside of his own





household, these tasks did not involve any very great mental





strain. He was far from enjoying unbroken prosperity; war and





scarcity were constantly pressing on him and his neighbours,





hindering his work and stopping their demand for his wares. But





he was inclined to take good and evil fortune, like sunshine and





rain, as things beyond his control: his fingers worked on, but





his brain was seldom weary.





    Even in modern England we find now and then a village artisan





who adheres to primitive methods, and makes things on his own





account for sale to his neighbours; managing his own business and





undertaking all its risks. But such cases are rare: the most





striking instances of an adherence to old-fashioned methods of





business are supplied by the learned professions; for a physician





or a solicitor manages as a rule his own business and does all





its work. This plan is not without its disadvantages: much





valuable activity is wasted or turned to but slight account by





some professional men of first-rate ability, who have not the





special aptitude required for obtaining a business connection;





they would be better paid, would lead happier lives, and would do





more good service for the world if their work could be arranged





for them by some sort of a middleman. But yet on the whole things





are probably best as they are: there are sound reasons behind the





popular instinct which distrusts the intrusion of the middleman





in the supply of those services which require the highest and





most delicate mental qualities, and which can have their full





value only where there is complete personal confidence.





    English solicitors however act, if not as employers or





undertakers, yet as agents for hiring that branch of the legal





profession which ranks highest, and whose work involves the





hardest mental strain. Again, many of the best instructors of





youth sell their services, not directly to the consumer, but to





the governing body of a college or school, or to a head master,





who arranges for their purchase: the employer supplies to the





teacher a market for his labour; and is supposed to give to the





purchaser, who may not be a good judge himself, some sort of





guarantee as to the quality of the teaching supplied.





    Again, artists of every kind, however eminent, often find it





to their advantage to employ someone else to arrange for them





with customers; while those of less established repute are





sometimes dependent for their living on capitalist traders, who





are not themselves artists, but who understand how to sell





artistic work to the best advantage.











    2. But in the greater part of the business of the modern





world the task of so directing production that a given effort may





be most effective in supplying human wants has to be broken up





and given into the hands of a specialized body of employers, or





to use a more general term, of business men. They "adventure" or





"undertake" its risks; they bring together the capital and the





labour required for the work; they arrange or "engineer" its





general plan, and superintend its minor details. Looking at





business men from one point of view we may regard them as a





highly skilled industrial grade, from another as middlemen





intervening between the manual worker and the consumer.





    There are some kinds of business men who undertake great





risks, and exercise a large influence over the welfare both of





the producers and of the consumers of the wares in which they





deal, but who are not to any considerable extent direct employers





of labour. The extreme type of these is the dealer on the stock





exchange or the produce markets, whose daily purchases and sales





are of vast dimensions, and who yet has neither factory nor





warehouse, but at most an office with a few clerks in it. The





good and the evil effects of the action of speculators such as





these are however very complex; and we may give our attention at





present to those forms of business in which administration counts





for most and the subtler forms of speculation for least. Let us





then take some illustrations of the more common types of





business, and watch the relations in which the undertaking of





risks stands to the rest of the work of the business man.











    3. The building trade will serve our purpose well, partly





because it adheres in some respects to primitive methods of





business. Late in the Middle Ages it was quite common for a





private person to build a house for himself without the aid of a





master builder; and the habit is not even now altogether extinct.





A person who undertakes his own building must hire separately all





his workmen, he must watch them and check their demands for





payment; he must buy his materials from many quarters, and he





must hire, or dispense with the use of, expensive machinery. He





probably pays more than the current wages; but here others gain





what he loses. There is however great waste in the time he spends





in bargaining with the men and testing and directing their work





by his imperfect knowledge; and again in the time that he spends





in finding out what kinds and quantities he wants of different





materials, and where to get them best, and so on. This waste is





avoided by that division of labour which assigns to the





professional builder the task of superintending details, and to





the professional architect the task of drawing plans.





    The division of labour is often carried still further when





houses are built not at the expense of those who are to live in





them, but as a building speculation. When this is done on a large





scale, as for instance in opening out a new suburb, the stakes at





issue are so large as to offer an attractive field to powerful





capitalists with a very high order of general business ability,





but perhaps with not much technical knowledge of the building





trade. They rely on their own judgment for the decision as to





what are likely to be the coming relations of demand and supply





for different kinds of houses; but they entrust to others the





management of details. They employ architects and surveyors to





make plans in accordance with their general directions; and then





enter into contracts with professional builders for carrying them





out. But they themselves undertake the chief risks of the





business, and control its general direction.











     4. It is well known that this division of responsibility





prevailed in the woollen trade just before the beginning of the





era of large factories: the more speculative work and the broader





risks of buying and selling being taken over by the undertakers,





who were not themselves employers of labour; while the detailed





work of superintendence and the narrower risks of carrying out





definite contracts were handed over to small masters.(1*) This





plan is still extensively followed in some branches of the





textile trades, especially those in which the difficulty of





forecasting the future is very great. Manchester warehousemen





give themselves to studying the movements of fashion, the markets





for raw materials, the general state of trade, of the money





market and of politics, and all other causes that are likely to





influence the prices of different kinds of goods during the





coming season; and after employing, if necessary, skilled





designers to carry out their ideas (just as the building





speculator in the previous case employed architects), they give





out to manufacturers in different parts of the world contracts





for making the goods on which they have determined to risk their





capital.





    In the clothing trades especially we see a revival of what





has been called the "house industry," which prevailed long ago in





the textile industries; that is, the system in which large





undertakers give out work to be done in cottages and very small





workshops to persons who work alone or with the aid of some





members of their family, or who perhaps employ two or three hired





assistants.(2*) In remote villages in almost every county of





England agents of large undertakers come round to give out to the





cottagers partially prepared materials for goods of all sorts,





but especially clothes such as shirts and collars and gloves; and





take back with them the finished goods. It is however in the





great capital cities of the world, and in other large towns,





especially old towns, where there is a great deal of unskilled





and unorganized labour, with a somewhat low physique and morale,





that the system is most fully developed, especially in the





clothing trades, which employ two hundred thousand people in





London alone, and in the cheap furniture trades. There is a





continual contest between the factory and the domestic system,





now one gaining ground and now the other: for instance just at





present the growing use of sewing machines worked by steam power





is strengthening the position of the factories in the boot trade;





while factories and workshops are getting an increased hold of





the tailoring trade. On the other hand the hosiery trade is being





tempted back to the dwelling-house by recent improvements in hand





knitting machines; and it is possible that new methods of





distributing power by gas and petroleum and electric engines may





exercise a like influence on many other industries. Or there may





be a movement towards intermediate plans, similar to those which





are largely followed in the Sheffield trades. Many cutlery firms





for instance put out grinding and other parts of their work, at





piece-work prices, to working men who rent the steam power which





they require, either from the firm from whom they take their





contract or from someone else: these workmen sometimes employing





others to help them, sometimes working alone.





    Again, the foreign merchant very often has no ships of his





own, but gives his mind to studying the course of trade, and





undertakes himself its chief risks; while he gets his carrying





done for him by men who require more administrative ability, but





need not have the same power of forecasting the subtler movements





of trade; though it is true that as purchasers of ships they have





great and difficult trade risks of their own. Again, the broader





risks of publishing a book are borne by the publisher, perhaps in





company with the author; while the printer is the employer of





labour and supplies the expensive types and machinery required





for the business. And a somewhat similar plan is adopted in many





branches of the metal trades, and of those which supply





furniture, clothing, etc.





    Thus there are many ways in which those who undertake the





chief risks of buying and selling may avoid the trouble of





housing and superintending those who work for them. They all have





their advantages; and when the workers are men of strong





character, as at Sheffield, the results are on the whole not





unsatisfactory. But unfortunately it is often the weakest class





of workers, those with the least resource and the least





self-control who drift into work of this kind. The elasticity of





the system which recommends it to the undertaker, is really the





means of enabling him to exercise, if he chooses, an undesirable





pressure on those who do his work.





    For while the success of a factory depends in a great measure





on its having a set of operatives who adhere steadily to it, the





capitalist who gives out work to be done at home has an interest





in retaining a great many persons on his books; he is tempted to





give each of them a little employment occasionally and play them





off one against another; and this he can easily do because they





do not know one another, and cannot arrange concerted action.











    5. When the profits of business are under discussion they are





generally connected in people's minds with the employer of





labour: "the employer" is often taken as a term practically





coextensive with the receiver of business profits. But the





instances which we have just considered are sufficient to





illustrate the truth that the superintendence of labour is but





one side, and often not the most important side of business work;





and that the employer who undertakes the whole risks of his





business really performs two entirely distinct services on behalf





of the community, and requires a twofold ability.





    To return to a class of considerations already noticed (IV,





XI, sections 4 and 5), the manufacturer who makes goods not to





meet special orders but for the general market, must, in his





first role as merchant and organizer of production, have a





thorough knowledge of things in his own trade. He must have the





power of forecasting the broad movements of production and





consumption, of seeing where there is an opportunity for





supplying a new commodity that will meet a real want or improving





the plan of producing an old commodity. He must be able to judge





cautiously and undertake risks boldly; and he must of course





understand the materials and machinery used in his trade.





    But secondly in this role of employer he must be a natural





leader of men. He must have a power of first choosing his





assistants rightly and then trusting them fully; of interesting





them in the business and of getting them to trust him, so as to





bring out whatever enterprise and power of origination there is





in them; while he himself exercises a general control over





everything, and preserves order and unity in the main plan of the





business.





    The abilities required to make an ideal employer are so great





and so numerous that very few persons can exhibit them all in a





very high degree. Their relative importance however varies with





the nature of the industry and the size of the business; and





while one employer excels in one set of qualities, another excels





in another; scarcely any two owe their success to exactly the





same combination of advantages. Some men make their way by the





use of none but noble qualities, while others owe their





prosperity to qualities in which there is very little that is





really admirable except sagacity and strength of purpose.





    Such then being the general nature of the work of business





management, we have next to inquire what opportunities different





classes of people have of developing business ability; and, when





they have obtained that, what opportunities they have of getting





command over the capital required to give it scope. We may thus





come a little closer to the problem stated at the beginning of





the chapter, and examine the course of development of a business





firm during several consecutive generations. And this inquiry may





conveniently be combined with some examination of the different





forms of business management. Hitherto we have considered almost





exclusively that form in which the whole responsibility and





control rests in the hands of a single individual. But this form





is yielding ground to others in which the supreme authority is





distributed among several partners or even a great number of





shareholders. Private firms and joint-stock companies,





co-operative societies and public corporations are taking a





constantly increasing share in the management of business; and





one chief reason of this is that they offer an attractive field





to people who have good business abilities, but have not





inherited any great business opportunities.











    6. It is obvious that the son of a man already established in





business starts with very great advantages over others. He has





from his youth up special facilities for obtaining the knowledge





and developing the faculties that are required in the management





of his father's business: he learns quietly and almost





unconsciously about men and manners in his father's trade and in





those from which that trade buys and to which it sells; he gets





to know the relative importance and the real significance of the





various problems and anxieties which occupy his father's mind:





and he acquires a technical knowledge of the processes and the





machinery of the trade.(3*) Some of what he learns will be





applicable only to his father's trade; but the greater part will





be serviceable in any trade that is in any way allied with that;





while those general faculties of judgment and resource, of





enterprise and caution, of firmness and courtesy, which are





trained by association with those who control the larger issues





of any one trade, will go a long way towards fitting him for





managing almost any other trade. Further, the sons of successful





business men start with more material capital than almost anyone





else except those who by nurture and education are likely to be





disinclined for business and unfitted for it: and if they





continue their fathers' work, they have also the vantage ground





of established trade connections.





    It would therefore at first sight seem likely that business





men should constitute a sort of caste; dividing out among their





sons the chief posts of command, and founding hereditary





dynasties, which should rule certain branches of trade for many





generations together. But the actual state of things is very





different. For when a man has got together a great business, his





descendants often fail, in spite of their great advantages, to





develop the high abilities and the special turn of mind and





temperament required for carrying it on with equal success. He





himself was probably brought up by parents of strong earnest





character; and was educated by their personal influence and by





struggle with difficulties in early life. But his children, at





all events if they were born after he became rich, and in any





case his grandchildren, are perhaps left a good deal to the care





of domestic servants who are not of the same strong fibre as the





parents by whose influence he was educated. And while his highest





ambition was probably success in business, they are likely to be





at least equally anxious for social or academic distinction.(4*)





    For a time indeed all may go well. His sons find a firmly





established trade connection, and what is perhaps even more





important, a well-chosen staff of subordinates with a generous





interest in the business. By mere assiduity and caution, availing





themselves of the traditions of the firm, they may hold together





for a long time. But when a full generation has passed, when the





old traditions are no longer a safe guide, and when the bonds





that held together the old staff have been dissolved, then the





business almost invariably falls to pieces unless it is





practically handed over to the management of new men who have





meanwhile risen to partnership in the firm. But in most cases his





descendants arrive at this result by a shorter route. They prefer





an abundant income coming to them without effort on their part,





to one which though twice as large could be earned only by





incessant toil and anxiety; and they sell the business to private





persons or a joint-stock company; or they become sleeping





partners in it; that is sharing in its risks and in its profits,





but not taking part in its management: in either case the active





control over their capital falls chiefly into the hands of new





men.











    7. The oldest and simplest plan for renovating the energies





of a business is that of taking into partnership some of its





ablest employees. The autocratic owner and manager of a large





manufacturing or trading concern finds that, as years go on, he





has to delegate more and more responsibility to his chief





subordinates; partly because the work to be done is growing





heavier, and partly because his own strength is becoming less





than it was. He still exercises a supreme control, but much must





depend on their energy and probity: so, if his sons are not old





enough, or for any other reason are not ready to take part of the





burden off his shoulders, he decides to take one of his trusted





assistants into partnership: he thus lightens his own labours, at





the same time that he secures that the task of his life will be





carried on by those whose habits he has moulded, and for whom he





has perhaps acquired something like a fatherly affection.(5*)





    But there are now, and there always have been, private





partnerships on more equal terms, two or more people of about





equal wealth and ability combining their resources for a large





and difficult undertaking. In such cases there is often a





distinct partition of the work of management: in manufactures for





instance one partner will sometimes give himself almost





exclusively to the work of buying raw material and selling the





finished product, while the other is responsible for the





management of the factory: and in a trading establishment one





partner will control the wholesale and the other the retail





department. In these and other ways private partnership is





capable of adapting itself to a great variety of problems: it is





very strong and very elastic; it has played a great part in the





past, and it is full of vitality now.











    8. But from the end of the Middle Ages to the present time





there has been in some classes of trades a movement towards the





substitution of public joint-stock companies, the shares of which





can be sold to anybody in the open market, for private companies,





the shares in which are not transferable without the leave of all





concerned. The effect of this change has been to induce people,





many of whom having no special knowledge of trade, to give their





capital into the hands of others employed by them: and there has





thus arisen a new distribution of the various parts of the work





of business management.





    The ultimate undertakers of the risks incurred by a





joint-stock company are the shareholders; but as a rule they do





not take much active part in engineering the business and





controlling its general policy; and they take no part in





superintending its details. After the business has once got out





of the hands of its original promoters, the control of it is left





chiefly in the hands of Directors; who, if the company is a very





large one, probably own but a very small proportion of its





shares, while the greater part of them have not much technical





knowledge of the work to be done. They are not generally expected





to give their whole time to it; but they are supposed to bring





wide general knowledge and sound judgment to bear on the broader





problems of its policy; and at the same time to make sure that





the "Managers" of the company are doing their work





thoroughly.(6*) To the Managers and their assistants is left a





great part of the work of engineering the business, and the whole





of the work of superintending it: but they are not required to





bring any capital into it; and they are supposed to be promoted





from the lower ranks to the higher according to their zeal and





ability. Since the joint-stock companies in the United Kingdom do





a very great part of the business of all kinds that is done in





the country, they offer very large opportunities to men with





natural talents for business management, who have not inherited





any material capital, or any business connection.











    9. Joint-stock companies have great elasticity and can expand





themselves without limit when the work to which they have set





themselves offers a wide scope; and they are gaining ground in





nearly all directions. But they have one great source of weakness





in the absence of any adequate knowledge of the business on the





part of the shareholders who undertake its chief risks. It is





true that the head of a large private firm undertakes the chief





risks of the business, while he entrusts many of its details to





others; but his position is secured by his power of forming a





direct judgment as to whether his subordinates serve his





interests faithfully and discreetly. If those to whom he has





entrusted the buying or selling of goods for him take commissions





from those with whom they deal, he is in a position to discover





and punish the fraud. If they show favouritism and promote





incompetent relations or friends of their own, or if they





themselves become idle and shirk their work, or even if they do





not fulfil the promise of exceptional ability which induced him





to give them their first lift, he can discover what is going





wrong and set it right.





    But in all these matters the great body of the shareholders





of a joint-stock company are, save in a few exceptional





instances, almost powerless; though a few of the larger





shareholders often exert themselves to find out what is going on;





and are thus able to exercise an effective and wise control over





the general management of the business. It is a strong proof of





the marvellous growth in recent times of a spirit of honesty and





uprightness in commercial matters, that the leading officers of





great public companies yield as little as they do to the vast





temptations to fraud which lie in their way. If they showed an





eagerness to avail themselves of opportunities for wrong-doing at





all approaching that of which we read in the commercial history





of earlier civilization, their wrong uses of the trusts imposed





in them would have been on so great a scale as to prevent the





development of this democratic form of business. There is every





reason to hope that the progress of trade morality will continue,





aided in the future as it has been in the past, by a diminution





of trade secrecy and by increased publicity in every form; and





thus collective and democratic forms of business management may





be able to extend themselves safely in many directions in which





they have hitherto failed, and may far exceed the great services





they already render in opening a large career to those who have





no advantages of birth.





    The same may be said of the undertakings of Governments





imperial and local: they also may have a great future before





them, but up to the present time the tax-payer who undertakes the





ultimate risks has not generally succeeded in exercising an





efficient control over the businesses, and in securing officers





who will do their work with as much energy and enterprise as is





shown in private establishments.





    The problems of large joint-stock company administration, as





well as of Governmental business, involve however many complex





issues into which we cannot enter here. They are urgent, because





very large businesses have recently increased fast, though





perhaps not quite so fast as is commonly supposed. The change has





been brought about chiefly by the development of processes and





methods in manufacture and mining, in transport and banking,





which are beyond the reach of any, and by the increase in the





scope but very large capitals; and functions of markets, and in





the technical facilities for handling large masses of goods. The





democratic element in Governmental enterprise was at first almost





wholly vivifying: but experience shows creative ideas and





experiments in business technique, and in business organization,





to be very rare in Governmental undertakings, and not very common





in private enterprises which have drifted towards bureaucratic





methods as the result of their great age and large size. A new





danger is thus threatened by the narrowing of the field of





industry which is open to the vigorous initiative of smaller





businesses.





    Production on the largest scale of all is to be seen chiefly





in the United States, where giant businesses, with some touch of





monopoly, are commonly called "trusts." Some of these trusts have





grown from a single root. But most of them have been developed by





the amalgamation of many independent businesses; and a first step





towards this combination was generally an association, or





"cartel" to use a German term, of a rather loose kind.











    10. The system of cooperation aims at avoiding the evils of





these two methods of business management. In that ideal form of





co-operative society, for which many still fondly hope, but which





as yet has been scantily realized in practice, a part or the





whole of those shareholders who undertake the risks of the





business are themselves employed by it. The employees, whether





they contribute towards the material capital of the business or





not, have a share in its profits, and some power of voting at the





general meetings at which the broad lines of its policy are laid





down, and the officers appointed who are to carry that policy





into effect. They are thus the employers and masters of their own





managers and foremen; they have fairly good means of judging





whether the higher work of engineering the business is conducted





honestly and efficiently, and they have the best possible





opportunities for detecting any laxity or incompetence in its





detailed administration. And lastly they render unnecessary some





of the minor work of superintendence that is required in other





establishments; for their own pecuniary interests and the pride





they take in the success of their own business make each of them





averse to any shirking of work either by himself or by his





fellow-workmen.





    But unfortunately the system has very great difficulties of





its own. For human nature being what it is, the employees





themselves are not always the best possible masters of their own





foremen and managers; jealousies and frettings at reproof are apt





to act like sand, that has got mixed with the oil in the bearings





of a great and complex machinery. The hardest work of business





management is generally that which makes the least outward show;





those who work with their hands are apt to underrate the





intensity of the strain involved in the highest work of





engineering the business, and to grudge its being paid for at





anything like as high a rate as it could earn elsewhere. And in





fact the managers of a co-operative society seldom have the





alertness, the inventiveness and the ready versatility of the





ablest of those men who have been selected by the struggle for





survival, and who have been trained by the free and unfettered





responsibility of private business. Partly for these reasons the





co-operative system has seldom been carried out in its entirety.





and its partial application has not yet attained a conspicuous





success except in retailing commodities consumed by working men.





But within the last few years more hopeful signs have appeared of





the success of bon?fide productive associations, or





"co-partnerships."





    Those working men indeed whose tempers are strongly





individualistic, and whose minds are concentrated almost wholly





on their own affairs, will perhaps always find their quickest and





most congenial path to material success by commencing business as





small independent "undertakers," or by working their way upwards





in a private firm or a public company. But co-operation has a





special charm for those in whose tempers the social element is





stronger, and who desire not to separate themselves from their





old comrades, but to work among them as their leaders. Its





aspirations may in some respects be higher than its practice; but





it undoubtedly does rest in great measure on ethical motives. The





true co-operator combines a keen business intellect with a spirit





full of an earnest faith; and some co-operative societies have





been served excellently by men of great genius both mentally and





morally -- men who for the sake of the co-operative faith that is





in them, have worked with great ability and energy, and with





perfect uprightness, being all the time content with lower pay





than they could have got as business managers on their own





account or for a private firm. Men of this stamp are more common





among the officers of co-operative societies than in other





occupations; and though they are not very common even there, yet





it may be hoped that the diffusion of a better knowledge of the





true principles of co-operation, and the increase of general





education, are every day fitting a larger number of co-operators





for the complex problems of business management.





    Meanwhile many partial applications of the co-operative





principle are being tried under various conditions, each of which





presents some new aspect of business management. Thus under the





scheme of Profit-Sharing, a private firm while retaining the





unfettered management of its business, pays its employees the





full market rate of wages, whether by Time or Piece-work, and





agrees in addition to divide among them a certain share of any





profits that may be made above a fixed minimum; it being hoped





that the firm will find a material as well as a moral reward in





the diminution of friction, in the increased willingness of its





employees to go out of their way to do little things that may be





of great benefit comparatively to the firm, and lastly in





attracting to itself workers of more than average ability and





industry.(7*)





    Another partially co-operative scheme is that of some Oldham





cotton-mills: they are really joint-stock companies; but among





their shareholders are many working men who have a special





knowledge of the trade, though they often prefer not to be





employed in the mills of which they are part owners. And another





is that of the Productive establishments, owned by the main body





of co-operative stores, through their agents, the Co-operative





Wholesale Societies. In the Scotch Wholesale, but not in the





English, the workers, as such, have some share in the management





and in the profits of the works.





    At a later stage we shall have to study all those various





co-operative and semi-co-operative forms of business more in





detail, and to inquire into the causes of their success or





failure in different classes of business, wholesale and retail,





agricultural, manufacturing and trading. But we must not pursue





this inquiry further now. Enough has been said to show that the





world is only just beginning to be ready for the higher work of





the co-operative movement; and that its many different forms may





therefore be reasonably expected to attain a larger success in





the future than in the past; and to offer excellent opportunities





for working men to practise themselves in the work of business





management, to grow into the trust and confidence of others, and





gradually rise to posts in which their business abilities will





find scope.











    11. In speaking of the difficulty that a working man has in





rising to a post in which he can turn his business ability to





full account, the chief stress is commonly laid upon his want of





capital: but this is not always his chief difficulty. For





instance the co-operative distributive societies have accumulated





a vast capital, on which they find it difficult to get a good





rate of interest; and which they would be rejoiced to lend to any





set of working men who could show that they had the capacity for





dealing with difficult business problems. Co-operators who have





firstly a high order of business ability and probity, and





secondly the "personal capital" of a great reputation among their





fellows for these qualities, will have no difficulty in getting





command of enough material capital for a considerable





undertaking: the real difficulty is to convince a sufficient





number of those around them that they have these rare qualities.





And the case is not very different when an individual endeavours





to obtain from the ordinary sources the loan of the capital





required to start him in business.





    It is true that in almost every business there is a constant





increase in the amount of capital required to make a fair start;





but there is a much more rapid increase in the amount of capital





which is owned by people who do not want to use it themselves,





and are so eager to lend it out that they will accept a





constantly lower and lower rate of interest for it. Much of this





capital passes into the hands of bankers who promptly lend it to





anyone of whose business ability and honesty they are convinced.





To say nothing of the credit that can be got in many businesses





from those who supply the requisite raw material or stock in





trade, the opportunities for direct borrowing are now so great





that a moderate increase in the amount of capital required for a





start in business is no very serious obstacle in the way of a





person who has once got over the initial difficulty of earning a





reputation for being likely to use it well.





    But perhaps a greater though less conspicuous hindrance to





the rise of the working man is the growing complexity of





business. The head of a business has now to think of many things





about which he never used to trouble himself in earlier days; and





these are just the kind of difficulties for which the training of





the workshop affords the least preparation. Against this must be





set the rapid improvement of the education of the working man not





only at school, but what is more important, in after life by





newspapers, and from the work of co-operative societies and





trades-unions, and in other ways.





    About three-fourths of the whole population of England belong





to the wage-earning classes; and at all events when they are well





fed, properly housed and educated, they have their fair share of





that nervous strength which is the raw material of business





ability. Without going out of their way they are all consciously





or unconsciously competitors for posts of business command. The





ordinary workman if he shows ability generally becomes a foreman,





from that he may rise to be a manager, and to be taken into





partnership with his employer. Or having saved a little of his





own he may start one of those small shops which still can hold





their own in a working man's quarter, stock it chiefly on credit,





and let his wife attend to it by day, while he gives his evenings





to it. In these or in other ways he may increase his capital till





he can start a small workshop, or factory. Once having made a





good beginning he will find the banks eager to give him generous





credit. He must have time; and since he is not likely to start in





business till after middle age he must have a long as well as a





strong life; but if he has this and has also "patience, genius





and good fortune" he is pretty sure to command a goodly capital





before he dies.(8*) In a factory those who work with their hands





have better opportunities of rising to posts of command than the





book-keepers and many others to whom social tradition has





assigned a higher place. But in trading concerns it is otherwise;





what manual work is done in them has as a rule no educating





character, while the experience of the office is better adapted





for preparing a man to manage a commercial than a manufacturing





business.





    There is then on the whole a broad movement from below





upwards. Perhaps not so many as formerly rise at once from the





position of working men to that of employers: but there are more





who get on sufficiently far to give their sons a good chance of





attaining to the highest posts. The complete rise is not so very





often accomplished in one generation; it is more often spread





over two; but the total volume of the movement upwards is





probably greater than it has ever been. And perhaps it is better





for society as a whole that the rise should be distributed over





two generations. The workmen who at the beginning of the last





century rose in such large numbers to become employers were





seldom fit for posts of command: they were too often harsh and





tyrannical; they lost their self-control, and were neither truly





noble nor truly happy; while their children were often haughty,





extravagant, and self-indulgent, squandering their wealth on low





and vulgar amusements, having the worst faults of the older





aristocracy without their virtues. The foreman or superintendent





who has still to obey as well as to command, but who is rising





and sees his children likely to rise further, is in some ways





more to be envied than the small master. His success is less





conspicuous, but his work is often higher and more important for





the world, while his character is more gentle and refined and not





less strong. His children are well-trained; and if they get





wealth, they are likely to make a fairly good use of it.





    It must however be admitted that the rapid extension of vast





businesses, and especially of joint-stock companies in many





branches of industry, is tending to make the able and thrifty





workman, with high ambitions for his sons, seek to put them to





office work. There they are in danger of losing the physical





vigour and the force of character which attaches to constructive





work with the hands, and to become commonplace members of the





lower middle classes. But, if they can keep their force





unimpaired, they are likely to become leaders in the world,





though not generally in their father's industry; and therefore





without the benefit of specially appropriate traditions and





aptitude.











    12. When a man of great ability is once at the head of an





independent business, whatever be the route by which he has got





there, he will with moderate good fortune soon be able to show





such evidence of his power of turning capital to good account as





to enable him to borrow in one way or another almost any amount





that he may need. Making good profits he adds to his own capital,





and this extra capital of his own is a material security for





further borrowings; while the fact that he has made it himself





tends to make lenders less careful to insist on a full security





for their loans. Of course fortune tells for much in business: a





very able man may find things going against him; the fact that he





is losing money may diminish his power of borrowing. If he is





working partly on borrowed capital, it may even make those who





have lent it refuse to renew their loans, and may thus cause him





to succumb to what would have been but a passing misfortune, if





he had been using no capital but his own:(9*) and in fighting his





way upwards he may have a chequered life full of great anxieties,





and even misfortunes. But he can show his ability in misfortune





as well as in success: human nature is sanguine; and it is





notorious that men are abundantly willing to lend to those who





have passed through commercial disaster without loss to their





business reputation. Thus, in spite of vicissitudes, the able





business man generally finds that in the long run the capital at





his command grows in proportion to his ability.





    Meanwhile, as we have seen, he, who with small ability is in





command of a large capital, speedily loses it: he may perhaps be





one who could and would have managed a small business with





credit, and left it stronger than he had found it: but if he has





not the genius for dealing with great problems, the larger it is





the more speedily will he break it up. For as a rule a large





business can be kept going only by transactions which, after





allowing for ordinary risks, leave but a very small percentage of





gain. A small profit on a large turn-over quickly made, will





yield a rich income to able men: and in those businesses which





are of such a nature as to give scope to very large capitals,





competition generally cuts the rate of profits on the turn-over





very fine. A village trader may make five per cent. less profits





on his turn-over than his abler rival, and yet be able to hold





his head above water. But in those large manufacturing and





trading businesses in which there is a quick return and a





straightforward routine, the whole profits on the turn-over are





often so very small that a person who falls behind his rivals by





even a small percentage loses a large sum at every turn-over;





while in those large businesses which are difficult and do not





rely on routine, and which afford high profits on the turn-over





to really able management, there are no profits at all to be got





by anyone who attempts the task with only ordinary ability.





    These two sets of forces, the one increasing the capital at





the command of able men, and the other destroying the capital





that is in the hands of weaker men, bring about the result that





there is a far more close correspondence between the ability of





business men and the size of the businesses which they own than





at first sight would appear probable. And when to this fact we





add all the many routes, which we have already discussed, by





which a man of great natural business ability can work his way up





high in some private firm or public company, we may conclude that





wherever there is work on a large scale to be done in such a





country as England, the ability and the capital required for it





are pretty sure to be speedily forthcoming.





    Further, just as industrial skill and ability are getting





every day to depend more and more on the broad faculties of





judgment, promptness, resource, carefulness and steadfastness of





purpose -- faculties which are not specialized to any one trade,





but which are more or less useful in all -- so it is with regard





to business ability. In fact business ability consists more of





these non-specialized faculties than do industrial skill and





ability in the lower grades: and the higher the grade of business





ability the more various are its applications.





    Since then business ability in command of capital moves with





great ease horizontally from a trade which is overcrowded to one





which offers good openings for it: and since it moves with great





ease vertically, the abler men rising to the higher posts in





their own trade, we see, even at this early stage of our inquiry,





some good reasons for believing that in modern England the supply





of business ability in command of capital accommodates itself, as





a general rule, to the demand for it; and thus has a fairly





defined supply price.





    Finally, we may regard this supply price of business ability





in command of capital as composed of three elements. The first is





the supply price of capital; the second is the supply price of





business ability and energy; and the third is the supply price of





that organization by which the appropriate business ability and





the requisite capital are brought together. We have called the





price of the first of these three elements interest; we may call





the price of the second taken by itself net earnings of





management, and that of the second and third, taken together,





gross earnings of management.











NOTES:











1. Compare Appendix A, section 13.











2. German economists call this "factory like" (fabrikmssig)





house industry, as distinguished from the "national" house





industry, which uses the intervals of other work (especially the





winter interruptions of agriculture) for subsidiary work in





making textile and other goods. (See Schnberg on Gewerbe in his





Handbuch.) Domestic workers of this last class were common all





over Europe in the Middle Ages but are now becoming rare except





in the mountains and in eastern Europe. They are not always well





advised in their choice of work; and much of what they make could





be made better with far less labour in factories, so that it





cannot be sold profitably in the open market: but for the most





part they make for their own or their neighbours' use, and thus





save the profits of a series of middlemen. Compare Survival of





Domestic Industries by Gonner in the Economic Journal, Vol. II.











3. We have already noticed how almost the only perfect





apprenticeships of modern times are those of the sons of





manufacturers, who practise almost every important operation that





is carried on in the works sufficiently to be able in after years





to enter into the difficulties of all their employees and form a





fair judgment on their work.











4. Until lately there has ever been in England a kind of





antagonism between academic studies and business. This is now





being diminished by the broadening of the spirit of our great





universities, and by the growth of colleges in our chief business





centres. The sons of business men when sent to the universities





do not learn to despise their fathers' trades as often as they





used to do even a generation ago. Many of them indeed are drawn





away from business by the desire to extend the boundaries of





knowledge. But the higher forms of mental activity, those which





are constructive and not merely critical, tend to promote a just





appreciation of the nobility of business work rightly done.











5. Much of the happiest romance of life, much that is most





pleasant to dwell upon in the social history of England from the





Middle Ages up to our own day is connected with the story of





private partnerships of this class. Many a youth has been





stimulated to a brave career by the influence of ballads and





tales which narrate the difficulties and the ultimate triumph of





the faithful apprentice, who has at length been taken into





partnership, perhaps on marrying his employer's daughter. There





are no influences on national character more far-reaching than





those which thus give shape to the aims of aspiring youth.











6. Bagehot delighted to argue (see for instance English





Constitution, ch. VII) that a Cabinet Minister often derives some





advantage from his want of technical knowledge of the business of





his Department. For he can get information on matters of detail





from the Permanent Secretary and other officials who are under





his authority; and, while he is not likely to set his judgment





against theirs on matters where their knowledge gives them the





advantage, his unprejudiced common sense may well overrule the





traditions of officialism in broad questions of public policy:





and in like manner the interests of a company may possibly





sometimes be most advanced by those Directors who have the least





technical knowledge of the details of its business.











7. Compare Schloss, Methods of Industrial Remuneration; and





Gilman, A Dividend to Labour.











8. The Germans say that success in business requires "Geld,





Geduld, Genie und Glck." The chances that a working man has of





rising vary somewhat with the nature of the work, being greatest





in those trades in which a careful attention to details counts





for most, and a wide knowledge, whether of science or of the





world movements of speculation, counts for least. Thus for





instance "thrift and the knowledge of practical details" are the





most important elements of success in the ordinary work of the





pottery trade; and in consequence most of those who have done





well in it "have risen from the bench like Josiah Wedgwood" (see





G. Wedgwood's evidence before the Commission on Technical





Education); and a similar statement might be made about many of





the Sheffield trades. But some of the working classes develop a





great faculty for taking speculative risks; and if the knowledge





of facts by which successful speculation must be guided, comes





within their reach, they will often push their way through





competitors who have started above them. Some of the most





successful wholesale dealers in perishable commodities such as





fish and fruit have begun life as market porters.











9. The danger of not being able to renew his borrowings just at





the time when he wants them most, puts him at a disadvantage





relatively to those who use only their own capital, much greater





than is represented by the mere interest on his borrowings: and,





when we come to that part of the doctrine of distribution which





deals with earnings of management, we shall find that, for this





among other reasons, profits are something more than interest in





addition to net earnings of management, i.e. those earnings which





are properly to be ascribed to the abilities of business men.

















Chapter XIII











Conclusion.





Correlation of the Tendencies to Increasing and to Diminishing





Return











    1. At the beginning of this Book we saw how the extra return





of raw produce which nature affords to an increased application





of capital and labour, other things being equal, tends in the





long run to diminish. In the remainder of the Book and especially





in the last four chapters we have looked at the other side of the





shield, and seen how man's power of productive work increases





with the volume of the work that he does. Considering first the





causes that govern the supply of labour, we saw how every





increase in the physical, mental and moral vigour of a people





makes them more likely, other things being equal, to rear to





adult age a large number of vigorous children. Turning next to





the growth of wealth, we observed how every increase of wealth





tends in many ways to make a greater increase more easy than





before. And lastly we saw how every increase of wealth and every





increase in the numbers and intelligence of the people increased





the facilities for a highly developed industrial organization,





which in its turn adds much to the collective efficiency of





capital and labour.





    Looking more closely at the economies arising from an





increase in the scale of production of any kind of goods, we





found that they fell into two classes -- those dependent on the





general development of the industry, and those dependent on the





resources of the individual houses of business engaged in it and





the efficiency of their management; that is, into external and





internal economies.





    We saw how these latter economies are liable to constant





fluctuations so far as any particular house is concerned. An able





man, assisted perhaps by some strokes of good fortune, gets a





firm footing in the trade, he works hard and lives sparely, his





own capital grows fast, and the credit that enables him to borrow





more capital grows still faster; he collects around him





subordinates of more than ordinary zeal and ability; as his





business increases they rise with him, they trust him and he





trusts them, each of them devotes himself with energy to just





that work for which he is specially fitted, so that no high





ability is wasted on easy work, and no difficult work is





entrusted to unskilful hands. Corresponding to this steadily





increasing economy of skill, the growth of his business brings





with it similar economies of specialized machines and plant of





all kinds; every improved process is quickly adopted and made the





basis of further improvements; success brings credit and credit





brings success; credit and success help to retain old customers





and to bring new ones; the increase of his trade gives him great





advantages in buying; his goods advertise one another, and thus





diminish his difficulty in finding a vent for them. The increase





in the scale of his business increases rapidly the advantages





which he has over his competitors, and lowers the price at which





he can afford to sell. This process may go on as long as his





energy and enterprise, his inventive and organizing power retain





their full strength and freshness, and so long as the risks which





are inseparable from business do not cause him exceptional





losses; and if it could endure for a hundred years, he and one or





two others like him would divide between them the whole of that





branch of industry in which he is engaged. The large scale of





their production would put great economies within their reach;





and provided they competed to their utmost with one another, the





public would derive the chief benefit of these economies, and the





price of the commodity would fall very low.





    But here we may read a lesson from the young trees of the





forest as they struggle upwards through the benumbing shade of





their older rivals. Many succumb on the way, and a few only





survive; those few become stronger with every year, they get a





larger share of light and air with every increase of their





height, and at last in their turn they tower above their





neighbours, and seem as though they would grow on for ever, and





for ever become stronger as they grow. But they do not. One tree





will last longer in full vigour and attain a greater size than





another; but sooner or later age tells on them all. Though the





taller ones have a better access to light and air than their





rivals, they gradually lose vitality; and one after another they





give place to others, which, though of less material strength,





have on their side the vigour of youth.





    And as with the growth of trees, so was it with the growth of





businesses as a general rule before the great recent development





of vast joint-stock companies, which often stagnate, but do not





readily die. Now that rule is far from universal, but it still





holds in many industries and trades. Nature still presses on the





private business by limiting the length of the life of its





original founders, and by limiting even more narrowly that part





of their lives in which their faculties retain full vigour. And





so, after a while, the guidance of the business falls into the





hands of people with less energy and less creative genius, if not





with less active interest in its prosperity. If it is turned into





a joint-stock company, it may retain the advantages of division





of labour, of specialized skill and machinery: it may even





increase them by a further increase of its capital; and under





favourable conditions it may secure a permanent and prominent





place in the work of production. But it is likely to have lost so





much of its elasticity and progressive force, that the advantages





are no longer exclusively on its side in its competition with





younger and smaller rivals.





    When therefore we are considering the broad results which the





growth of wealth and population exert on the economies of





production, the general character of our conclusions is not very





much affected by the facts that many of these economies depend





directly on the size of the individual establishments engaged in





the production, and that in almost every trade there is a





constant rise and fall of large businesses, at any one moment





some firms being in the ascending phase and others in the





descending. For in times of average prosperity decay in one





direction is sure to be more than balanced by growth in another.





    Meanwhile an increase in the aggregate scale of production of





course increases those economies, which do not directly depend on





the size of individual houses of business. The most important of





these results from the growth of correlated branches of industry





which mutually assist one another, perhaps being concentrated in





the same localities, but anyhow availing themselves of the modern





facilities for communication offered by steam transport, by the





telegraph and by the printing-press. The economies arising from





such sources as this, which are accessible to any branch of





production, do not depend exclusively upon its own growth: but





yet they are sure to grow rapidly and steadily with that growth;





and they are sure to dwindle in some, though not in all respects,





if it decays.











    2. These results will be of great importance when we come to





discuss the causes which govern the supply price of a commodity.





We shall have to analyse carefully the normal cost of producing a





commodity, relatively to a given aggregate volume of production;





and for this purpose we shall have to study the expenses of a





representative producer for that aggregate volume. On the one





hand we shall not want to select some new producer just





struggling into business, who works under many disadvantages, and





has to be content for a time with little or no profits, but who





is satisfied with the fact that he is establishing a connection





and taking the first steps towards building up a successful





business; nor on the other hand shall we want to take a firm





which by exceptionally long-sustained ability and good fortune





has got together a vast business, and huge well-ordered workshops





that give it a superiority over almost all its rivals. But our





representative firm must be one which has had a fairly long life,





and fair success, which is managed with normal ability, and which





has normal access to the economies, external and internal, which





belong to that aggregate volume of production; account being





taken of the class of goods produced, the conditions of marketing





them and the economic environment generally.





    Thus a representative firm is in a sense an average firm. But





there are many ways in which the term "average" might be





interpreted in connection with a business. And a Representative





firm is that particular sort of average firm, at which we need to





look in order to see how far the economies, internal and





external, of production on a large scale have extended generally





in the industry and country in question. We cannot see this by





looking at one or two firms taken at random: but we can see it





fairly well by selecting, after a broad survey, a firm, whether





in private or joint-stock management (or better still, more than





one), that represents, to the best of our judgment, this





particular average.





    The general argument of the present Book shows that an





increase in the aggregate volume of production of anything will





generally increase the size, and therefore the internal economies





possessed by such a representative firm; that it will always





increase the external economies to which the firm has access; and





thus will enable it to manufacture at a less proportionate cost





of labour and sacrifice than before.





    In other words, we say broadly that while the part which





nature plays in production shows a tendency to diminishing





return, the part which man plays shows a tendency to increasing





return. The law of increasing return may be worded thus: -- An





increase of labour and capital leads generally to improved





organization, which increases the efficiency of the work of





labour and capital.





    Therefore in those industries which are not engaged in





raising raw produce an increase of labour and capital generally





gives a return increased more than in proportion; and further





this improved organization tends to diminish or even override any





increased resistance which nature may offer to raising increased





amounts of raw produce. If the actions of the laws of increasing





and diminishing return are balanced we have the law of constant





return, and an increased produce is obtained by labour and





sacrifice increased just in proportion.





    For the two tendencies towards increasing and diminishing





return press constantly against one another. In the production of





wheat and wool, for instance, the latter tendency has almost





exclusive sway in an old country, which cannot import freely. In





turning the wheat into flour, or the wool into blankets, an





increase in the aggregate volume of production brings some new





economies, but not many; for the trades of grinding wheat and





making blankets are already on so great a scale that any new





economies that they may attain are more likely to be the result





of new inventions than of improved organization. In a country





however in which the blanket trade is but slightly developed,





these latter may be important; and then it may happen that an





increase in the aggregate production of blankets diminishes the





proportionate difficulty of manufacturing by just as much as it





increases that of raising the raw material. In that case the





actions of the laws of diminishing and of increasing return would





just neutralize one another; and blankets would conform to the





law of constant return. But in most of the more delicate branches





of manufacturing, where the cost of raw material counts for





little, and in most of the modern transport industries the law of





increasing return acts almost unopposed.(1*)





    Increasing Return is a relation between a quantity of effort





and sacrifice on the one hand, and a quantity of product on the





other. The quantities cannot be taken out exactly, because





changing methods of production call for machinery, and for





unskilled and skilled labour of new kinds and in new proportions.





But, taking a broad view, we may perhaps say vaguely that the





output of a certain amount of labour and capital in an industry





has increased by perhaps a quarter or a third in the last twenty





years. To measure outlay and output in terms of money is a





tempting, but a dangerous resource: for a comparison of money





outlay with money returns is apt to slide into an estimate of the





rate of profit on capital.(2*)











    3. We may now sum up provisionally the relations of





industrial expansion to social wellbeing. A rapid growth of





population has often been accompanied by unhealthy and enervating





habits of life in overcrowded towns. And sometimes it has started





badly, outrunning the material resources of the people, causing





them with imperfect appliances to make excessive demands on the





soil; and so to call forth the stern action of the law of





diminishing return as regards raw produce, without having the





power of minimizing its effects. Having thus begun with poverty,





an increase in numbers may go on to its too frequent consequences





in that weakness of character which unfits a people for





developing a highly organized industry.





    These are serious perils: but yet it remains true that the





collective efficiency of a people with a given average of





individual strength and energy may increase more than in





proportion to their numbers. If they can for a time escape from





the pressure of the law of diminishing return by importing food





and other raw produce on easy terms; if their wealth is not





consumed in great wars, and increases at least as fast as their





numbers; and if they avoid habits of life that would enfeeble





them; then every increase in their numbers is likely for the time





to be accompanied by a more than proportionate increase in their





power of obtaining material goods. For it enables them to secure





the many various economies of specialized skill and specialized





machinery, of localized industries and production on a large





scale: it enables them to have increased facilities of





communication of all kinds; while the very closeness of their





neighbourhood diminishes the expense of time and effort involved





in every sort of traffic between them, and gives them new





opportunities of getting social enjoyments and the comforts and





luxuries of culture in every form. No doubt deduction must be





made for the growing difficulty of finding solitude and quiet and





even fresh air: but there is in most cases some balance of





good.(3*)





    Taking account of the fact that an increasing density of





population generally brings with it access to new social





enjoyments we may give a rather broader scope to this statement





and say: -- An increase of population accompanied by an equal





increase in the material sources of enjoyment and aids to





production is likely to lead to a more than proportionate





increase in the aggregate income of enjoyment of all kinds;





provided firstly, an adequate supply of raw produce can be





obtained without great difficulty, and secondly there is no such





overcrowding as causes physical and moral vigour to be impaired





by the want of fresh air and light and of healthy and joyous





recreation for the young.





    The accumulated wealth of civilized countries is at present





growing faster than the population: and though it may be true





that the wealth per head would increase somewhat faster if the





population did not increase quite so fast; yet as a matter of





fact an increase of population is likely to continue to be





accompanied by a more than proportionate increase of the material





aids to production: and in England at the present time, with easy





access to abundant foreign supplies of raw material, an increase





of population is accompanied by a more than proportionate





increase of the means of satisfying human wants other than the





need for light, fresh air, etc. Much of this increase is however





attributable not to the increase of industrial efficiency but to





the increase of wealth by which it is accompanied: and therefore





it does not necessarily benefit those who have no share in that





wealth. And further, England's foreign supplies of raw produce





may at any time be checked by changes in the trade regulations of





other countries, and may be almost cut off by a great war while





the naval and military expenditure which would be necessary to





make the country fairly secure against this last risk, would





appreciably diminish the benefits that she derives from the





action of the law of increasing return.











NOTES:











1. In an article on "The Variation of Productive Forces" in the





Quarterly Journal of Economics 1902, Professor Bullock suggests





that the term "Economy of Organization" should be substituted for





Increasing Return. He shows clearly that the forces which make





for Increasing Return are not of the same order as those that





make for Diminishing Return: and there are undoubtedly cases in





which it is better to emphasize this difference by describing





causes rather than results, and contrasting Economy of





Organization with the Inelasticity of Nature's response to





intensive cultivation.











2. There is no general rule that industries which yield





increasing returns show also rising profits. No doubt a vigorous





firm, which increases its scale of operations and obtains





important (internal) economies which are peculiar to it, will





show an increasing return and a rising rate of profit; because





its increasing output will not materially affect the price of its





produce. But profits tend to be low, as we shall see below (VI,





VIII, sections 1, 2), in such industries as plain weaving,





because their vast scale has enabled organization in production





and marketing to be carried so far as to be almost dominated by





routine.











3. The Englishman Mill bursts into unwonted enthusiasm when





speaking (Political Economy, Book IV, ch. VI, section 2) of the





pleasures of wandering alone in beautiful scenery: and many





American writers give fervid descriptions of the growing richness





of human life as the backwoodsman finds neighbours settling





around him, as the backwoods settlement develops into a village,





the village into a town, and the town into a vast city. (See for





instance Carey's Principles of Social Science and Henry George's





Progress and Poverty.)











End