





The Higher Learning In America: A Memorandum On the Conduct of



Universities By Business Men





        by Thorstein Veblen





1918











PREFACE







    It is something more than a dozen years since the following



observations on American academic life were first assembled in



written form. In the meantime changes of one kind and another



have occurred, although not such as to alter the course of policy



which has guided American universities. Lines of policy which



were once considered to be tentative and provisional have since



then passed into settled usage. This altered and more stable



state of the subject matter has permitted a revision to avoid



detailed documentation of matters that have become commonplace,



with some resulting economy of space and argument. But,



unhappily, revision and abridgment carries its own penalties, in



the way of a more fragmentary presentation and a more repetitious



conduct of the argument; so that it becomes necessary to bespeak



a degree of indulgence on that ground.



    Unhappily, this is not all that seems necessary to plead in



extenuation of recurrent infirmities. Circumstances, chiefly of a



personal incidence, have repeatedly delayed publication beyond



what the run of events at large would have indicated as a



propitious date; and the same circumstances have also enjoined a



severer and more repressive curtailment in the available data. It



may not be out of place, therefore, to indicate in the most



summary fashion what has been the nature of these fortuitous



hindrances.



    In its earlier formulation, the argument necessarily drew



largely on first-hand observation of the conduct of affairs at



Chicago, under the administration of its first president. As is



well known, the first president's share in the management of the



university was intimate, masterful and pervasive, in a very high



degree; so much so that no secure line of demarcation could be



drawn between the administration's policy and the president's



personal ruling. It is true, salient features of academic policy



which many observers at that time were inclined to credit to the



proclivities of Chicago's first president, have in the later



course of things proved to belong to the impersonal essence of



the case; having been approved by the members of the craft, and



so having passed into general usage without abatement. Yet, at



the time, the share of the Great Pioneer in reshaping American



academic policy could scarcely have been handled in a detached



way, as an impersonal phenomenon of the unfolding historical



sequence. The personal note was, in fact, very greatly in



evidence.



    And just then, presently, that Strong Man's life was brought



to a close. So that it would unavoidably have seemed a breach of



decorum to let these observations seek a hearing at that time,



even after any practicable revision and excision which filial



piety would enjoin. Under the rule of Nihil nisi bonum, there



seemed nothing for it but a large reticence.



    But swiftly, with the passage of years, events proved that



much of what had appeared to be personal to the Great Pioneer was



in reality intrinsic to the historical movement; so that the



innovations presently lost their personal colour, and so went



impersonally to augment the grand total of human achievement at



large. Meanwhile general interest in the topic had nowise abated.



Indeed, discussion of the academic situation was running high and



in large volume, and much of it was taking such a turn --



controversial, reproachful, hortatory, acrimonious -- that



anything in the way of a temperate survey should presumably have



been altogether timely.



    But fortuitous circumstances again intervened, such as made



it seem the part of insight and sobriety again to defer



publication, until the colour of an irrelevant personal equation



should again have had time to fade into the background. With the



further passage of time, it is hoped that no fortuitous shadow



will now cloud the issue in any such degree as to detract at all



sensibly from whatever value this account of events and their



causes may have.



    This allusion to incidents which have no material bearing on



the inquiry may tolerantly be allowed, as going to account for a



sparing use of local information and, it is hoped, to extenuate a



degree of reserve and reticence touching divers intimate details



of executive policy.







    It goes without saying that the many books, papers and



addresses brought out on the academic situation have had their



share in shaping the essay. More particularly have these various



expressions of opinion and concern made it possible to take many



things for granted, as matter of common notoriety, that would



have appeared to require documentation a dozen or fifteen years



ago, as lying at that time still in the field of surmise and



forecast. Much, perhaps the greater bulk, of the printed matter



issued on this head in the interval has, it is true, been of a



hortatory or eloquently optimistic nature, and may therefore be



left on one side. But the academic situation has also been



receiving some considerable attention with a view to getting an



insight into what is going forward. One and another of these



writers to whom the present essay is in debt will be fond



referred to by name in the pages which more particularly lean on



their support; and the like is true for various utterances by men



in authority that have been drawn on for illustrative



expressions. But a narrow scrutiny would doubtless make it appear



that the unacknowledged indebtedness greatly exceeds what so is



accredited and accounted for. That such is the case must not be



taken as showing intentional neglect of the due courtesies.



    March 1916.







    In the course of the past two years, while the manuscript has



been lying in wait for the printer, a new situation has been



forcing itself on the attention of men who continue to take an



interest in the universities. On this provocation a few



paragraphs have been added, at the end of the introductory



chapter. Otherwise there appears to be no call for a change in



the general argument, and it has not been disturbed since the



earlier date, which is accordingly left as it stands.







    June 1918.











CHAPTER ONE







Introductory: The Place of the University in Modern Life







                                I







     In any known civilization there will be found something in



the way of esoteric knowledge. This body of knowledge will vary



characteristically from one culture to another, differing both in



content and in respect of the canons of truth and reality relied



on by its adepts. But there is this common trait running through



all civilizations, as touches this range of esoteric knowledge,



that it is in all cases held, more or less closely, in the



keeping of a select body of adepts or specialists -- scientists,



scholars, savants, clerks, priests, shamans, medicinemen --



whatever designation may best fit the given case.



    In the apprehension of the given society within which any



such body of knowledge is found it will also be found that the



knowledge in question is rated as an article of great intrinsic



value, in some way a matter of more substantial consequence than



any or all of the material achievements or possessions of the



community. It may take shape as a system of magic or of religious



beliefs, of mythology, theology, philosophy or science. But



whatever shape it falls into in the given case, it makes up the



substantial core of the civilization in which it is found, and it



is felt to give character and distinction to that civilization.



    In the apprehension of the group in whose life and esteem it



lives and takes effect, this esoteric knowledge is taken to



embody a systematization of fundamental and eternal truth;



although it is evident to any outsider that it will take its



character and its scope and method from the habits of life of the



group, from the institutions with which it is bound in a web of



give and take. Such is manifestly the case in all the historic



phases of civilization, as well as in all those contemporary



cultures that are sufficiently remote from our everyday interests



to admit of their being seen in adequate perspective. A passably



dispassionate inquiry into the place which modern learning holds



in modern civilization will show that such is also the case of



this latest, and in the mind of its keepers the most mature,



system of knowledge. It should by no means be an insuperably



difficult matter to show that this "higher learning" of the



modern world, the current body of science and scholarship, also



holds its place on such a tenure of use and wont, that it has



grown and shifted in point of content, aims and methods in



response to the changes in habits of life that have passed over



the Western peoples during the period of its growth and



ascendancy. Nor should it be embarrassingly difficult to reach



the persuasion that this process of change and supersession in



the scope and method of knowledge is still effectually at work,



in a like response to institutional changes that still are



incontinently going forward.(1*)



    To the adepts who are occupied with this esoteric knowledge,



the scientists and scholars on whom its keeping devolves, the



matter will of course not appear in just that light; more



particularly so far as regards that special segment of the field



of knowledge with the keeping and cultivation of which they may,



each and several, be occupied. They are, each and several,



engaged on the perfecting and conservation of a special line of



inquiry, the objective end of which, in the view of its adepts,



will necessarily be the final and irreducible truth as touches



matters within its scope. But, seen in perspective, these adepts



are themselves to be taken as creatures of habit, creatures of



that particular manner of group life out of which their



preconceptions in matters of knowledge, and the manner of their



interest in the run of inquiry, have sprung. So that the terms of



finality that will satisfy the adepts are also a consequence of



habituation, and they are to be taken as conclusive only because



and in so far as they are consonant with the discipline of



habituation enforced by that manner of group life that has



induced in these adepts their particular frame of mind.



    Perhaps at a farther remove than many other current



phenomena, but none the less effectually for that, the higher



learning takes its character from the manner of life enforced on



the group by the circumstances in which it is placed. These



constraining circumstances that so condition the scope and method



of learning are primarily, and perhaps most cogently, the



conditions imposed by the state of the industrial arts, the



technological situation; but in the second place, and scarcely



less exacting in detail, the received scheme of use and wont in



its other bearings has its effect in shaping the scheme of



knowledge, both as to its content and as touches the norms and



methods of its organization. Distinctive and dominant among the



constituent factors of this current scheme of use and wont is the



pursuit of business, with the outlook and predilections which



that pursuit implies. Therefore any inquiry into the effect which



recent institutional changes may have upon the pursuit of the



higher learning will necessarily be taken up in a peculiar degree



with the consequences which an habitual pursuit of business in



modern times has had for the ideals, aims and methods of the



scholars and schools devoted to the higher learning.



    The Higher Learning as currently cultivated by the scholars



and scientists of the Western civilization differs not



generically from the esoteric knowledge purveyed by specialists



in other civilizations, elsewhere and in other times. It engages



the same general range of aptitudes and capacities, meets the



same range of human wants, and grows out of the same impulsive



propensities of human nature. Its scope and method are different



from what has seemed good in other cultural situations, and its



tenets and canons are so far peculiar as to give it a specific



character different from these others; but in the main this



specific character is due to a different distribution of emphasis



among the same general range of native gifts that have always



driven men to the pursuit of knowledge. The stress falls in a



somewhat obviously different way among the canons of reality by



recourse to which men systematize and verify the knowledge



gained; which is in its turn due to the different habituation to



which civilized men are subjected, as contrasted with the



discipline exercised by other and earlier cultures.



    In point of its genesis and growth any system of knowledge



may confidently be run back, in the main, to the initiative and



bias afforded by two certain impulsive traits of human nature: an



Idle Curiosity, and the Instinct of Workmanship.(2*)



    In this generic trait the modern learning does not depart



from the rule that holds for the common run. Men instinctively



seek knowledge, and value it. The fact of this proclivity is well



summed up in saying that men are by native gift actuated with an



idle curiosity, -- "idle" in the sense that a knowledge of things



is sought, apart from any ulterior use of the knowledge so



gained.(3*) This, of course, does not imply that the knowledge so



gained will not be turned to practical account. In point of fact,



although the fact is not greatly relevant to the inquiry here in



hand, the native proclivity here spoken of as the instinct of



workmanship will unavoidably incline men to turn to account, in a



system of ways and means, whatever knowledge so becomes



available. But the instinct of workmanship has also another and



more pertinent bearing in these premises, in that it affords the



norms, or the scheme of criteria and canons of verity, according



to which the ascertained facts will be construed and connected up



in a body of systematic knowledge. Yet the sense of workmanship



takes effect by recourse to divers expedients and reaches its



ends by recourse to varying principles, according as the



habituation of workday life has enforced one or another scheme of



interpretation for the facts with which it has to deal.



    The habits of thought induced by workday life impose



themselves as ruling principles that govern the quest of



knowledge; it will therefore be the habits of thought enforced by



the current technological scheme that will have most (or most



immediately) to say in the current systematization of facts. The



working logic of the current state of the industrial arts will



necessarily insinuate itself as the logical scheme which must, of



course, effectually govern the interpretation and generalizations



of fact in all their commonplace relations. But the current state



of the industrial arts is not all that conditions workmanship.



Under any given institutional situation, -- and the modern scheme



of use and wont, law and order, is no exception,workmanship is



held to a more or less exacting conformity to several tests and



standards that are not intrinsic to the state of the industrial



arts, even if they are not alien to it; such as the requirements



imposed by the current system of ownership and pecuniary values.



These pecuniary conditions that impose themselves on the



processes of industry and on the conduct of life, together with



the pecuniary accountancy that goes with them -- the price system



have much to say in the guidance and limitations of workmanship.



And when and in so far as the habituation so enforced in the



traffic of workday life goes into effect as a scheme of logic



governing the quest of knowledge, such principles as have by



habit found acceptance as being conventionally salutary and



conclusive in the pecuniary conduct of affairs will necessarily



leave their mark on the ideals, aims, methods and standards of



science and those principles and scholarship. More particularly,



standards of organization, control and achievement, that have



been accepted as an habitual matter of course in the conduct of



business will, by force of habit, in good part reassert



themselves as indispensable and conclusive in the conduct of the



affairs of learning. While it remains true that the bias of



workmanship continues to guide the quest of knowledge, under the



conditions imposed by modern institutions it will not be the



naive conceptions of primitive workmanship that will shape the



framework of the modern system of learning; but rather the



preconceptions of that disciplined workmanship that has been



instructed in the logic of the modern technology and



sophisticated with much experience in a civilization in whose



scheme of life pecuniary canons are definitive.



    The modern technology is of an impersonal, matter-of-fact



character in an unexampled degree, and the accountancy of modern



business management is also of an extremely dispassionate and



impartially exacting nature. It results that the modern learning



is of a similarly matter-of-fact, mechanistic complexion, and



that it similarly leans on statistically dispassionate tests and



formulations. Whereas it may fairly be said that the personal



equation once -- in the days of scholastic learning -- was the



central and decisive factor in the systematization of knowledge,



it is equally fair to say that in later time no effort is spared



to eliminate all bias of personality from the technique or the



results of science or scholarship. It is the "dry light of



science" that is always in request, and great pains is taken to



exclude all color of sentimentality.



    Yet this highly sterilized, germ-proof system of knowledge,



kept in a cool, dry place, commands the affection of modern



civilized mankind no less unconditionally, with no more



afterthought of an extraneous sanction, than once did the highly



personalized mythological and philosophical constructions and



interpretations that had the vogue in the days of the schoolmen.



    Through all the mutations that have passed over this quest of



knowledge, from its beginnings in puerile myth and magic to its



(provisional) consummation in the "exact" sciences of the current



fashion, any attentive scrutiny will find that the driving force



has consistently been of the same kind, traceable to the same



proclivity of human nature. In so far as it may fairly be



accounted esoteric knowledge, or a "higher learning," all this



enterprise is actuated by an idle curiosity, a disinterested



proclivity to gain a knowledge of things and to reduce this



knowledge to a comprehensible system. The objective end is a



theoretical organization. a logical articulation of things known,



the lines of which must not be deflected by any consideration of



expediency or convenience, but must run true to the canons of



reality accepted at the time. These canons of reality, or of



verity, have varied from time to time, have in fact varied



incontinently with the passage of time and the mutations of



experience. As the fashions of modern time have come on,



particularly the later phases of modern life, the experience that



so has shaped and reshaped the canons of verity for the use of



inquiring minds has fallen more and more into the lines of



mechanical articulation and has expressed itself ever more



unreservedly in terms of mechanical stress. Concomitantly the



canons of reality have taken on a mechanistic complexion, to the



neglect and progressive disuse of all tests and standards of a



more genial sort; until in the off-hand apprehension of modern



men, "reality" comes near being identified with mechanical fact,



and "verification" is taken to mean a formulation in mechanical



terms. But the final test of this reality about which the



inquiries of modern men so turn is not the test of mechanical



serviceability for human use, but only of mechanistically



effectual matter-of-fact.







    So it has come about that modern civilization is in a very



special degree a culture of the intellectual powers, in the



narrower sense of the term, as contrasted with the emotional



traits of human nature. Its achievements and chief merits are



found in this field of learning, and its chief defects elsewhere.



And it is on its achievements in this domain of detached and



dispassionate knowledge that modern civilized mankind most



ingenuously plumes itself and confidently rests its hopes. The



more emotional and spiritual virtues that once held the first



place have been overshadowed by the increasing consideration



given to proficiency in matter-of-fact knowledge. As prime movers



in the tide of civilized life, these sentimental movements of the



human spirit belong in the past, -at least such is the



self-complacent avowal of the modern spokesmen of culture. The



modern technology, and the mechanistic conception of things that



goes with that technology, are alien to the spirit of the "Old



Order." The Church, the court, the camp, the drawing-room, where



these elder and perhaps nobler virtues had their laboratory and



playground, have grown weedy and gone to seed. Much of the



apparatus of the old order, with the good old way, still stands



over in a state of decent repair, and the sentimentally



reminiscent endeavors of certain spiritual "hold-overs" still



lend this apparatus of archaism something of a galvanic life. But



that power of aspiration that once surged full and hot in the



cults of faith, fashion, sentiment, exploit, and honor, now at



its best comes to such a head as it may in the concerted



adulation of matter-of-fact.



    This esoteric knowledge of matter-of-fact has come to be



accepted as something worth while in its own right, a



self-legitimating end of endeavor in itself, apart from any



bearing it may have on the glory of God or the good of man. Men



have, no doubt, always been possessed of a more or less urgent



propensity to inquire into the nature of things, beyond the



serviceability of any knowledge so gained, and have always been



given to seeking curious explanations of things at large. The



idle curiosity is a native trait of the race. But in past times



such a disinterested pursuit of unprofitable knowledge has, by



and large, not been freely avowed as a legitimate end of



endeavour; or such has at any rate been the state of the case



through that later segment of history which students commonly



take account of. A quest of knowledge has overtly been rated as



meritorious, or even blameless, only in so far as it has appeared



to serve the ends of one or another of the practical interests



that have from time to time occupied men's attention. But



latterly, during the past few generations, this learning has so



far become an avowed "end in itself" that "the increase and



diffusion of knowledge among men" is now freely rated as the most



humane and meritorious work to be taken care of by any



enlightened community or any public-spirited friend of



civilization.



    The expediency of such "increase and diffusion" is no longer



held in doubt, because it has ceased to be a question of



expediency among the enlightened nations, being itself the



consummation upon which, in the apprehension of civilized men,



the advance of culture must converge. Such has come to be the



long-term common sense judgment of enlightened public opinion. A



settled presumption to some such effect has found lodgment as a



commonplace conviction in the popular mind, in much the same



measure and in much the same period of time as the current body



of systematic knowledge has taken on the character of matter of



fact. For good or ill, civilized men have come to hold that this



matter-of-fact knowledge of things is the only end in life that



indubitably justifies itself. So that nothing more irretrievably



shameful could overtake modern civilization than the miscarriage



of this modern learning, which is the most valued spiritual asset



of civilized mankind.



    The truth of this view is borne out by the professions even



of those lieutenants of the powers of darkness who are straining



to lay waste and debauch the peoples of Christendom. In



high-pitched concert they all swear by the name of a "culture"



whose sole inalienable asset is this same intellectual mastery of



matters of fact. At the same time it is only by drawing on the



resources of this matter-of-fact knowledge that the protagonists



of reaction are able to carry on their campaign of debauchery and



desolation.







    Other interests that have once been held in higher esteem



appear by comparison to have fallen into abeyance, -- religious



devotion, political prestige, fighting capacity, gentility,



pecuniary distinction, profuse consumption of goods. But it is



only by comparison with the higher value given to this enterprise



of the intellect that such other interests appear to have lost



ground. These and the like have fallen into relative disesteem,



as being sordid and insubstantial by comparison. Not that these



"lower" human interests, answering to the "lower" ranges of human



intellect, have fallen into neglect; it is only that they have



come to be accounted "lower," as contrasted with the quest of



knowledge; and it is only on sober second thought, and perhaps



only for the ephemeral present, that they are so accounted by the



common run of civilized mankind. Men still are in sufficiently



hot pursuit of all these time-worn amenities, and each for



himself is, in point of fact, more than likely to make the



pursuit of such self-seeking ends the burden of his life; but on



a dispassionate rating, and under the corrective of deliberate



avowal, it will appear that none of these commend themselves as



intrinsically worth while at large. At the best they are rated as



expedient concessions to human infirmity or as measures of



defense against human perversity and the outrages of fortune. The



last resort of the apologists for these more sordid endeavours is



the plea that only by this means can the ulterior ends of a



civilization of intelligence be served. The argument may fairly



be paraphrased to the effect that in order to serve God in the



end, we must all be ready to serve the Devil in the meantime.







    It is always possible, of course, that this pre-eminence of



intellectual enterprise in the civilization of the Western



peoples is a transient episode; that it may eventually -- perhaps



even precipitately, with the next impending turn in the fortunes



of this civilization -- again be relegated to a secondary place



in the scheme of things and become only an instrumentality in the



service of some dominant aim or impulse, such as a vainglorious



patriotism, or dynastic politics, or the breeding of a commercial



aristocracy. More than one of the nations of Europe have moved so



far in this matter already as to place the primacy of science and



scholarship in doubt as against warlike ambitions; and the



aspirations of the American community appear to be divided --



between patriotism in the service of the captains of war, and



commerce in the service of the captains of finance. But hitherto



the spokesmen of any such cultural reversion are careful to



declare a perfunctory faith in that civilization of disinterested



intellectual achievement which they are endeavouring to suborn to



their several ends. That such pro forma declarations are found



necessary argues that the faith in a civilization of intelligence



is still so far intact as to require all reactionaries to make



their peace with it.



    Meantime the easy matter-of-course presumption that such a



civilization of intelligence justifies itself goes to argue that



the current bias which so comes to expression will be the outcome



of a secure and protracted experience. What underlies and has



brought on this bent in the temper of the civilized peoples is a



somewhat intricate question of institutional growth, and can not



be gone into here; but the gradual shifting of this



matter-of-fact outlook into the primacy among the ideals of



modern. Christendom is sufficiently evident in point of fact, to



any attentive student of modern times. Conceivably, there may



come an abrupt term to its paramount vogue, through some



precipitate sweep of circumstances; but it did not come in by



anything like the sudden intrusion of a new invention in ideals



-- after the fashion of a religious conversion nor by the



incursion of a hitherto alien element into the current scheme of



life, but rather by force of a gradual and unintended, scarcely



perceptible, shifting of emphasis between the several cultural



factors that conjointly go to make up the working scheme of



things.



    Along with this shifting of matter-of-fact knowledge into the



foreground among the ideals of civilized life, there has also



gone on a similarly unpremeditated change in the attitude of



those persons and establishments that have to do with this



learning, as well as in the rating accorded them by the community



at large. Again it is a matter of institutional growth, of



self-wrought changes in the scheme of use and wont; and here as



in other cases of institutional growth and displacement, the



changes have gone forward for the most part blindly, by impulse,



without much foreknowledge of any ulterior consequences to which



such a sequence of change might be said to tend. It is only after



the new growth of use and wont has taken effect in an altered



range of principles and standards, that its direction and



ulterior consequences can be appreciated with any degree of



confidence. But this development that has thrown up



matter-of-fact knowledge into its place of paramount value for



modern culture has in a peculiar degree been unintended and



unforeseen; the like applies to the case of the schools and the



personnel involved; and in a peculiar degree the drift and



bearing of these changes have also not been appreciated while



they have been going forward, doubtless because it has all been a



peculiarly unprecedented phenomenon and a wholly undesigned drift



of habituation. History records nothing that is fairly



comparable. No era in the historic past has set a pattern for



guidance in this matter, and the experience of none of the



peoples of history affords a clue by which to have judged



beforehand of the probable course and outcome of this



specifically modern and occidental phase of culture.



    Some slight beginnings and excursions in the way of a



cultivation of matter-of-fact learning there may have been, now



and again, among the many shifting systems of esoteric lore that



have claimed attention here and there, early and late; and these



need by no means be accounted negligible. But they have on the



whole come to nothing much better than broken excursions, as seen



from the point of view of the latterday higher learning, and they



have brought into bearing nothing appreciable in the way of



establishments designed without afterthought to further the



advance of disinterested knowledge. Anything like a cultural era



that avowedly takes such a quest of knowledge as its chief and



distinctive characteristic is not known to history. From this



isolated state of the case it follows, unfortunately, that this



modern phase is to be studied only in its own light; and since



the sequence of development has hitherto reached no secure



consummation or conclusion, there is also much room for



conflicting opinions as to its presumptive or legitimate outcome,



or even as to its present drift.







                                II







    But notorious facts make this much plain, that civilized



mankind looks to this quest of matter-of-fact knowledge as its



most substantial asset and its most valued achievement, -- in so



far as any consensus of appreciation or of aspirations is to be



found among civilized mankind; and there is no similar consensus



bearing on any other feature of that scheme of life that



characterizes modern civilization. It is similarly beyond dispute



that men look to the modern system of schools and related



establishments of learning for the furtherance and conservation



of this intellectual enterprise. And among the various items of



this equipment the modern university is, by tradition, more



closely identified with the quest of knowledge than any other. It



stands in a unique and peculiarly intimate relation to this



intellectual enterprise. At least such is the current



apprehension of the university's work. The university is the only



accepted institution of the modern culture on which the quest of



knowledge unquestionably devolves; and the visible drift of



circumstances as well as of public sentiment runs also to making



this the only unquestioned duty incumbent on the university.



    It is true, many other lines of work, and of endeavor. that



may not fairly be called work, are undertaken by schools of



university grade; and also, many other schools that call



themselves "universities" will have substantially nothing to do



with the higher learning. But each and several of these other



lines of endeavor, into which the universities allow themselves



to be drawn, are open to question. Their legitimacy remains an



open question in spite of the interested arguments of their



spokesmen, who advocate the partial submergence of the university



in such enterprises as professional training, undergraduate



instruction, supervision and guidance of. the secondary school



system, edification of the unlearned by "university extension"



and similar excursions into the field of public amusement,



training of secondary school teachers, encouragement of amateurs



by "correspondence," etc. What and how much of these extraneous



activities the university should allow itself is a matter on



which there is no general agreement even among those whose



inclinations go far in that direction; but what is taken for



granted throughout all this advocacy of outlying detail is the



secure premise that the university is in the first place a



seminary of the higher learning, and that no school can make good



its pretensions to university standing except by proving its



fitness in this respect.(4*)



    The conservation and advancement of the higher learning



involves two lines of work, distinct but closely bound together:



(a) scientific and scholarly inquiry, and (b) the instruction of



students.(5*) The former of these is primary and indispensable.



It is this work of intellectual enterprise that gives its



character to the university and marks it off from the lower



schools. The work of teaching properly belongs in the university



only because and in so far as it incites and facilitates the



university man's work of inquiry, -- and the extent to which such



teaching furthers the work of inquiry is scarcely to be



appreciated without a somewhat extended experience. By and large,



there are but few and inconsequential exceptions to the rule that



teaching, as a concomitant of investigation, is distinctly



advantageous to the investigator; particularly in so far as his



work is of the nature of theoretical inquiry. The instruction



necessarily involved in university work, therefore, is only such



as can readily be combined with the work of inquiry, at the same



time that it goes directly to further the higher learning in that



it trains the incoming generation of scholars and scientists for



the further pursuit of knowledge. Training for other purposes is



necessarily of a different kind and is best done elsewhere; and



it does not become university work by calling it so and imposing



its burden on the men and equipment whose only concern should be



the higher learning.



    University teaching, having a particular and special purpose



-- the pursuit of knowledge -- it has also a particular and



special character, such as to differentiate it from other



teaching and at the same time leave it relatively ineffective for



other purposes. Its aim is to equip the student for the work of



inquiry, not to give him facility in that conduct of affairs that



turns such knowledge to "practical account." Hence the



instruction that falls legitimately under the hand of the



university man is necessarily subsidiary and incidental to the



work of inquiry, and it can effectually be carried on only by



such a teacher as is himself occupied with the scrutiny of what



knowledge is already in hand and with pushing the inquiry to



further gains. And it can be carried on by such a teacher only by



drawing his students into his own work of inquiry. The student's



relation to his teacher necessarily becomes that of an apprentice



to his master, rather than that of a pupil to his schoolmaster.



    A university is a body of mature scholars and scientists, the



"faculty," -- with whatever plant and other equipment may



incidentally serve as appliances for their work in any given



case. The necessary material equipment may under modern



conditions be very considerable, as may also the number of



care-takers, assistants, etc.; but all that is not the



university, but merely its equipment. And the university man's



work is the pursuit of knowledge, together with whatever advisory



surveillance and guidance he may consistently afford such



students as are entering on the career of learning at a point



where his outlook and methods of work may be of effect for them.



No man whose energies are not habitually bent on increasing and



proving up the domain of learning belongs legitimately on the



university staff. The university man is, properly, a student, not



a schoolmaster. Such is the unmistakable drift of sentiment and



professed endeavour, in so far as it is guided by the cultural



aspirations of civilized mankind rather than by the emulative



strategy of individuals seeking their own preferment.(6*)



    All this, of course, implies no undervaluing of the work of



those men who aim to prepare the youth for citizenship and a



practical career. It is only a question of distinguishing between



things that belong apart. The scientist and the scholar on the



one hand, and the schoolmaster on the other hand, both belong



within the later growth of civilization; but a differentiation of



the two classes, and a division of their work, is indispensable



if they are to do their work as it should be done, and as the



modern community thoughtfully intends that it should be done. And



while such a division of labour has hitherto not been carried



through with any degree of consistency, it is at least under way,



and there is nothing but the presumption of outworn usage that



continues to hold the two lines of work together, to the



detriment of both; backed, it is true, by ambitions of



self-aggrandizement on the part of many schools and many of their



directorates.



    The schoolmaster and his work may be equally, or more,



valuable to the community at large -- presumably more rather than



less -- but in so far as his chief interest is of the pedagogical



sort his place is not in the university. Exposition, instruction



and drill belong in and professional schools. The consistent aim



there is, and should be, to instruct, to inculcate a knowledge of



results, and to give the pupil a working facility in applying it.



On the university level such information and training is (should



be) incidental to the work of research. The university man is



almost unavoidably a teacher, by precept and example, but he can



not without detriment to his work as scientist or scholar serve



as a taskmaster or a vehicle of indoctrination. The student who



comes up to the university for the pursuit of knowledge is



expected to know what he wants and to want it, without



compulsion. If he falls short in these respects, if he has not



the requisite interest and initiative, it is his own misfortune,



not the fault of his teacher. What he has a legitimate claim to



is an opportunity for such personal contact and guidance as will



give him familiarity with the ways and means of the higher



learning, -- any information imparted to him being incidental to



this main work of habituation. He gets a chance to make himself a



scholar, and what he will do with his opportunities in this way



lies in his own discretion.



    The difference between the modern university and the lower



and professional schools is broad and simple; not so much a



difference of degree as of kind. There is no difficulty about



apprehending or appreciating this difference; the dispute turns



not on the practicability of distinguishing between the two, but



on the desirability of letting such a distinction go into effect.



It is a controversy between those who wish to hold fast that



which once was good and those who look to make use of the means



in hand for new ends and meet new exigencies.



    The lower schools (including the professional schools) are,



in the ideal scheme, designed to fit the incoming generation for



civil life; they are therefore occupied with instilling such



knowledge and habits as will make their pupils fit citizens of



the world in whatever position in the fabric of workday life they



may fall. The university on the other hand is specialized to fit



men for a life of science and scholarship; and it is accordingly



concerned, with such discipline only as will give efficiency in



the pursuit of knowledge and fit its students for the increase



and diffusion of learning. It follows that while the lower



schools necessarily take over the surveillance of their pupils'



everyday life, and exercise a large measure of authority and



responsible interference in that behalf, the university assumes



(or should assume) no responsibility for its students' fortunes



in the moral, religious, pecuniary, domestic, or hygienic



respect.



    Doubtless the larger and more serious responsibility in the



educational system belongs not to the university but to the lower



and professional schools. Citizenship is a larger and more



substantial category than scholarship; and the furtherance of



civilized life is a larger and more serious interest than the



pursuit of knowledge for its own idle sake. But the proportions



which the quest of knowledge is latterly assuming in scheme of



civilized life require that the establishments the to which this



interest is committed should not be charged with extraneous



duties; particularly not with extraneous matters themselves of



such grave consequence as this training for citizenship and



practical affairs. These are too serious a range of duties to be



taken care of as a side-issue, by a seminary of learning, the



members of whose faculty, if they are fit for their own special



work, are not men of affairs or adepts in worldly wisdom.







                III







    In point of historical pedigree the American universities are



of another derivation than their European counterpart; although



the difference in this respect is not so sharp a matter of



contrast as might be assumed at first sight. The European



(Continental) universities appear to have been founded,



originally, to meet the needs of professional training, more



particularly theological (and philosophical) training in the



earlier times. The American universities are, historically, an



outgrowth of the American college; and the latter was installed,



in its beginnings, largely as a means of professional training;



chiefly training for Divinity, secondarily for the calling of the



schoolmaster. But in neither case, neither in that of the



European university nor in that of the American College, was this



early vocational aim of the schools allowed to decide their



character in the long run, nor to circumscribe the lines of their



later growth. In both cases, somewhat alike, the two groups of



schools came to their mature development, in the nineteenth



century, as establishments occupied with disinterested learning,



given over to the pursuit of intellectual enterprise, rather than



as seminaries for training of a vocational kind. They still had a



vocational value, no doubt, and the vocational needs of their



students need not have been absent from the considerations that



guided their directorates. It would particularly be found that



the (clerical) directorates of the American colleges had more



than half an eye to the needs of Divinity even at so late a date



as when, in the third quarter of the century, the complexion of



the American college situation began seriously to change. It is



from this period -- from the era of the Civil War and the



Reconstruction -- that the changes set in which have reshaped the



academic situation in America.



    At this era, some half a century ago, the American college



was, or was at least pressed to be, given over to disinterested



instruction, not specialized with a vocational, or even a



denominational, bias. It was coming to take its place as the



superior or crowning member, a sort of capstone, of the system of



public instruction. The life history of any one of the state



universities whose early period of growth runs across this era



will readily show the effectual guidance of such an ideal of a



college, as a superior and definitive member in a school system



designed to afford an extended course of instruction looking to



an unbiassed increase and diffusion of knowledge. Other



interests, of a professional or vocational kind, were also



entrusted to the keeping of these new-found schools; but with a



conclusive generality the rule holds that in these academic



creations a college establishment of a disinterested,



non-vocational character is counted in as the indispensable



nucleus, -- that much was at that time a matter of course.



    The further development shows two marked features: The



American university has come into bearing; and the college has



become an intermediate rather than a terminal link in the



conventional scheme of education. Under the names "undergraduate"



and "graduate," the college and the university are still commonly



coupled together as subdivisions of a complex whole; but this



holding together of the two disparate schools is at the best a



freak of aimless survival. At the worst, and more commonly, it is



the result of a gross ambition for magnitude on the part of the



joint directorate. Whether the college lives by itself as an



independent establishment on a foundation of its own, or is in



point of legal formality a subdivision of the university



establishment, it takes its place in the educational scheme as



senior member of the secondary school system, and it bears no



peculiarly close relation to the university as a seat of



learning. At the closest it stands to the university in the



relation of a fitting school; more commonly its relations are



closer with the ordinary professional and vocational schools; and



for the most part it stands in no relation, beyond that of



juxtaposition, with the one or the other.



    The attempt to hold the college and the no means together in



bonds of ostensible Solidarity is by university an advisedly



concerted adjustment to the needs of scholarship as they run



today. By historical accident the older American universities



have grown into bearing on the ground of an underlying college,



and the external connection so inherited has not usually been



severed; and by ill-advised, or perhaps unadvised, imitation the



younger universities have blundered into encumbering themselves



with an undergraduate department to simulate this presumptively



honourable pedigree, to the detriment both of the university and



of the college so bound up with it. By this arrangement the



college -- undergraduate department -- falls into the position of



an appendage, a side issue, to be taken care of by afterthought



on the part of a body of men whose chief legitimate interest runs



-- should run -- on other things than the efficient management of



such an undergraduate training-school, -- provided always that



they are a bona fide university faculty, and not a body of



secondary-school teachers masquerading under the assumed name of



a university.



    The motive to this inclusion of an undergraduate department



in the newer universities appears commonly to have been a



headlong eagerness on the part of the corporate authorities to



show a complete establishment of the conventionally accepted



pattern, and to enroll as many students as possible.



    Whatever may have been true for the earlier time, when the



American college first grew up and flourished, it is beyond



question that the undergraduate department which takes the place



of the college today cannot be rated as an institution of the



higher learning. At the best it is now a school for preliminary



training, preparatory to entering on the career of learning, or



in preparation for the further training required for the



professions; but it is also, and chiefly, an establishment



designed to give the concluding touches to the education of young



men who have no designs on learning, beyond the close of the



college curriculum. It aims to afford a rounded discipline to



those whose goal is the life of fashion or of affairs. How well,



or how ill, the college may combine these two unrelated purposes



is a question that does not immediately concern the present



inquiry. It is touched on here only to point the contrast between



the American college and the university.



    It follows from the character of their work that while the



university should offer no set curriculum, the college has,



properly, nothing else to offer. But the retention or inclusion



of the college and its aims within the university corporation has



necessarily led to the retention of college standards and methods



of control even in what is or purports to be university work; so



that it is by no means unusual to find university (graduate) work



scheduled in the form of a curriculum, with all that



boarding-school circumstance and apparatus that is so unavoidable



an evil in all undergraduate training. In effect, the outcome of



these short-sighted attempts to take care of the higher learning



by the means and method of the boys' school, commonly is to



eliminate the higher learning from the case and substitute the



aims and results of a boys' training-school.



    Undergraduate work being task work, it is possible, without



fatal effect, to reduce it to standard units of time and volume,



and so control and enforce it by a system of accountancy and



surveillance; the methods of control, accountancy and coercion



that so come to be worked out have all that convincing appearance



of tangible efficiency that belongs to any mechanically defined



and statistically accountable routine, such as will always



commend itself to the spirit of the schoolmaster; the temptation



to apply such methods of standardized routine wherever it is at



all feasible is always present, and it is cogently spoken for by



all those to whom drill is a more intelligible conception than



scholarship. The work of learning, which distinctively belongs in



the university, on the other hand, is a matter of personal



contact and co-operation between teacher and student, and is not



measurable in statistical units or amenable to mechanical tests;



the men engaged in this work can accordingly offer nothing of the



same definite character in place of the rigid routine and



accountancy advocated by the schoolmasters; and the outcome in



nearly all cases where the control of both departments vests in



one composite corporate body, as it usually does, is the gradual



insinuation of undergraduate methods and standards in the



graduate school; until what is nominally university work settles



down, in effect, into nothing more than an extension of the



undergraduate curriculum. This effect is had partly by reducing



such of the graduate courses as are found amenable to the



formalities of the undergraduate routine, and partly by



dispensing with such graduate work as will not lend itself, even



ostensibly, to the schoolmaster's methods.







    What has been said of the college in this connection holds



true in the main also of the professional and technical schools.



In their aims, methods and achievements these schools are, in the



nature of the case, foreign to the higher learning. This is, of



course, not said in disparagement of their work; rather the



contrary. As is the case with the college, so these schools also



are often included in the university corporation by ties of an



external and factitious kind, frequently by terms of the charter.



But this formal inclusion of them under the corporate charter



does not set aside the substantial discrepancy between their



purpose, work and animus and those of the university proper. It



can only serve to trouble the single-mindedness of both. It



leaves both the pursuit of learning and the work of preparation



for the professions somewhat at loose ends, confused with the



bootless illusion that they are, in some recondite way, parallel



variants of a single line of work.



    In aim and animus the technical and professional schools are



"practical," in the most thorough going manner; while the pursuit



of knowledge that occupies the scientists and scholars is not



"practical" in the slightest degree. The divergent lines of



interest to be taken care of by the professional schools and the



university, respectively, are as widely out of touch as may well



be within the general field of human knowledge. The one is



animated wholly by considerations of material expediency, and the



range of its interest and efforts is strictly limited by



consideration of the useful effect to which the proficiency that



it gives is to be turned; the other knows nothing of expediency,



and is influenced by no consideration of utility or disutility,



in its appreciation of the knowledge to be sought. The animus of



the one is worldly wisdom; of the other, idle curiosity. The two



are incommensurably at variance so far as regards their purpose,



and in great measure also as regards their methods of work, and



necessarily so.



    But with all this divergence of purpose and animus there is



after all a broad and very substantial bond of community between



the technical schools, on the one hand, and the proper work of



the university, on the other hand, in that the two are, in great



measure, occupied with the same general range of materials and



employ somewhat the same logical methods in handling these



materials. But the relation that results from this community of



material is almost wholly external and mechanical. Nor does it



set up any presumption that the two should expediently be



included in the same corporate establishment, or even that they



need be near neighbors or need maintain peculiarly close



relations of personnel. The technical schools, and in a less



degree the professional schools not properly classed as



technical, depend in large measure on results worked out by the



scientists, who properly belong in the universities. But the



material so made use of for technical ends are taken over and



turned to account without afterthought. The technologist's work



is related to that of the scientists very much as the work of the



designer is related to that of the inventor. To a considerable



extent the scientists similarly depend on the work of the



technical men for information, and for correction and



verification of their own theoretical work. But there is, on this



account, nothing to gain by associating any given technical



school with any given university establishment; incorporation in



any given university does not in any degree facilitate the



utilization of the results of the sciences by the technical men;



nor is it found in practice to further the work of the sciences.



The schools in question do not in any peculiar degree draw on the



work of the scientists attached to their particular university,



nor do these scientists, on the other hand, have any special use



for the work of their associated technical schools. In either



case the source drawn on is the general literature of the



subject, the body of materials available at large, not the work



of particular men attached to particular schools. The



generalizations of science are indispensable to the technical



men; but what they draw on is the body of science at large,



regardless of what any given university establishment may have



had to do with the work out of which the particular items of



scientific information have emerged. Nor is this scientific



material useful to the technologists for the further pursuit of



science; to them the scientific results are data, raw material to



be turned to practical use, not means by which to carry



scientific inquiry out to further results.



    Similarly, the professions and the technical schools afford



valuable data for the use of the professed scholars and



scientists, information that serves as material of Investigation,



or that will at least be useful as a means of extending



correcting, verifying and correlating lines of inquiry on which



they are engaged. But the further bearing of these facts upon the



affairs of life, their expediency or futility, is of no interest



or consequence. The affairs of life, except the affairs of



learning, do not touch the interest of the university man as a



scholar or scientist. What is of importance to him in all these



matters with which the professions and technologists are busy is



their bearing on those matters of fact into which his scientific



interest leads him to inquire. The tests and experiments carried



out at these technical schools, as well as the experience



gathered by the members of their staff, will occasionally afford



him material for further inquiry or means whereby to check



results already arrived at; but for such material he does not by



preference resort to any one of the technical schools as



contrasted with any other, and it is quite an idle question



whether the source of any such serviceable information is a



school attached to his own university. The investigator finds his



material where he can; which comes to saying that he draws on the



general body of technical knowledge, with no afterthought as to



what particular technical school may have stood in some relation



or other to the information which he finds useful.



    Neither to the man engaged in university work nor to the



technical schools that may serve him as occasional sources of



material is there any advantage to be derived from their



inclusion in the university establishment. Indeed, it is a



detriment to both parties, as has already been remarked, but more



decidedly to the university men. By including the technical and



professional schools in the university corporation the



technologists and professional men attached to these schools are



necessarily included among the academic staff, and so they come



to take their part in the direction of academic affairs at large.



In what they so do toward shaping the academic policy they will



not only count for all they are worth, but they are likely to



count for something more than their due share in this respect;



for they are to some extent trained to the conduct of affairs,



and so come in for something of that deference that is currently



paid to men of affairs, at the same time that this practical



training gives them an advantage over their purely academic



colleagues, in the greater assurance and adroitness with which



they are able to present their contentions. By virtue of this



same training, as well as by force of current practical interest,



the technologist and the professional man are, like other men of



affairs, necessarily and habitually impatient of any scientific



or scholarly work that does not obviously lend itself to some



practical use. The technologist appreciates what is mechanically



serviceable; the professional man, as, for instance, the lawyer,



appreciates what promises pecuniary gain; and the two unite with



the business-man at large in repudiating whatever does not look



directly to such a utilitarian outcome. So that as members of the



academic staff these men are likely to count at their full weight



toward the diversion of the university's forces from



disinterested science and scholarship to such palpably



utilitarian ends.







    But the active measures so taken by the academic authorities



at the instance of the schoolmasters and "practical" men are by



no means the only line along which their presence in the academic



corporation affects the case. Intimate association with these



"utilitarians" unavoidably has its corrupting effect on the



scientists and scholars, and induces in them also something of



the same bias toward "practical" results in their work; so that



they no longer pursue the higher learning with undivided



interest, but with more or less of an eye to the utilitarian main



chance; whereby the advantages of specialization, which are the



reason for these schools, are lost, and the pride of the modern



community is wounded in its most sensitive spot -- the efficiency



of its specialists.



    So also, on the other hand, the formal incorporation of these



technological and professional men in the academic body, with its



professedly single-minded interest in learning, has its effect on



their frame of mind. They are, without intending it, placed in a



false position, which unavoidably leads them to court a specious



appearance of scholarship, and so to invest their technological



discipline with a degree of pedantry and sophistication; whereby



it is hoped to give these schools and their work some scientific



and scholarly prestige, and so lift it to that dignity that is



pressed to attach to a non-utilitarian pursuit of learning.



Doubtless this pursuit of scholarly prestige is commonly



successful, to the extent that it produces the desired conviction



of awe in the vulgar, who do not know the difference; but all



this make-believe scholarship, however successfully staged, is



not what these schools are designed for; or at least it is not



what is expected of them, nor is it what they can do best and



most efficiently.



    To the substantial gain of both parties, though with some



lesion of the vanity of both, the separation between the



university and the professional and technical schools should be



carried through and made absolute. Only on such conditions can



either the one or the other do its own work in a workmanlike



manner. Within the university precincts any aim or interest other



than those of irresponsible science and scholarship -- pursuit of



matter-of-fact knowledge -- are to be rated as interlopers.







                                IV







    To all this there is the ready objection of the schoolmasters



and utilitarians that such a project is fantastic and



unpractical, useless and undesirable; that such has not been the



mission of the university in the past, nor its accepted place and



use in the educational system of today and yesterday,. that the



universities of Christendom have from their first foundation been



occupied with professional training and useful knowledge; that



they have been founded for utilitarian purposes and their work



has been guided mainly or altogether by utilitarian



considerations; -- all of which is conceded without argument. The



historical argument amounts to saying that the universities were



founded before modern civilization took on its modern character,



before the disinterested pursuit of knowledge had come to take



the first place among the ideals of civilized mankind, and that



they were established to take care of those interests which were



then accounted of first importance, and that this intellectual



enterprise in pursuit of disinterested knowledge consequently was



not at that time confided to the care of any special



establishment or freely avowed as a legitimate interest in its



own right.



    It is true that, by historical accident, the university at



large has grown out of professional training-schools, primarily



schools for training in theology, secondarily in law and



medicine. It is also true, in like wise and in like degree, that



modern science and scholarship have grown out of the technology



of handicraft and the theological philosophy of the



schoolmen.(7*) But just as it would be a bootless enterprise to



cut modern science back into handicraft technology, so would it



be a gratuitous imbecility to prune back the modern university to



that inchoate phase of its life-history and make it again a



corporation for the training of theologians, jurists and doctors



of medicine. The historical argument does not enjoin a return to



the beginning of things, but rather an intelligent appreciation



of what things are coming to.



    The genesis of the university at large, taken as an



institution of civilized life, is an incident of the transition



from the barbarian culture of the middle ages to modern times,



and its later growth and acquirement of character is an incident



of the further growth of modern civilization; and the character



of this later growth of the university reflects the bent of



modern civilization, as contrasted with the barbarian spirit of



things in the mediaeval spiritual world.



    In a general way, the place of the university in the culture



of Christendom is still substantially the same as it has been



from the beginning. Ideally, and in the popular apprehension, it



is, as it has always been, a corporation for the cultivation and



care of the community's highest aspirations and ideals. But these



ideals and aspirations have changed somewhat with the changing



scheme of the Western civilization; and so the university has



also concomitantly so changed in character, aims and ideals as to



leave it still the corporate organ of the community's dominant



intellectual interest. At the same time, it is true, these



changes in the purpose and spirit of the university have always



been, and are always being, made only tardily, reluctantly,



concessively, against the protests of those who are zealous for



the commonplaces of the day before yesterday. Such is the



character of institutional growth and change; and in its



adaptation to the altered requirements of an altered scheme of



culture the university has in this matter been subject to the



conditions of institutional growth at large. An institution is,



after all, a prevalent habit of thought, and as such it is



subject to the conditions and limitations that surround any



change in the habitual frame of mind prevalent in the community.



    The university of medieval and early modern times, that is to



say the barbarian university, was necessarily given over to the



pragmatic, utilitarian disciplines, since that is the nature of



barbarism; and the barbarian university is but another, somewhat



sublimated, expression of the same barbarian frame of mind. The



barbarian culture is pragmatic, utilitarian, worldly wise, and



its learning partakes of the same complexion. The barbarian, late



or early, is typically an unmitigated pragmatist; that is the



spiritual trait that most profoundly marks him off from the



savage on the one hand and from the civilized man on the other



hand. "He turns a keen, untroubled face home to the instant need



of things."



    The high era of barbarism in Europe, the Dark and Middle



Ages, is marked off from what went before and from what has



followed in the cultural sequence, by a hard and fast utilitarian



animus. The all-dominating spiritual trait of those times is that



men then made the means of life its end. It is perhaps needless



to call to mind that much of this animus still survives in later



civilized life, especially in so far as the scheme of civilized



life is embodied in the competitive system. In that earlier time,



practical sagacity and the serviceability of any knowledge



acquired, its bearing on individual advantage, spiritual or



temporal, was the ruling consideration, as never before or since.



The best of men in that world were not ashamed to avow that a



boundless solicitude for their own salvation was their worthiest



motive of conduct, and it is plain in all their speculations that



they were unable to accept any other motive or sanction as final



in any bearing. Saint and sinner alike knew no higher rule than



expediency, for this world and the next. And, for that matter, so



it still stands with the saint and the sinner, -- who make up



much of the commonplace human material in the modern community;



although both the saint and the sinner in the modern community



carry, largely by shamefaced subreption, an ever increasing



side-line of other and more genial interests that have no merit



in point of expediency whether for this world or the next.



    Under the rule of such a cultural ideal the corporation of



learning could not well take any avowed stand except as an



establishment for utilitarian instruction, the practical



expediency of whose work was the sole overt test of its



competency. And such it still should continue to be according to



the avowed aspirations of the staler commonplace elements in the



community today. By subreption, and by a sophisticated



subsumption under some ostensibly practical line of interest and



inquiry, it is true, the university men of the earlier time spent



much of their best endeavour on matters of disinterested



scholarship that had no bearing on any human want more to the



point than an idle curiosity; and by a similar turn of subreption



and sophistication the later spokesmen of the barbarian ideal



take much complacent credit for the "triumphs of modern science"



that have nothing but an ostensible bearing on any matter of



practical expediency, and they look to the universities to



continue this work of the idle curiosity under some plausible



pretext of practicality.



    So the university of that era unavoidably came to be



organized as a more or less comprehensive federation of



professional schools or faculties devoted to such branches of



practical knowledge as the ruling utilitarian interests of the



time demanded. Under this overshadowing barbarian tradition the



universities of early modern times started out as an avowed



contrivance for indoctrination in the ways and means of



salvation, spiritual and temporal, individual and collective, --



in some sort a school of engineering, primarily in divinity,



secondarily in law and politics, and presently in medicine and



also in the other professions that serve a recognized utilitarian



interest. After that fashion of a university that answered to



this manner of ideals and aspirations had once been installed and



gained a secure footing, its pattern acquired a degree of



authenticity and prescription, so that later seminaries of



learning came unquestioningly to be organized on the same lines;



and further changes of academic policy and practice, such as are



demanded by the later growth of cultural interests and ideals,



have been made only reluctantly and with a suspicious reserve,



gradually and by a circuitous sophistication; so that much of the



non-utilitarian scientific and scholarly work indispensable to



the university's survival under modern conditions is still



scheduled under the faculties of law or medicine, or even of



divinity.



    But the human propensity for inquiry into things,



irrespective of use or expediency, insinuated itself among the



expositors of worldly wisdom from the outset; and from the first



this quest of idle learning has sought shelter in the university



as the only establishment in which it could find a domicile, even



on sufferance, and so could achieve that footing of consecutive



intellectual enterprise running through successive generations of



scholars which is above all else indispensable to the advancement



of knowledge. Under the rgime of unmitigated pragmatic aims that



ruled the earlier days of the European universities, this pursuit



of knowledge for its own sake was carried on as a work of



scholarly supererogation by men whose ostensibly sole occupation



was the promulgation of some accredited line of salutary



information. Frequently it had to be carried on under some



colourable masquerade of practicality. And yet so persistent has



the spirit of idle curiosity proved to be, and so consonant with



the long-term demands even of the laity, that the dissimulation



and smuggling-in of disinterested learning has gone on ever more



openly and at an ever increasing rate of gain; until in the end,



the attention given to scholarship and the non-utilitarian



sciences in these establishments has come far to exceed that



given to the practical disciplines for which the several



faculties were originally installed. As time has passed and as



successive cultural mutations have passed over the community,



shifting the centre of interest and bringing new ideals of



scholarship, and bringing the whole cultural fabric nearer to its



modern complexion, those purposes of crass expediency that were



of such great moment and were so much a matter of course in



earlier academic policy, have insensibly fallen to the rank of



incidentals. And what had once been incidental, or even an object



of surreptitious tolerance in the university, remains today as



the only unequivocal duty of the corporation of learning, and



stands out as the one characteristic trait without which no



establishment can claim rank as a university.



    Philosophy -- the avowed body of theoretical science in the



late medieval time -- had grown out of the schoolmen's



speculations in theology, being in point of derivation a body of



refinements on the divine scheme of salvation; and with a view to



quiet title, and to make manifest their devotion to the greater



good of eschatological expediency, those ingenious speculators



were content to proclaim that their philosophy is the handmaid of



theology -- Philosophia theologiae ancillans. But their



philosophy has fallen into the alembic of the idle curiosity and



has given rise to a body of modern science, godless and



unpractical, that has no intended or even ostensible bearing on



the religious fortunes of mankind; and their sanctimonious maxim



would today be better accepted as the subject of a limerick than



of a homily. Except in degree, the fortunes of the temporal



pragmatic disciplines, in Law and Medicine, have been much the



same as that of their elder sister, Theology. Professionalism and



practical serviceability have been gradually crowded into the



background of academic interests and overlaid with



quasi-utilitarian research -- such as the history of



jurisprudence, comparative physiology, and the like. They have in



fact largely been eliminated.(8*)



    And changes running to this effect have gone farthest and



have taken most consistent effect in those communities that are



most fully imbued with the spirit of the modern peaceable



civilization. It is in the more backward communities and schools



that the barbarian animus of utilitarianism still maintains



itself most nearly intact, whether it touches matters of temporal



or of spiritual interest. With the later advance of culture, as



the intellectual interest has gradually displaced the older



ideals in men's esteem, and barring a reactionary episode here



and there, the university has progressively come to take its



place as a seat of the higher learning, a corporation for the



pursuit of knowledge; and barring accidental reversions, it has



increasingly asserted itself as an imperative necessity, more and



more consistently, that the spirit of disinterested inquiry must



have free play in these seminaries of the higher learning,



without afterthought as to the practical or utilitarian



consequences which this free inquiry may conceivably have for the



professional training or for the social, civil or religious



temper of the students or the rest of the community. Nothing is



felt to be so irremediably vicious in academic policy as a



coercive bias, religious, political, conventional or



professional, in so far as it touches that quest of knowledge



that constitutes the main interest of the university.



    Professional training and technological work at large have of



course not lost ground, either in the volume and the rigour of



their requirements or in the application bestowed in their



pursuit; but as within the circle of academic interests, these



utilitarian disciplines have lost their preferential place and



have been pushed to one side; so that the professional and



technical schools are now in fact rated as adjuncts rather than



as integral constituents of the university corporation. Such is



the unmistakable sense of this matter among academic men. At the



same time these vocational schools have, one with another,



progressively taken on more of a distinctive, independent and



close-knit structure; an individual corporate existence,



autonomous and academically self-sufficient, even in those cases



where they most tenaciously hold to their formal connection with



the university corporation. They have reached a mature phase of



organization, developed a type of personnel and control peculiar



to themselves and their special needs, and have in effect come



out from under the tutelage of the comprehensive academic



organization of which they once in their early days were the



substantial core. These schools have more in common among



themselves as a class than their class have with the academic



aims and methods that characterize the university proper. They



are in fact ready and competent to go on their own recognizances,



-- indeed they commonly resent any effective interference or



surveillance from the side of the academic corporation of which



they nominally continue to be members, and insist on going their



own way and arranging their own affairs as they know best. Their



connection with the university is superficial and formal at the



best, so far as regards any substantial control of their affairs



and policy by the university authorities at large; it is only in



their interference with academic policy, and in injecting their



own peculiar bias into university affairs, that they count



substantially as corporate members of the academic body. And in



these respects, what is said of the professional and technical



schools holds true also of the undergraduate departments.



    It is quite feasible to have a university without



professional schools and without an undergraduate department; but



it is not possible to have one without due provision for that



non-utilitarian higher learning about which as a nucleus these



utilitarian disciplines cluster. And this in spite of the



solicitous endeavours of the professional schools to make good



their footing as the substantial core of the corporation.







                             V







    As intimated above, there are two main reasons for the



continued and tenacious connection between these schools and the



universities: (a) ancient tradition, fortified by the solicitous



ambition of the university directorate to make a brave show of



magnitude, and (b) the anxiety of these schools to secure some



degree of scholarly authentication through such a formal



connection with a seat of learning. These two motives have now



and again pushed matters fairly to an extreme in the reactionary



direction. So, for instance, the chances of intrigue and



extra-academic clamour have latterly thrown up certain men of



untempered "practicality" as directive heads of certain



universities, and some of these have gone so far as to avow a



reactionary intention to make the modern university a cluster of



professional schools or faculties, after the ancient barbarian



fashion.(9*) But such a policy of return to the lost crudities is



unworkable in the long run under modern conditions. It may serve



excellently as a transient expedient in a campaign of popularity,



and such appears to have been its chief purpose where a move of



this kind has been advocated, but it runs on superficial grounds



and can afford neither hope nor fear of a permanent diversion in



the direction so spoken for.



    In the modern community, under the strain of the price system



and the necessities of competitive earning and spending, many men



and women are driven by an habitual bias in favour of a higher



"practical" efficiency in all matters of education; that is to



say, a more single-minded devotion to the needs of earning and



spending. There is, indeed, much of this spirit abroad in the



community, and any candidate for popular favour and prestige may



find his own advantage in conciliating popular sentiment of this



kind. But there is at the same time equally prevalent through the



community a long-term bias of another kind, such as will not



enduringly tolerate the sordid effects of pursuing an educational



policy that looks mainly to the main chance, and unreservedly



makes the means of life its chief end. By virtue of this



long-term idealistic drift, any seminary of learning that plays



fast and loose in this way with the cultural interests entrusted



to its keeping loses caste and falls out of the running. The



universities that are subjected in this fashion to an



experimental reversion to vocationalism, it appears, will



unavoidably return presently to something of the non-professional



type, on pain of falling into hopeless discredit. There have been



some striking instances, but current not ions of delicacy will



scarcely admit a citation of nam es and dates. And while the



long-term drift of the modern idealistic bias may not permit the



universities permanently to be diverted to the service of Mammon



in this fashion, yet the unremitting endeavours of "educators"



seeking prestige for worldly wisdom results at the best in a



fluctuating state of compromise, in which the ill effects of such



bids for popularity are continually being outworn by the drift of



academic usage.



    The point is illustrated by the American state universities



as a class, although the illustration is by no means uniformly



convincing. The greater number of these state schools are not, or



are not yet, universities except in name. These establishments



have been founded, commonly, with a professed utilitarian



purpose, and have started out with professional training as their



chief avowed aim. The purpose made most of in their establishment



has commonly been to train young men for proficiency in some



gainful occupation; along with this have gone many



half-articulate professions of solicitude for cultural interests



to be taken care of by the same means. They have been installed



by politicians looking for popular acclaim, rather than by men of



scholarly or scientific insight, and their management has not



infrequently been entrusted to political masters of intrigue,



with scant academic qualifications; their foundations has been



the work of practical politicians with a view to conciliate the



good will of a lay constituency clamouring for things tangibly



"useful" -- that is to say, pecuniarily gainful. So these experts



in short-term political prestige have made provision for schools



of a "practical" character; but they have named these



establishments "universities" because the name carries an air of



scholarly repute, of a higher, more substantial kind than any



naked avowal of material practicality would give. Yet, in those



instances where the passage of time has allowed the readjustment



to take place, these quasi-"universities," installed by men of



affairs, of a crass "practicality," and in response to the



utilitarian demands of an unlearned political constituency, have



in the long run taken on more and more of an academic,



non-utilitarian character, and have been gradually falling into



line as universities claiming a place among the seminaries of the



higher learning. The long-term drift of modern cultural ideals



leaves these schools no final resting place short of the



university type, however far short of such a consummation the



greater number of them may still be found.







    What has just been said of the place which the university



occupies in modern civilization, and more particularly of the



manner in which it is to fill its place, may seem something of a



fancy sketch. It is assuredly not a faithful description of any



concrete case, by all means not of any given American university;



nor does it faithfully describe the line of policy currently



pursued by the directorate of any such establishment. Yet it is



true to the facts, taken in a generalized way, and it describes



the type to which the American schools unavoidably gravitate by



force of the community's long-term idealistic impulsion, in so



far as their drift is not continually corrected and offset by



vigilant authorities who, from motives of their own, seek to turn



the universities to account in one way and another. It describes



an institutional ideal; not necessarily an ideal nursed by any



given individual, but the ideal logically involved in the scheme



of modern civilization, and logically coming out of the



historical development of Western civilization hitherto, and



visible to any one who will dispassionately stand aside and look



to the drift of latterday events in so far as they bear on this



matter of the higher learning, its advancement and conservation.



    Many if not most of those men who are occupied with the



guidance of university affairs would disown such a projected



ideal, as being too narrow and too unpractical to fit into the



modern scheme of things, which is above all else a culture of



affairs; that it does not set forth what should be aimed at by



any who have the good of mankind at heart, or who in any sensible



degree appreciate the worth of real work as contrasted with the



leisurely intellectual finesse of the confirmed scientist and man



of letters. These and the like objections and strictures may be



well taken, perhaps. The question of what, in any ulterior sense,



ought to be sought after in the determination of academic policy



and the conduct of academic affairs will, however, not coincide



with the other question, as to what actually is being



accomplished in these premises, on the one hand, nor as to what



the long-term cultural aspirations of civilized men are setting



toward, on the other hand.



    Now, it is not intended here to argue the merits of the



current cultural ideals as contrasted with what, in some ulterior



sense, ought to be aimed at if the drift of current aspirations



and impulse should conceivably permit a different ideal to be put



into effect. It is intended only to set forth what place, in



point of fact and for better or worse, the higher learning and



the university hold in the current scheme of Western



civilization, as determined by that body of instinctive



aspirations and proclivities that holds this civilization to its



course as it runs today; and further to show how and how far



certain institutional factors comprised in this modern scheme of



life go to help or hinder the realization of this ideal which



men's aspirations and proclivities so make worth while to them.



The sketch here offered in characterization of the university and



its work, therefore, endeavours to take account of the



community's consensus of impulses and desires touching the animus



and aims that should move the seminaries of the higher learning,



at the same time that it excludes those subsidiary or alien



interests in whose favour no such consensus is found to prevail.



    There are many of these workday interests, extraneous to the



higher learning, each and several of which may be abundantly good



and urgent in its own right; but, while they need not be at cross



purposes with the higher learning, they are extraneous to that



disinterested pursuit of knowledge in which the characteristic



intellectual bent of modern civilization culminates. These others



are patent, insistent and palpable, and there need be no



apprehension of their going by default. The intellectual



predilection -- the idle curiosity -- abides and asserts itself



when other pursuits of a more temporal but more immediately



urgent kind leave men free to take stock of the ulterior ends and



values of life; whereas the transient interests, preoccupation



with the ways and means of life, are urgent and immediate, and



employ men's thought and energy through the greater share of



their life. The question of material ways and means, and the



detail requirements of the day's work, are for ever at hand and



for ever contest the claims of any avowed ulterior end; and by



force of unremitting habituation the current competitive system



of acquisition and expenditure induces in all classes such a bias



as leads them to overrate ways and means as contrasted with the



ends which these ways and means are in some sense designed to



serve.



    So, one class and another, biassed by the habitual



preoccupation of the class, will aim to divert the academic



equipment to some particular use which habit has led them to rate



high; or to include in the academic discipline various lines of



inquiry and training which are extraneous to the higher learning



but which the class in question may specially have at heart; but



taking them one with another, there is no general or abiding



consensus among the various classes of the community in favour of



diverting the academic establishment to any other specific uses,



or of including in the peculiar work of the university anything



beyond the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake.



    Now, it may be remarked by the way, that civilized mankind



should have come so to set their heart on this chase after a



fugitive knowledge of inconsequential facts may be little to the



credit of the race or of that scheme of culture that so centres



about this cult of the idle curiosity. And it is perhaps to their



credit, as well as to the credit of the community whose creatures



they are, that the spokesmen of some tangible ideal, some



materially expedient aspiration, embodying more of worldly



wisdom, are for ever urging upon the institutions of the higher



leaning one or another course of action of a more palpably



expedient kind. But, for better or worse, the passage of time



brings out the fact that these sober and sensible courses of



policy so advocated are after all essentially extraneous, if not



alien, to those purposes for which a university can be



maintained, on the ground afforded by the habits of thought



prevalent in the modern civilized community.



    One and another of these "practical" and expedient interests



have transiently come to the front in academic policy, and have



in their time given a particular bent to the pursuit of knowledge



that has occupied the universities. Of these extraneous interests



the two most notable have, as already indicated above, been the



ecclesiastical and the political. But in the long run these



various interests and ideals of expediency have, all and several,



shown themselves to be only factional elements in the scheme of



culture, and have lost their preferential voice in the shaping of



academic life. The place in men's esteem once filled by church



and state is now held by pecuniary traffic, business enterprise.



So that the graver issues of academic policy which now tax the



discretion of the directive powers, reduce themselves in the main



to a question between the claims of science and scholarship on



the one hand and those of business principles and pecuniary gain



on the other hand. In one shape or another this problem of



adjustment, reconciliation or compromise between the needs of the



higher learning and the demands of business enterprise is for



ever present in the deliberations of the university directorate.



This question gathers in its net all those perplexing details of



expediency that now claim the attention of the ruling bodies.







                            VI







    Since the paragraphs that make up the foregoing chapter were



written the American academic community has been thrown into a



new and peculiar position by the fortunes of war. The progress



and the further promise of the war hold in prospect new and



untried responsibilities, as well as an unexampled opportunity.



So that the outlook now (June 1918) would seem to be that the



Americans are to be brought into a central place in the republic



of learning; to take a position, not so much of dominance as of



trust and guardianship; not so much by virtue of their own



superior merit as by force of the insolvency of the European



academic community.



    Again, it is not that the war is expected to leave the lines



of European scholars and scientists extinct; although there is no



denying the serious inroads made by the war, both in the way of a



high mortality among European men of learning, and in the way of



a decimation of the new men on whom the hopes of the higher



learning for the incoming generation should have rested. There is



also a serious diversion of the young forces from learning to



transiently urgent matters of a more material, and more ephemeral



nature. But possibly more sinister than all these losses that are



in a way amenable to statistical record and estimate, is the



current and prospective loss of morale.



    Naturally, it would be difficult and hazardous to offer an



appraisal of this prospective loss of morale, with which it is to



be expected that the disintegrated European community of learned



men will come through the troubled times. But that there is much



to be looked for on this score, that there is much to be written



off in the way of lowered aggregate efficiency and loss of the



spirit of team-work, -- that much there is no denying, and it is



useless to blink the fact.



    There has already a good deal of disillusionment taken effect



throughout the nations of Christendom in respect of the temper



and trustworthiness of German scholarship these past three or



four years, and it is fairly beyond computation what further



shift of sentiment in this respect is to be looked for in the



course of a further Possible period of years given over to the



same line of experience. Doubtless, the German scholars, and



therefore the German seats of learning whose creatures and whose



custodians these German scholars are, have earned much of the



distrust and dispraise that is falling to their share. There is



no overlooking the fact that they have proved the frailty of



their hold on those elementary principles of sobriety and single



mind that underlie all sound work in the field of learning. To



any one who has the interest of the higher learning at heart, the



spectacle of maudlin chauvinism and inflated scurrility



unremittingly placed on view by the putative leaders of German



science and scholarship can not but be exceedingly disheartening.



    It may be argued, and it may be true, of course, that much of



this failure of intelligence and spiritual force among Germany's



men of learning is of the nature of a transient eclipse of their



powers; that with the return of settled conditions there is due



to come a return of poise and insight. But when all due argument



has been heard, it remains true that the distrust set afoot in



the mind of their neighbours, by this highly remarkable



exhibition of their personal equation, will long inure to the



disability of Germany's men of learning as a force to be counted



on in that teamwork that is of the essence of things for the



advancement of learning. In effect, Germany, and Germany's



associates in this warlike enterprise, will presumably be found



bankrupt in this respect on the return of peace, even beyond the



other nations.



    These others have also not escaped the touch of the angel of



decay, but the visible corruption of spiritual and intellectual



values does not go the same length among them. Nor have these



others suffered so heavy a toll on their prospective scholarly



man power. It is all a matter of degree and of differential



decline, coupled with a failure of corporate organization and of



the usages and channels of communion and co-operation.



Chauvinistic self-sufficiency and disesteem of their neighbours



have apparently also not gone so deep and far among the other



nations; although here again it is only a relative degree of



immunity that they enjoy.



    And all this holds true of the Americans in much the same way



as of the rest; except that the Americans have, at least



hitherto, not been exposed to the blight in anything like the



same degree as any one of those other peoples with whom they come



in comparison here. It is, of course, not easy to surmise what



may yet overtake them, and the others with them; but judged on



the course of things hitherto, and on the apparent promise of the



calculable future, it is scarcely to be presumed that the



Americans are due to suffer so extreme a degree of dilapidation



as the European peoples, -- even apart from the accentuated evil



case of the Germans. The strain has hitherto been lighter here,



and it promises so to continue, whether the further duration of



the war shall turn out to be longer or shorter. The Americans



are, after all, somewhat sheltered from the impact; and so soon



as the hysterical anxiety induced by the shock has had time to



spend itself, it should reasonably be expected that this people



will be able soberly to take stock of its assets and to find that



its holdings in the domain of science and scholarship are, in the



main, still intact.



    Not that no loss has been incurred, nor that no material



degree of derangement is to be looked for, but in comparison with



what the experience of the war is bringing to the Europeans, the



case of the Americans should still be the best there is to be



looked for and the best is always good enough, perforce. So it



becomes a question, what the Americans will do with the best



opportunity which the circumstances offer. And on their conduct



of their affairs in this bearing turns not only their own fortune



in respect of the interests of science and scholarship, but in



great measure the fortunes of their overseas friends and



co-partners in the republic of learning as well.



    The fortunes of war promise to leave the American men of



learning in a strategic position, in the position of a strategic



reserve, of a force to be held in readiness, equipped and



organized to meet the emergency that so arises, and to retrieve



so much as may be of those assets of scholarly equipment and



personnel that make the substantial code of Western civilization.



And so it becomes a question of what the Americans are minded to



do about it. It is their opportunity, and at the same time it



carries the gravest responsibility that has yet fallen on the



nation; for the spiritual fortunes of Christendom are bound up



with the line of policy which this surviving contingent of



American men of learning shall see fit to pursue. They are not



all that is to be left over when the powers of decay shall begin



to retire, nor are they, perhaps, to be the best and most



valuable contingent among these prospective survivors; but they



occupy a strategic position, in that they are today justly to be



credited with disinterested motives, beyond the rest, at the same



time that they command those material resources without which the



quest of knowledge can hope to achieve little along the modern



lines of inquiry. By force of circumstances they are thrown into



the position of keepers of the ways and means whereby the



republic of learning is to retrieve its fortunes. By force of



circumstances they are in a position, if they so choose, to



shelter many of those masters of free inquiry whom the one-eyed



forces of reaction and partisanship overseas will seek to



suppress and undo; and they are also in a position, if they so



choose, to install something in the way of an international



clearing house and provisional headquarters for the academic



community throughout that range of civilized peoples whose



goodwill they now enjoy -- a place of refuge and a place of



meeting, confluence and dissemination for those views and ideas



that live and move and have their being in the higher learning.







    There is, therefore, a work of reconstruction to be taken



care of in the realm of learning, no less than in the working



scheme of economic and civil institutions. And as in this other



work of reconstruction, so here; if it is to be done without



undue confusion and blundering it is due to be set afoot before



the final emergency is at hand. But there is the difference that,



whereas the framework of civil institutions may still, with



passable success, be drawn on national lines and confined within



the national frontiers; and while the economic organization can



also, without fatal loss, be confined in a similar fashion, in



response to short-sighted patriotic preconceptions; the interests



of science, and therefore of the academic community, do not run



on national lines and can not similarly be confined within



geographical or political boundaries. In the nature of the case



these interests are of an international character and can not be



taken care of except by unrestricted collusion and collaboration



among the learned men of all those peoples whom it may concern.



Yet there is no mistaking the fact that the spirit of invidious



patriotism has invaded these premises, too, and promises to



bungle the outcome; which makes the needed work of reconstruction



all the more difficult and all the more imperative. Unhappily,



the state of sentiment on both sides of the line of cleavage will



presumably not admit a cordial understanding and co-operation



between the German contingent and the rest of the civilized



nations, for some time to come. But the others are in a frame of



mind that should lend itself generously to a larger measure of



co-operation in this respect now than ever before.



    So it may not seem out of place to offer a suggestion,



tentatively and under correction, looking to this end. A



beginning may well be made by a joint enterprise among American



scholars and universities for the installation of a freely



endowed central establishment where teachers and students of all



nationalities, including Americans with the rest, may pursue



their chosen work as guests of the American academic community at



large, or as guests of the American people in the character of a



democracy of culture. There should also be nothing to hinder the



installation of more than one of these academic houses of refuge



and entertainment; nor should there be anything to hinder the



enterprise being conducted on such terms of amity, impartiality



and community interest as will make recourse to it an easy matter



of course for any scholars whom its opportunities may attract.



The same central would at the same time, and for the time being,



take care of those channels of communication throughout the



academic world that have been falling into enforced neglect under



the strain of the war. So also should provision be made, perhaps



best under the same auspices, for the (transient) taking-over of



the many essential lines of publicity and publication on which



the men engaged in scholarly and scientific inquiry have learned



to depend, and which have also been falling into something of a



decline during the war.



    Measures looking to this end might well be made, at the same



time, to serve no less useful a purpose within the American



Academic community. As is well known, there prevails today an



extensive and wasteful competitive duplication of plant,



organization and personnel among the American universities, as



regards both publications and courses of instruction.



Particularly is this true in respect of that advanced work of the



universities that has to do with the higher learning. At the same



time, these universities are now pinched for funds, due to the



current inflation of prices. So that any proposal of this nature,



which might be taken advantage of as an occasion for the pooling



of common issues among the universities, might hopefully be



expected to be welcomed as a measure of present relief from some



part of the pecuniary strain under which they are now working.



    But competition is well ingrained in the habitual outlook of



the American schools. To take the issue to neutral ground,



therefore, where this competitive animus may hopefully be counted



on to find some salutary abatement, it may be suggested that a



practicable nucleus for this proposed joint enterprise can well



be found in one or another -- perhaps in one and another -- of



those extra-academic foundations for research of which there



already are several in existence, -- as, e.g., the Carnegie



Institution. With somewhat enlarged powers, or perhaps rather



with some abatement of restrictions, and with such additional



funds as may be required, the necessary work and organization



should readily be taken care of by such an institution. Further



growth and ramification would be left to future counsel and



advisement.



    The contemplated enterprise would necessarily require a



certain planning and organization of work and something in the



way of an administrative and clerical staff,a setting up of



something in the way of "organization tables"; but there can be



no question of offering detailed proposals on that head here. Yet



the caution may well be entered here that few specifications are



better than many, in these premises, and that the larger the



latitude allowed from the outset, the fewer the seeds of eventual



defeat, -- as is abundantly illustrated by contraries.



    It is also evident that such an enterprise will involve



provision for some expenditure of funds; presumably a somewhat



generous expenditure; which comes near implying that recourse



should be had to the public revenues, or to resources that may



legitimately be taken over by the public authorities from private



hands where they now serve no useful purpose. There are many



items of material resources in the country that come legitimately



under this head. At the same time it is well in this connection



to call to mind that there is no prospect of the country's being



in any degree impoverished in the course of the war; so that



there need be no apprehension of a shortage of means for the



carrying on of such an enterprise, if only the available sources



are drawn on without prejudice. In the mind of any disinterested



student of the American economic situation, there can be no



serious apprehension that the American people, collectively, will



be at all worse off in point of disposable means at the close of



the war than they were at its beginning; quite the contrary in



fact. To any one who will look to the facts it is evident that



the experience of the war, and the measures taken and to be



taken, are leading to a heightened industrial productiveness and



a concomitant elimination of waste. The resulting net gain in



productive efficiency has not gone at all far, and there need be



no apprehension of its going to great lengths; but, for more or



less, it is going so far as safely to promise a larger net annual



production of useful goods in the immediate future than in the



immediate past; and the disposable means of any people is always



a matter of the net annual production, and it need be a question



of nothing else. The manner in which this net product is, and is



to be, shared among the classes and individuals of the community



is another question, which does not belong here.



    A question of graver weight and of greater perplexity touches



the presumptive attitude of the several universities and their



discretionary authorities in the face of any proposed measure of



this kind; where the scope of the enterprise is so far beyond



their habitual range of interest. When one calls to mind the



habitual parochialism of the governing boards of these seminaries



of the higher learning, and the meticulous manoeuvres of their



executives seeking each to enhance his own prestige and the



prestige of his own establishment, there is not much of an



evident outlook for large and generous measures looking to the



common good. And yet it is also to be called to mind that these



governing boards and executives are, after all, drawn from the



common stock of humanity, picked men as they may be; and that



they are subject, after all, to somewhat the same impulses and



infirmities as the common run, picked though they may be with a



view to parochialism and blameless futility. Now, what is



overtaking the temper of the common run under the strain of the



war situation should be instructive as to what may be also looked



for at the bands of these men in whose discretion rest the



fortunes of the American universities. There should be at least a



fighting chance that, with something larger, manlier, more



substantial, to occupy their attention and to shape the day's



work for them, these seminaries of learning may, under instant



pressure, turn their best efforts to their ostensible purpose,



"the increase and diffusion of knowledge among men," and to



forego their habitual preoccupation with petty intrigue and



bombastic publicity, until the return of idler days.







NOTES:







1. An inquiry of this kind has been attempted elsewhere: Cf. The



Instinct of Workmanship. chapter vii, pp. 321-340; "The Place of



Science in Modern Civilization", American Journal of Sociology.



Vol. XI (March, 1906), pp. 585-609; "The Evolution of the



Scientific Point of View," University of California Chronicle



(1908), Vol. X, No. 4, pp. 395-416.







2. Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of the



Industrial Arts, ch.i and pp. 30-45, 52-62, 84-89.







3. In the crude surmises of the pioneers in pragmatism this



proposition was implicitly denied; in their later and more



advisedly formulated positions the expositors of pragmatism have



made peace with it.







4. The essential function of the university is to bring together,



for the transmission of experience and impulse, the sages of the



passing and the picked youths of the coming generation. By the



extent and fulness with which they establish these social



contacts, and thus transmit the wave of cumulative experience and



idealist impulse -- the real sources of moral and intellectual



progress -- the universities are to be judged. -- Victor



Branford, Interpretations and Forecasts, ch. VI. "The Present as



a Transition." p 288.







5. Cf., Geo. T. Ladd, University Control, p. 349.







6. Cf., e.g., J. McKeen Cattell, University Control, Part III,



ch. V., "Concerning the American University." "The university is



those who teach and those who learn and the work they do." "The



university is its men and their work. But certain externals are



necessary or at least usual -- buildings and equipment, a



president and trustees."



    "The papers by other writers associated with Mr Cattell in



this volume run to the same effect whenever they touch the same



topic; and, indeed, it would be difficult to find a deliberate



expression to the contrary among men entitled to speak in these



premises.



    It may be in place to add here that the volume referred to,



on University Control, has been had in mind throughout the



following analysis and has served as ground and material for much



of the argument.







7. Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship, ch. vi, vii.







8. With the current reactionary trend of things political and



civil toward mediaeval-barbarian policies and habits of thought



in the Fatherland, something of a correlative change has also



latterly come in evidence in the German universities; so that



what is substantially "cameralistic science" -- training and



information for prospective civil servants and police magistrates



is in some appreciable measure displacing disinterested inquiry



in the field of economics and political theory. This is



peculiarly true of those corporations of learning that come



closely in touch with the Cultus Ministerium.







9. Cf. "Some Considerations On the Function of the State



University." (Inaugural Address of Edmund Janes James, Ph.D.,



LL.D.), Science, November 17, 1905.











CHAPTER II







The Governing Boards







    In the working theory of the modern civilized community, --



that is to say in the current common-sense apprehension of what



is right and good, as it works out in the long run, -- the



university is a corporation of learning, disinterested and



dispassionate. To its keeping is entrusted the community's joint



interest in esoteric knowledge. It is given over to the



single-minded pursuit of science and scholarship, without



afterthought and without a view to interests subsidiary or



extraneous to the higher learning. It is, indeed, the one great



institution of modern times that works to no ulterior end and is



controlled by no consideration of expediency beyond its own work.



Typically, normally, in point of popular theory, the university



is moved by no consideration other than "the increase and



diffusion of knowledge among men." This is so because this



profitless quest of knowledge has come to be the highest and



ulterior aim of modern culture.



    Such has been the case, increasingly, for some generations



past; but it is not until quite recently that such a statement



would hold true unequivocally and with an unqualified generality.



That the case stands so today is due to the failure of



theoretical interests of a different kind; directly and



immediately it is due to the fact that in the immediate present



the cult of knowledge has, by default, taken over that primacy



among human interests which an eschatologically thrifty religious



sentiment once held in the esteem of Christendom. So long as the



fear of God still continued to move the generality of civilized



men in sufficient measure, their theoretical knowledge was



organized for "the glory of God and the good of man," -- the



latter phrase being taken in the eschatological sense; and so



long the resulting scheme of learning was laid out and cultivated



with an eye to the main chance in a hereafter given over, in the



main and for its major effect, to pains and penalties. With the



latterday dissipation of this fear of God, the scheme of



knowledge handed down out of a devout past and further amplified



in the (theoretically) Godless present, has, by atrophy of



disuse, lost its ulterior view to such spiritual expediency, and



has come to stand over as an output of intellectual enterprise



working under the impulsion and guidance of an idle curiosity



simply. All this may not be much to the credit of civilized



mankind, but dispassionate reflection will not leave the fact in



doubt. And the outcome for the university, considered as an



institution of this modern culture, is such as this conjuncture



of circumstances will require.



    But while such is the dispassionate working theory, the



long-term drift of modern common sense as touches the work of the



university, it is also a matter of course that this ideally



single-minded course of action has never been realized in any



concrete case. While it holds true, by and large, that modern



Christendom has outlived the fear of God, -- that is to say of



"the Pope, the Turk, and the Devil," -- it does not therefore



follow that men take a less instant interest in the affairs of



life, or carry on the traffic of their lives with a less alert



eye to the main chance, than they once did under the habitual



shadow of that barbarian fear. The difference is, for the purpose



in hand, that the same solicitous attention that once converged



on such an avoidance of ulterior consequences now centres on



questions of present ways and means. Worldly wisdom has not



fallen into decay or abeyance, but it has become a wisdom of ways



and means that lead to nothing beyond further ways and means.



Expediency and practical considerations have come to mean



considerations of a pecuniary kind; good, on the whole, for



pecuniary purposes only; that is to say, gain and expenditure for



the sake of further gain and expenditure, with nothing that will



stand scrutiny as a final term to this traffic in ways and means,



-- except only this cult of the idle curiosity to which the seats



of learning are, in theory, dedicate. But unremitting habituation



to the competitive pursuit of ways and means has determined that



"practical" interests of this complexion rule workday life in the



modern community throughout, and they are therefore so intimately



and ubiquitously bound up with current habits of thought, and



have so strong and immediate a hold on current workday sentiment,



that, hitherto, in no case have the seats of learning been able



to pursue their quest of knowledge with anything like that



single-mindedness which academic men are moved to profess in



their moments of academic elation.



    Some one vital interest of this practical sort, some variant



of the quest of gain, is always at hand and strenuously effective



in the community's life, and therefore dominates their everyday



habits of thought for the time being. This tone-giving dominance



of such a workday interest may be transient or relatively



enduring; it may be more or less urgently important and



consequential under the circumstances in which the community is



placed, or the clamour of its spokesmen and beneficiaries may be



more or less ubiquitous and pertinacious; but in any case it will



have its effect in the counsels of the "Educators," and so it



will infect the university as well as the lower levels of the



educational system. So that, while the higher learning still



remains as the enduring purpose and substantial interest of the



university establishment, the dominant practical interests of the



day will, transiently but effectually, govern the detail lines of



academic policy, the range of instruction offered, and the



character of the personnel; and more particularly and immediately



will the character of the governing boards and the academic



administration so be determined by the current run of popular



sentiment touching the community's practical needs and aims;



since these ruling bodies stand, in one way or another, under the



critical surveillance of a lay constituency.







    The older American universities have grown out of underlying



colleges, -- undergraduate schools. Within the memory of men



still living it was a nearly unbroken rule that the governing



boards of these higher American schools were drawn largely from



the clergy and were also guided mainly by ecclesiastical, or at



least by devotional, notions of what was right and needful in



matters of learning. This state of things reflected the ingrained



devoutness of that portion of the American community to which the



higher schools then were of much significance. At the same time



it reflected the historical fact that the colleges of the early



days had been established primarily as training schools for



ministers of the church. In their later growth, in the recent



past, while the chief purpose of these seminaries has no longer



been religious, yet ecclesiastical prepossessions long continued



to mark the permissible limits of the learning which they



cultivated, and continued also to guard the curriculum and



discipline of the schools.



    That phase of academic policy is past. Due regard at least



is, of course, still had to the religious proprieties -- the



American community, by and large, is still the most devout of



civilized countries -- but such regard on the part of the



academic authorities now proceeds on grounds of businesslike



expediency rather than on religious conviction or on an



ecclesiastical or priestly bias in the ruling bodies. It is a



concessive precaution on the part of a worldly-wise directorate,



in view of the devout prejudices of those who know no better.



    The rule of the clergy belongs virtually to the prehistory of



the American universities. While that rule held there were few if



any schools that should properly be rated as of university grade.



Even now, it is true, much of the secondary school system,



including the greater part, though a diminishing number, of the



smaller colleges, is under the tutelage of the clergy; and the



academic heads o* these schools are almost universally men of



ecclesiastical standing and bias rather than of scholarly



attainments. But that fact does not call for particular notice



here, since these schools lie outside the university field, and



so outside the scope of this inquiry.



    For a generation past, while the American universities have



been coming into line as seminaries of the higher learning, there



has gone on a wide-reaching substitution of laymen in the place



of clergymen on the governing boards. This progressive



secularization is sufficiently notorious, even though there are



some among the older establishments the terms of whose charters



require a large proportion of clergymen on their boards. This



secularization is entirely consonant with the prevailing drift of



sentiment in the community at large, as is shown by the uniform



and uncritical approval with which it is regarded. The



substitution is a substitution of businessmen and politicians;



which amounts to saying that it is a substitution of businessmen.



So that the discretionary control in matters of university policy



now rests finally in the hands of businessmen.



    The reason which men prefer to allege for this state of



things is the sensible need of experienced men of affairs to take



care of the fiscal concerns of these university corporations; for



the typical modern university is a corporation possessed of large



property and disposing of large aggregate expenditures, so that



it will necessarily have many and often delicate pecuniary



interests to be looked after. It is at the same time held to be



expedient in case of emergency to have several wealthy men



identified with the governing board, and such men of wealth are



also commonly businessmen. It is apparently believed, though on



just what ground this sanguine belief rests does not appear, that



in case of emergency the wealthy members of the boards may be



counted on to spend their substance in behalf of the university.



In point of fact, at any rate, poor men and men without large



experience in business affairs are felt to have no place in these



bodies. If by any chance such men, without the due pecuniary



qualifications, should come to make up a majority, or even an



appreciable minority of such a governing board, the situation



would be viewed with some apprehension by all persons interested



in the case and cognizant of the facts. The only exception might



be cases where, by tradition, the board habitually includes a



considerable proportion of clergymen:







                "Such great regard is always lent



                By men to ancient precedent."











    The reasons alleged are no doubt convincing to those who are



ready to be so convinced, but they are after all more plausible



at first sight than on reflection. In point of fact these



businesslike governing boards commonly exercise little if any



current surveillance of the corporate affairs of the university,



beyond a directive oversight of the distribution of expenditures



among the several academic purposes for which the corporate



income is to be used; that is to say, they control the budget of



expenditures; which comes to saying that they exercise a



pecuniary discretion in the case mainly in the way of deciding



what the body of academic men that constitutes the university may



or may not do with the means in hand; that is to say, their



pecuniary surveillance comes in the main to an interference with



the academic work, the merits of which these men of affairs on



the governing board are in no special degree qualified to judge.



Beyond this, as touches the actual running administration of the



corporation's investments, income and expenditures, -- all that



is taken care of by permanent officials who have, as they



necessarily must, sole and responsible charge of those matters.



Even the auditing of the corporation's accounts is commonly



vested in such officers of the corporation, who have none but a



formal, if any, direct connection with the governing board. The



governing board, or more commonly a committee of the board, on



the other hand, will then formally review the balance sheets and



bundles of vouchers duly submitted by the corporation's fiscal



officers and their clerical force, -- with such effect of



complaisant oversight as will best be appreciated by any person



who has bad the fortune to look into the accounts of a large



corporation.







    So far as regards its pecuniary affairs and their due



administration, the typical modern university is in a position,



without loss or detriment, to dispense with the services of any



board of trustees, regents, curators, or what not. Except for the



insuperable difficulty of getting a hearing for such an



extraordinary proposal, it should be no difficult matter to show



that these governing boards of businessmen commonly are quite



useless to the university for any businesslike purpose. Indeed,



except for a stubborn prejudice to the contrary, the fact should



readily be seen that the boards are of no material use in any



connection; their sole effectual function being to interfere with



the academic management in matters that are not of the nature of



business, and that lie outside their competence and outside the



range of their habitual interest.



    The governing boards -- trustees, regents, curators, fellows,



whatever their style and title -- are an aimless survival from



the days of clerical rule, when they were presumably of some



effect in enforcing conformity to orthodox opinions and



observances, among the academic staff. At that time, when means



for maintenance of the denominational colleges commonly had to be



procured by an appeal to impecunious congregations, it fell to



these bodies of churchmen to do service as sturdy beggars for



funds with which to meet current expenses. So that as long as the



boards were made up chiefly of clergymen they served a pecuniary



purpose; whereas, since their complexion has been changed by the



substitution of businessmen in the place of ecclesiastics, they



have ceased to exercise any function other than a bootless



meddling with academic matters which they do not understand. The



sole ground of their retention appears to be an unreflecting



deferential concession to the usages of corporate organization



and control, such as have been found advantageous for the pursuit



of private gain by businessmen banded together in the



exploitation of joint-stock companies with limited liability.(1*)



    The fact remains, the modern civilized community is reluctant



to trust its serious interests to others than men of pecuniary



substance, who have proved their fitness for the direction of



academic affairs by acquiring, or by otherwise being possessed



of, considerable wealth.(2*) It is not simply that experienced



businessmen are, on mature reflection, judged to be the safest



and most competent trustees of the university's fiscal interests.



The preference appears to be almost wholly impulsive, and a



matter of habitual bias. It is due for the greater part to the



high esteem currently accorded to men of wealth at large, and



especially to wealthy men who have succeeded in business, quite



apart from any special capacity shown by such success for the



guardianship of any institution of learning. Business success is



by common consent, and quite uncritically, taken to be conclusive



evidence of wisdom even in matters that have no relation to



business affairs. So that it stands as a matter of course that



businessmen must be preferred for the guardianship and control of



that intellectual enterprise for the pursuit of which the



university is established, as well as to take care of the



pecuniary welfare of the university corporation. And, full of the



same naive faith that business success "answereth all things,"



these businessmen into whose hands this trust falls are content



to accept the responsibility and confident to exercise full



discretion in these matters with which they have no special



familiarity. Such is the outcome, to the present date, of the



recent and current secularization of the governing boards. The



final discretion in the affairs of the seats of learning is



entrusted to men who have proved their capacity for work that has



nothing in common with the higher learning.(3*)



    As bearing on the case of the American universities, it



should be called to mind that the businessmen of this country, as



a class, are of a notably conservative habit of mind. In a degree



scarcely equalled in any community that can lay claim to a



modicum of intelligence and enterprise, the spirit of American



business is a spirit of quietism, caution, compromise, collusion,



and chicane. It is not that the spirit of enterprise or of unrest



is wanting in this community, but only that, by selective effect



of the conditioning circumstances, persons affected with that



spirit are excluded from the management of business, and so do



not come into the class of successful businessmen from which the



governing boards are drawn. American inventors are bold and



resourceful, perhaps beyond the common run of their class



elsewhere, but it has become a commonplace that American



inventors habitually die poor; and one does not find them



represented on the boards in question. American engineers and



technologists are as good and efficient as their kind in other



countries. but they do not as a class accumulate wealth enough to



entitle them to sit on the directive board of any self-respecting



university, nor can they claim even a moderate rank as "safe and



sane" men of business. American explorers, prospectors and



pioneers can not be said to fall short of the common measure in



hardihood, insight, temerity or tenacity; but wealth does not



accumulate in their hands, and it is a common saying, of them as



of the inventors, that they are not fit to conduct their own



(pecuniary) affairs; and the reminder is scarcely needed that



neither they nor their qualities are drawn into the counsels of



these governing boards. The wealth and the serviceable results



that come of the endeavours of these enterprising and temerarious



Americans habitually inure to the benefit of such of their



compatriots as are endowed with a "safe and sane" spirit of



"watchful waiting," -- of caution, collusion and chicane. There



is a homely but well-accepted American colloquialism which says



that "The silent hog eats the swill."



    As elsewhere, but in a higher degree and a more cogent sense



than elsewhere, success in business affairs, in such measure as



to command the requisite deference, comes only by getting



something for nothing. And, baring -- accidents and within the



law, it is only the waiting game and the defensive tactics that



will bring gains of that kind, unless it be strategy of the



nature of finesse and chicane. Now it happens that American



conditions during the past one hundred years have been peculiarly



favourable to the patient and circumspect man who will rather



wait than work; and it is also during these hundred years that



the current traditions and standards of business conduct and of



businesslike talent have taken shape and been incorporated in the



community's common sense. America has been a land of free and



abounding resources; which is to say, when converted into terms



of economic theory, that it is the land of the unearned



increment. In all directions, wherever enterprise and industry



have gone, the opportunity was wide and large for such as had the



patience or astuteness to place themselves in the way of this



multifarious flow of the unearned increment, and were endowed



with the retentive grasp. Putting aside the illusions of public



spirit and diligent serviceability, sedulously cultivated by the



apologists of business, it will readily be seen that the great



mass of reputably large fortunes in this country are of such an



origin; nor will it cost anything beyond a similar lesion to the



affections to confirm the view that such is the origin and line



of derivation of the American propertied business community and



its canons of right and honest living.







    It is a common saying that the modern taste has been unduly



commercialized by the unremitting attention necessarily given to



matters of price and of profit and loss in an industrial



community organized on business principles; that pecuniary



standards of excellence are habitually accepted and applied with



undue freedom and finality. But what is scarcely appreciated at



its full value is the fact that these pecuniary standards of



merit and efficiency are habitually applied to men as well as to



things, and with little less freedom and finality. The man who



applies himself undeviatingly to pecuniary affairs with a view to



his own gain, and who is habitually and cautiously alert to the



main chance, is not only esteemed for and in respect of his



pecuniary success, but he is also habitually rated high at large,



as a particularly wise and sane person. He is deferred to as



being wise and sane not only in pecuniary matters but also in any



other matters on which he may express an opinion.



    A very few generations ago, be fore the present pecuniary era



of civilization had made such headway, and before the common man



in these civilized communities had lost the fear of God, the like



wide-sweeping and obsequious veneration and deference was given



to the clergy and their opinions; for the churchmen were then, in



the popular apprehension, proficient in all those matters that



were of most substantial interest to the common man of that time.



Indeed, the salvation of men's souls was then a matter of as



grave and untiring solicitude as their commercial solvency has



now become. And the trained efficiency of the successful



clergyman of that time for the conduct of spiritual and



ecclesiastical affairs lent him a prestige with his fellow men



such as to give his opinions, decisions and preconceptions great



and unquestioned weight in temporal matters as well; he was then



accepted as the type of wise, sane and benevolent humanity, in



his own esteem as well as in the esteem of his fellows. In like



manner also, in other times and under other cultural conditions



the fighting-man has held the first place in men's esteem and has



been deferred to in matters that concerned his trade and in



matters that did not.



    Now, in that hard and fast body of aphoristic wisdom that



commands the faith of the business community there is comprised



the conviction that learning is of no use in business. This



conviction is, further, backed up and coloured with the tenet,



held somewhat doubtfully, but also, and therefore, somewhat



doggedly, by the common run of businessmen, that what is of no



use in business is not worth while. More than one of the greater



businessmen have spoken, advisedly and with emphasis, to the



effect that the higher learning is rather a hindrance than a help



to any aspirant for business success;(4*) more particularly to



any man whose lot is cast in the field of business enterprise of



a middling scale and commonplace circumstances. And notoriously,



the like view of the matter prevails throughout the business



community at large. What these men are likely to have in mind in



passing this verdict, as shown by various expressions on this



head, is not so much the higher learning in the proper sense, but



rather that slight preliminary modicum that is to be found



embodied in the curriculum of the colleges, -- for the common run



of businessmen are not sufficiently conversant with these matters



to know the difference, or that there is a difference, between



the college and the university. They are busy with other things.



    It is true, men whose construction of the facts is coloured



by their wish to commend the schools to the good will of the



business community profess to find ground for the belief that



university training, or rather the training of the undergraduate



school, gives added fitness for a business career, particularly



for the larger business enterprise. But they commonly speak



apologetically and offer extenuating considerations, such as



virtually to concede the case, at the same time that they are



very prone to evade the issue by dwelling on accessory and



subsidiary considerations that do not substantially touch the



question of trained capacity for the conduct of business



affairs.(5*) The apologists commonly shift from the undebatable



ground of the higher learning as related to business success, to



the more defensible ground of the undergraduate curriculum,



considered as introductory to those social amenities that devolve



on the successful man of business; and in so far as they confine



themselves to the topic of education and business they commonly



spend their efforts in arguing for the business utility of the



training afforded by the professional and technical schools,



included within the university corporation or otherwise. There is



ground for their contention in so far as "university training" is



(by subreption) taken to mean training in those "practical"



branches of knowledge (Law, Politics, Accountancy, etc.) that



have a place within the university precincts only by force of a



non-sequitur. And the spokesmen for these views are commonly



also, and significantly, eager to make good their contention by



advocating the introduction of an increased proportion of these



"practical" subjects into the schedule of instruction.



    The facts are notorious and leave little room for cavil on



the merits of the case. Particularly is the award of the facts



unequivocal in America, -- the native ground of the self-made



businessman, and at the same time the most admirably



thorough-paced business community extant. The American business



community is well enough as it is, without the higher learning,



and it is fully sensible that the higher learning is not a



business proposition.



    But a good rule works both ways. If scholarly and scientific



training, such as may without shame be included under the caption



of the higher learning, unfits men for business efficiency, then



the training that comes of experience in business must also be



held to unfit men for scholarly and scientific pursuits, and even



more pronouncedly for the surveillance of such pursuits. The



circumstantial evidence for the latter proposition is neither



less abundant nor less unequivocal than for the former. If the



higher learning is incompatible with business shrewdness,



business enterprise is, by the same token, incompatible with the



spirit of the higher learning. Indeed, within the ordinary range



of lawful occupations these two lines of endeavour, and the



animus that belongs to each, are as widely out of touch as may



be. They are the two extreme terms of the modern cultural scheme;



although at the same time each is intrinsic and indispensable to



the scheme of modern civilization as it runs. With the excision



or serious crippling of either, Western Civilization would suffer



a dislocation amounting to a revolutionary change.



    On the other hand, the higher learning and the spirit of



scientific inquiry have much in common with modern industry and



its technological discipline. More particularly is there a close



bond of sympathy and relationship between the spirit of



scientific inquiry and the habit of mind enforced by the



mechanical industries of the modern kind. In both of these lines



of activity men are occupied with impersonal facts and deal with



them in a matter-of-fact way. In both, as far as may be, the



personal equation is sought to be eliminated, discounted and



avoided, so as to leave no chance for discrepancies due to



personal infirmity or predilection. But it is only on its



mechanical side that the industrial organization so comes in



touch with modern science and the pursuit of matter-of-fact



knowledge; and it is only in so far as their habits of thought



are shaped by the discipline of the mechanical industries that



there is induced in the industrial population the same bent as



goes to further or to appreciate the work of modern science. But



it would be quite nugatory to suggest that the governing boards



of the universities should be made up of, or should comprise,



impecunious technologists and engineers.



    There is no similar bond of consanguinity between the



business occupations and the scientific spirit; except so far as



regards those clerical and subaltern employments that lie wholly



within the mechanical routine of business traffic; and even as



regards these employments and the persons so occupied it is, at



the most, doubtful whether their training does not after all



partake more of that astute and invidious character of cunning



that belongs to the conduct of business affairs than of the



dispassionate animus of scientific inquiry.



    These extenuating considerations do not touch the case of



that body of businessmen, in the proper sense of the term, from



which the membership of the governing boards is drawn. The



principles that rule business enterprise of that larger and



pecuniarily effectual sort are a matter of usage, appraisement,



contractual arrangement and strategic manoeuvres. They are the



principles of a game of competitive guessing and pecuniary



coercion, a game carried on wholly within the limits of the



personal equation, and depending for its movement and effect on



personal discrepancies of judgment. Science has to do with the



opaquely veracious sequence of cause and effect, and it deals



with the facts of this sequence without mental reservation or



ulterior purposes of expediency. Business enterprise proceeds on



ulterior purposes and calculations of expediency; it depends on



shrewd expedients and lives on the margin of error, on the



fluctuating margin of human miscalculation. The training given by



these two lines of endeavour -- science and business -- is wholly



divergent; with the notorious result that for the purposes of



business enterprise the scientists are the most ignorant,



gullible and incompetent class in the community. They are not



only passively out of touch with the business spirit, out of



training by neglect, but they are also positively trained out of



the habit of mind indispensable to business enterprise. The



converse is true of the men of business affairs.(6*)



    Plato's classic scheme of folly, which would have the



philosophers take over the management of affairs, has been turned



on its head; the men of affairs have taken over the direction of



the pursuit of knowledge. To any one who will take a



dispassionate look at this modern arrangement it looks foolish,



of course, -- ingeniously foolish; but, also, of course, there is



no help for it and no prospect of its abatement in the calculable



future.



    It is a fact of the current state of things, grounded in the



institutional fabric of Christendom; and it will avail little to



speculate on remedial corrections for this state of academic



affairs so long as the institutional ground of this perversion



remains intact. Its institutional ground is the current system of



private ownership. It claims the attention of students as a



feature of the latterday cultural growth, as an outcome of the



pecuniary organization of modern society, and it is to be taken



as a base-line in any inquiry into the policy that controls



modern academic life and work -- just as any inquiry into the



circumstances and establishments of learning in the days of



scholasticism must take account of the ecclesiastical rule of



that time as one of the main controlling facts in the case. The



fact is that businessmen hold the plenary discretion, and that



business principles guide them in their management of the affairs



of the higher learning; and such must continue to be the case so



long as the community's workday material interests continue to be



organized on a basis of business enterprise. All this does not



promise well for the future of science and scholarship in the



universities, but the current effects of this method of



university control are sufficiently patent to all academic men,



-- and the whole situation should perhaps trouble the mind of no



one who will be at pains to free himself from the (possibly



transient) preconception that "the increase and diffusion of



knowledge among men" is, in the end, more to be desired than the



acquisition and expenditure of riches by the astuter men in the



community.







    Many of those who fancy themselves conversant with the



circumstances of American academic life would question the view



set forth above, and they would particularly deny that business



principles do or can pervade the corporate management of the



universities in anything like the degree here implied. They would



contend that while the boards of control are commonly gifted with



all the disabilities described -- that much being not open to



dispute -- yet these boards do not, on the whole, in practice,



extend the exercise of their plenary discretion to the directive



control of what are properly speaking academic matters; that they



habitually confine their work of directorship to the pecuniary



affairs of the corporation; and that in so far as they may at



times interfere in the university's scholarly and scientific



work, they do so in their capacity as men of culture, not as men



of property or of enterprise. This latter would also be the view



to which the men of property on the boards would themselves



particularly incline. So it will be held by the spokesmen of



content that virtually full discretion in all matters of academic



policy is delegated to the academic head of the university,



fortified by the advice and consent of the senior members of his



faculty; by the free choice of the governing boards, in practice



drawn out from under the control of these businessmen in question



and placed in the hands of the scholars. And such, commonly, is



at least ostensibly the case, in point of form; more particularly



as regards those older establishments that are burdened with



academic traditions running back beyond the date when their



governing boards were taken over by the businessmen, and more



particularly in the recent past than in the immediate present or



for the establishments of a more recent date.



    This complaisant view overlooks the fact that much effective



surveillance of the academic work is exercised through the



board's control of the budget. The academic staff can do little



else than what the specifications of the budget provide for;



without the means with which the corporate income should supply



them they are as helpless as might be expected.



    Imbued with an alert sense of those tangible pecuniary values



which they are by habit and temperament in a position to



appreciate, a sagacious governing board may, for instance,



determine to expend the greater proportion of the available



income of the university in improving and decorating its real



estate, and they may with businesslike thrift set aside an



appreciable proportion of the remainder for a sinking fund to



meet vaguely unforeseen contingencies, while the academic staff



remains (notoriously) underpaid and so scantily filled as



seriously to curtail their working capacity. Or the board may,



again, as has also happened, take a thrifty resolution to



"concede" only a fraction -- say ten or fifteen per-cent -- of



the demands of the staff for books and similar working materials



for current use; while setting aside a good share of the funds



assigned for such use, to accumulate until at some future date



such materials may be purchased at more reasonable prices than



those now ruling. These illustrations are not supplied by fancy.



There is, indeed, a visible reluctance on the part of these



businesslike boards to expend the corporation's income for those



intangible, immaterial uses for which the university is



established. These uses leave no physical, tangible residue, in



the way of durable goods, such as will justify the expenditure in



terms of vendible property acquired; therefore they are prima



facie imbecile, and correspondingly distasteful, to men whose



habitual occupation is with the acquisition of property. By force



of the same businesslike bias the boards unavoidably incline to



apportion the funds assigned for current expenses in such a way



as to favour those "practical" or quasi-practical lines of



instruction and academic propaganda that are presumed to heighten



the business acumen of the students or to yield immediate returns



in the way of a creditable publicity.







    As to the delegation of powers to the academic head. There is



always the reservation to be kept in mind, that the academic head



is limited in his discretion by the specifications of the budget.



The permissible deviations in that respect are commonly neither



wide nor of a substantial character; though the instances of a



university president exercising large powers are also not



extremely rare. But in common practice, it is to be noted, the



academic head is vested with somewhat autocratic powers, within



the lines effectually laid down in the budget; he is in effect



responsible to the governing board alone, and his responsibility



in that direction chiefly touches his observance of the pecuniary



specifications of the budget.



    But it is more to the point to note that the academic head



commonly holds office by choice of the governing board. Where the



power of appointment lies freely in the discretion of such a



board, the board will create an academic head in its own image.



In point of notorious fact, the academic head of the university



is selected chiefly on grounds of his business qualifications,



taking that expression in a somewhat special sense. There is at



present an increasingly broad and strenuous insistence on such



qualifications in the men selected as heads of the universities;



and the common sense of the community at large bears out the



predilections of the businesslike board of control in this



respect. The new incumbents are selected primarily with a view to



give the direction of academic policy and administration more of



a businesslike character. The choice may not always fall on a



competent business man, but that is not due to its inclining too



far to the side of scholarship. It is not an easy matter even for



the most astute body of businessmen to select a candidate who



shall measure up to their standard of businesslike efficiency in



a field of activity that has substantially nothing in common with



that business traffic in which their preconceptions of efficiency



have been formed.



    In many cases the alumni have much to say in the choice of a



new academic head, whether by courtesy or by express provision;



and the results under these circumstances are not substantially



different. It follows as an inevitable consequence of the current



state of popular sentiment that the successful businessmen among



the alumni will have the deciding voice, in so far as the matter



rests with the alumni; for the successful men of affairs assert



themselves with easy confidence, and they are looked up to, in



any community whose standards of esteem are business standards,



so that their word carries weight beyond that of any other class



or order of men. The community at large, or at least that portion



of the community that habitually makes itself heard, speaks to



the same effect and on the same ground, -- viz., a sentimental



conviction that pecuniary success is the final test of manhood.



Business principles are the sacred articles of the secular creed,



and business methods make up the ritual of the secular cult.



    The one clear note of acclaim that goes up, from the avowed



adepts of culture and from those without the pale, when a new



head has, as recently been called to one of the greater



universities, is in commendation of his business capacity,



"commercial sense," executive ability, financiering tact; and the



effectual canvass of his qualifications does not commonly range



much outside of these prime requisites. The modicum of



scholarship and scholarly ideals and insight concessively deemed



indispensable in such a case is somewhat of the nature of a



perquisite, and is easily found. It is not required that the



incumbent meet the prepossessions of the contingent of learned



men in the community in this respect; the choice does not rest



with that element, nor does its ratification, but rather at the



other end of the scale, with that extreme wing of the laity that



is taken up with "practical," that is to say pecuniary, affairs.



    As to the requirements of scholarly or scientific competency,



a plausible speaker with a large gift of assurance, a



businesslike "educator" or clergyman, some urbane pillar of



society, some astute veteran of the scientific demi-monde, will



meet all reasonable requirements. Scholarship is not barred, of



course, though it is commonly the quasi-scholarship of the



popular raconteur that comes in evidence in these premises; and



the fact that these incumbents of executive office show so much



of scholarly animus and attainments as they do is in great



measure a fortuitous circumstance. It is, indeed, a safe



generalization that in point of fact the average of university



presidents fall short of the average of their academic staff in



scholarly or scientific attainments, even when all persons



employed as instructors are counted as members of the staff. It



may also be remarked by the way that when, as may happen, a



scholar or scientist takes office as directive head of a



university, he is commonly lost to the republic of learning; he



has in effect passed from the ranks of learning to those of



business enterprise.



    The upshot of it all should be that when and in so far as a



businesslike governing board delegates powers to the university's



academic head, it delegates these powers to one of their own



kind, who is somewhat peremptorily expected to live up to the



aspirations that animate the board. What such a man, so placed,



will do with the powers and opportunities that so devolve on him



is a difficult question that can be answered only in terms of the



compulsion of the circumstances in which he is placed and of the



moral wear and tear that comes of arbitrary powers exercised in a



tangle of ambiguities.(7*)







NOTES:







1. An instance showing something of the measure and incidence of



fiscal service rendered by such a businesslike board may be



suggestive, even though it is scarcely to be taken as faithfully



illustrating current practice, in that the particular board in



question has exercised an uncommon measure of surveillance over



its university's pecuniary concerns.



    A university corporation endowed with a large estate



(appraised at something over $30,000,000) has been governed by a



board of the usual form, with plenary discretion, established on



a basis of co-optation. In point of practical effect, the board,



or rather that fraction of the board which takes an active



interest in the university's affairs, has been made up of a group



of local business men engaged in divers enterprises of the kind



familiar to men of relatively large means, with somewhat



extensive interests of the nature of banking and underwriting,



where large extensions of credit and the temporary use of large



funds are of substantial consequence. By terms of the corporate



charter the board was required to render to the governor of the



state a yearly report of all the pecuniary affairs of the



university; but no penalty was attached to their eventual failure



to render such report, though some legal remedy could doubtless



have been had on due application by the parties in interest, as



e. g., by the academic head of the university. No such report has



been rendered, however, and no steps appear to have been taken to



procure such a report, or any equivalent accounting. But on



persistent urging from the side of his faculty, and after some



courteous delay, the academic head pushed an inquiry into the



corporation's finances so far as to bring out facts somewhat to



the following effect: --



    The board, or the group of local business men who constituted



the habitual working majority of the board, appear to have kept a



fairly close and active oversight of the corporate funds



entrusted to them, and to have seen to their investment and



disposal somewhat in detail -- and, it has been suggested,



somewhat to their own pecuniary advantage. With the result that



the investments were found to yield a current income of some



three per cent. (rather under than over), -- in a state where



investment on good security in the open market commonly yielded



from six per cent to eight per cent. Of this income approximately



one-half (apparently some forty-five per cent) practically



accrued to the possible current use of the university



establishment. Just what disposal was made of the remainder is



not altogether clear; though it is loosely presumed to have been



kept in hand with an eventual view to the erection and repair of



buildings. Something like one-half of what so made up the



currently disposable income was further set aside in the



character of a sinking fund, to accumulate for future use and to



meet contingencies; so that what effectually accrued to the



university establishment for current use to meet necessary



academic expenditures would amount to something like one per cent



(or less) on the total investment. But of this finally disposable



fraction of the income, again, an appreciable sum was set aside



as a special sinking fund to accumulate for the eventual use of



the university library, -- which, it may be remarked, was in the



meantime seriously handicapped for want of funds with which to



provide for current needs. So also the academic establishment at



large was perforce managed on a basis of penurious economy, to



the present inefficiency and the lasting damage of the



university.



    The figures and percentages given above are not claimed to be



exact; it is known that a more accurate specification of details



would result in a less favourable showing.



    At the time when these matters were disclosed (to a small



number of the uneasy persons interested) there was an ugly



suggestion afloat touching the pecuniary integrity of the board's



management, but this is doubtless to be dismissed as being merely



a loose expression of ill-will; and the like is also doubtless to



be said as regards the suggestion that there may have been an



interested collusion between the academic head and the active



members of the board. These were "all honourable men," of great



repute in the community and well known as sagacious and



successful men in their private business ventures.







2. Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship, ch. vii, pp. 343-352.







3. A subsidiary reason of some weight should not be overlooked in



seeking the cause of this secularization of the boards, and of



the peculiar colour which the secularization has given them. In



any community where wealth and business enterprise are held in



such high esteem, men of wealth and of affairs are not only



deferred to, but their countenance is sought from one motive and



another. At the same time election to one of these boards has



come to have a high value as an honourable distinction. Such



election or appointment therefore is often sought from motives of



vanity, and it is at the same time a convenient means of



conciliating the good will of the wealthy incumbent.



    It may be added that now and again the discretionary control



of large funds which so falls to the members of the board may



come to be pecuniarily profitable to them, so that the office may



come to be attractive as a business proposition as well as in



point of prestige. Instances of the kind are not wholly unknown,



though presumably exceptional.







4. Cf., e. g.. R. T. Crane. The Futility of All Kinds of Higher



Schooling, especially part I, ch. iv.







5. Cf. R.T. Crane, as above, especially part I, ch. ii. iii, and



vi. Cf. also H.P. Judson, The Higher Education as a Training for



Business, where the case is argued in a typically commonplace and



matter-of-fact spirit, but where "The Higher Education" is taken



to mean the undergraduate curriculum simply; also "A Symposium on



the value of humanistic, particularly classical, studies as a



training for men of affairs," Proceedings of the Classical



Conference at Ann Arbor, Michigan, April 3, 1909.







6. Cf. Bacon, Essays -- "Of Cunning", and "Of Wisdom for a Man's



Self."







7. Cf. ch. viii, especially pp. 242-269.







CHAPTER III







The Academic Administration and Policy







    Men dilate on the high necessity of a businesslike



organization and control of the university, its equipment,



personnel and routine. What is had in mind in this insistence on



an efficient system is that these corporations of learning shall



set their affairs in order after the pattern of a well-conducted



business concern. In this view the university is conceived as a



business house dealing in merchantable knowledge, placed under



the governing hand of a captain of erudition, whose office it is



to turn the means in hand to account in the largest feasible



output. It is a corporation with large funds, and for men biased



by their workday training in business affairs it comes as a



matter of course to rate the university in terms of investment



and turnover. Hence the insistence on business capacity in the



executive heads of the universities, and hence also the extensive



range of businesslike duties and powers that devolve on them.



    Yet when all these sophistications of practical wisdom are



duly allowed for, the fact remains that the university is, in



usage, precedent, and common sense preconception, an



establishment for the conservation and advancement of the higher



learning, devoted to a disinterested pursuit of knowledge. As



such, it consists of a body of scholars and scientists, each and



several of whom necessarily goes to his work on his own



initiative and pursues it in his own way. This work necessarily



follows an orderly sequence and procedure, and so takes on a



systematic form, of an organic kind. But the system and order



that so govern the work, and that come into view in its procedure



and results, are the logical system and order of intellectual



enterprise, not the mechanical or statistical systematization



that goes into effect in the management of an industrial plant or



the financiering of a business corporation.



    Those items of human intelligence and initiative that go to



make up the pursuit of knowledge, and that are embodied in



systematic form in its conclusions, do not lend themselves to



quantitative statement, and can not be made to appear on a



balance-sheet. Neither can that intellectual initiative and



proclivity that goes in as the indispensable motive force in the



pursuit of learning be reduced to any known terms of



subordination, obedience, or authoritative direction. No scholar



or scientist can become an employee in respect of his scholarly



or scientific work. Mechanical systematization and authoritative



control can in these premises not reach beyond the material



circumstances that condition the work in hand, nor can it in



these external matters with good effect go farther than is



necessary to supply the material ways and means requisite to the



work, and to adapt them to the peculiar needs of any given line



of inquiry or group of scholars. In order to their best



efficiency, and indeed in the degree in which efficiency in this



field of activity is to be attained at all, the executive



officers of the university must stand in the relation of



assistants serving the needs and catering to the idiosyncrasies



of the body of scholars and scientists that make up the



university;(1*) in the degree in which the converse relation is



allowed to take effect, the unavoidable consequence is wasteful



defeat. A free hand is the first and abiding requisite of



scholarly and scientific work.



    Now, in accepting office as executive head of a university,



the incumbent necessarily accepts all the conditions that attach



to the administration of his office, whether by usage and common



sense expectation, by express arrangement, or by patent



understanding with the board to which he owes his elevation to



this post of dignity and command. By usage and precedent it is



incumbent on him to govern the academic personnel and equipment



with an eye single to the pursuit of knowledge, and so to conduct



its affairs as will most effectually compass that end. That is to



say he must so administer his office as best to serve the



scholarly needs of the academic staff, due regard being



scrupulously had to the idiosyncrasies, and even to the vagaries,



of the men whose work he is called on to further. But by patent



understanding, if not by explicit stipulation, from the side of



the governing board, fortified by the preconceptions of the laity



at large to the same effect, he is held to such a conspicuously



efficient employment of the means in hand as will gratify those



who look for a voluminous turnover. To this end he must keep the



academic administration and its activity constantly in the public



eye, with such "pomp and circumstance" of untiring urgency and



expedition as will carry the conviction abroad that the



university under his management is a highly successful going



concern, and he must be able to show by itemized accounts that



the volume of output is such as to warrant the investment. So the



equipment and personnel must be organized into a facile and



orderly working force, held under the directive control of the



captain of erudition at every point, and so articulated and



standardized that its rate of speed and the volume of its current



output can be exhibited to full statistical effect as it runs.



    The university is to make good both as a corporation of



learning and as a business concern dealing in standardized



erudition, and the executive head necessarily assumes the



responsibility of making it count wholly and unreservedly in each



of these divergent, if not incompatible lines.(2*) Humanly



speaking, it follows by necessary consequence that he will first



and always take care of those duties that are most jealously



insisted on by the powers to whom he is accountable, and the due



performance of which will at the same time yield some



sufficiently tangible evidence of his efficiency. That other,



more recondite side of the university's work that has



substantially to do with the higher learning is not readily set



out in the form of statistical exhibits, at the best, and can



ordinarily come to appraisal and popular appreciation only in the



long run. The need of a businesslike showing is instant and



imperative, particularly in a business era of large turnover and



quick returns, and to meet this need the uneventful scholastic



life that counts toward the higher learning in the long run is of



little use; so it can wait, and it readily becomes a habit with



the busy executive to let it wait.



    It should be kept in mind also that the incumbent of



executive office is presumably a man of businesslike



qualifications, rather than of scholarly insight, -- the method



of selecting the executive heads under the present rgime makes



that nearly a matter of course. As such he will in his own right



more readily appreciate those results of his own management that



show up with something of the glare of publicity, as contrasted



with the slow-moving and often obscure working of inquiry that



lies (commonly) somewhat beyond his intellectual horizon. So that



with slight misgivings, if any, he takes to the methods of



organization and control that have commended themselves in that



current business enterprise to which it is his ambition to



assimilate the corporation of learning.



    These precedents of business practice that are to afford



guidance to the captain of erudition are, of course, the



precedents of competitive business. It is one of the unwritten,



and commonly unspoken, commonplaces lying at the root of modern



academic policy that the various universities are competitors for



the traffic in merchantable instruction, in much the same fashion



as rival establishments in the retail trade compete for custom.



Indeed, the modern department store offers a felicitous analogy,



that has already been found serviceable in illustration of the



American university's position in this respect, by those who



speak for the present rgime as well as by its critics. The fact



that the universities are assumed to be irreconcilable



competitors, both in the popular apprehension and as evidenced by



the manoeuvres of their several directors, is too notorious to be



denied by any but the interested parties. Now and again it is



formally denied by one and another among the competing captains



of erudition, but the reason for such denial is the need of



it.(3*)



    Now, the duties of the executive head of a competitive



business concern are of a strategic nature, the object of his



management being to get the better of rival concerns and to



engross the trade. To this end it is indispensable that he should



be a "strong man" and should have a free hand, -- though perhaps



under the general and tolerant surveillance of his board of



directors. Any wise board of directors, and in the degree in



which they are endowed with the requisite wisdom, will be careful



to give their general manager full discretion, and not to hamper



him with too close an accounting of the details of his



administration, so long as he shows gratifying results. He must



be a strong man; that is to say, a capable man of affairs,



tenacious and resourceful in turning the means at hand to account



for this purpose, and easily content to let the end justify the



means. He must be a man of scrupulous integrity, so far as may



conduce to his success, but with a shrewd eye to the limits



within which honesty is the best policy, for the purpose in hand.



He must have full command of the means entrusted to him and full



control of the force of employees and subordinates who are to



work under his direction, and he must be able to rely on the



instant and unwavering loyalty of his staff in any line of policy



on which he may decide to enter. He must therefore have free



power to appoint and dismiss, and to reward and punish, limited



only by the formal ratification of his decisions by the board of



directors who will be careful not to interfere or inquire unduly



in these matters, -- so long as their strong man shows results.



    The details and objective of his strategy need not be known



to the members of the staff; indeed, all that does not concern



them except in the most general way. They are his creatures, and



are responsible only to him and only for the due performance of



the tasks assigned them; and they need know only so much as will



enable them to give ready and intelligent support to the moves



made by their chief from day to day. The members of the staff are



his employees, and their first duty is a loyal obedience; and for



the competitive good of the concern they must utter no expression



of criticism or unfavourable comment on the policy, actions or



personal characteristics of their chief, so long as they are in



his employ. They have eaten his bread, and it is for them to do



his bidding.



    Such is the object-lesson afforded by business practice as it



bears on the duties incumbent on the academic head and on the



powers of office delegated to him. It is needless to remark on



what is a fact of common notoriety, that this rule drawn from the



conduct of competitive business is commonly applied without



substantial abatement in the conduct of academic affairs.(4*)



    Under this rule the academic staff becomes a body of graded



subalterns, who share confidence of the chief in varying degrees,



but who no decisive voice in the policy or the conduct of affairs



of the concern in whose pay they are held. The faculty is



conceived as a body of employees, hired to render certain



services and turn out certain scheduled vendible results.



    The chief may take advice; and, as is commonly the practice



in analogous circumstances in commercial business, he will be



likely to draw about him from among the faculty a conveniently



small number of advisers who are in sympathy with his own



ambitions, and who will in this way form an unofficial council,



or cabinet, or "junta," to whom he can turn for informal,



anonymous and irresponsible, advice and moral support at any



juncture. He will also, in compliance with charter stipulations



and parliamentary usage, have certain officially recognized



advisers, -- the various deans, advisory committees, Academic



Council, University Senate, and the like, -- with whom he shares



responsibility, particularly for measures of doubtful popularity,



and whose advice he formally takes coram publico; but he can not



well share discretion with these, except on administrative



matters of inconsequential detail. For reasons of practical



efficiency, discretion must be undivided in any competitive



enterprise. There is much fine-spun strategy to be taken care of



under cover of night and cloud.







    But the academic tradition, which still drags on the hands of



the captains of erudition, has not left the ground prepared for



such a clean-cut businesslike organization and such a campaign of



competitive strategy. By tradition the faculty is the keeper of



the academic interests of the university and makes up a body of



loosely-bound noncompetitive co-partners, with no view to



strategic team play and no collective ulterior ambition, least of



all with a view to engrossing the trade. By tradition, and indeed



commonly by explicit proviso, the conduct of the university's



academic affairs vests formally in the president, with the advice



and consent of the faculty, or of the general body of senior



members of the faculty. In due observance of these traditions,



and of the scholastic purposes notoriously underlying all



university life, certain forms of disinterested zeal must be



adhered to in all official pronouncements of the executive, as



well as certain punctilios of conference and advisement between



the directive head and the academic staff.



    All of which makes the work of the executive head less easy



and ingenuous than it might be. The substantial demands of his



position as chief of a competitive business are somewhat widely



out of touch with these forms of divided responsibility that must



(formally) be observed in administering his duties, and equally



out of touch with the formal professions of disinterested zeal



for the cause of learning that he is by tradition required to



make from time to time. All that may reasonably be counted on



under these trying circumstances is that he should do the best he



can, -- to save the formalities and secure the substance. To



compass these difficult incongruities, he will, as already



remarked above, necessarily gather about him, within the general



body of the academic personnel, a corps of trusted advisors and



agents, whose qualifications for their peculiar work is an



intelligent sympathy with their chief's ideals and methods and an



unreserved subservience to his aims, -- unless it should come to



pass, as may happen in case its members are men of force and



ingenuity, that this unofficial cabinet should take over the



direction of affairs and work out their own aims and purposes



under cover of the chief's ostensibly autocratic rule.



    Among these aids and advisers will be found at least a



proportion of the higher administrative officials, and among the



number it is fairly indispensable to include one or more adroit



parliamentarians, competent to procure the necessary modicum of



sanction for all arbitrary acts of the executive, from a



distrustful faculty convened as a deliberative body. These men



must be at least partially in the confidence of the executive



head. From the circumstances of the case it also follows that



they will commonly occupy an advanced academic rank, and so will



take a high (putative) rank as scholars and scientists. High



academic rank comes of necessity to these men who serve as



coadjutors and vehicles of the executive policy, as does also the



relatively high pay that goes with high rank; both are required



as a reward of merit and an incitement to a zealous



serviceability on the one hand, and to keep the administration in



countenance on the other hand by giving the requisite dignity to



its agents. They will be selected on the same general grounds of



fitness as their chief, -- administrative facility, plausibility,



proficiency as public speakers and parliamentarians, ready



versatility of convictions, and a staunch loyalty to their bread.



Experience teaches that scholarly or scientific capacity does not



enter in any appreciable measure among the qualifications so



required for responsible academic office, beyond what may



thriftily serve to mask the conventional decencies of the case.



    It is, further, of the essence of this scheme of academic



control that the captain of erudition should freely exercise the



power of academic life and death over the members of his staff,



to reward the good and faithful servant and to abase the



recalcitrant. Otherwise discipline would be a difficult matter,



and the formally requisite "advice and consent" could be procured



only tardily and grudgingly.







    Admitting such reservations and abatement as may be due, it



is to be said that the existing organization of academic control



under business principles falls more or less nearly into the form



outlined above. The perfected type, as sketched in the last



paragraphs, has doubtless not been fully achieved in practice



hitherto, unless it be in one or another of the newer



establishments with large ambitions and endowment, and with few



traditions to hamper the working out of the system. The incursion



of business principles into the academic community is also of



relatively recent date, and should not yet have had time to



pervade the organization throughout and with full effect; so that



the rgime of competitive strategy should as yet be neither so



far advanced nor so secure a matter of course as may fairly be



expected in the near future. Yet the rate of advance along this



line, and the measure of present achievement, are more



considerable than even a very sanguine advocate of business



principles could have dared to look for a couple of decades ago.



    In so far as these matters are still in process of growth,



rather than at their full fruition, it follows that any analysis



of the effects of this rgime must be in some degree speculative,



and must at times deal with the drift of things as much as with



accomplished fact. Yet such an inquiry must approach its subject



as an episode of history, and must deal with the personal figures



and the incidents of this growth objectively, as phenomena thrown



up to view by the play of circumstances in the dispassionate give



and take of institutional change. Such an impersonal attitude, it



is perhaps needless to remark, is not always easy to maintain in



dealing with facts of so personal, and often of so animated, a



character. Particularly will an observer who has seen these



incidents from the middle and in the making find it difficult



uniformly to preserve that aloof perspective that will serve the



ends of an historical appreciation. The difficulty is increased



and complicated by the necessity of employing terms, descriptions



and incidents that have been habitually employed in current



controversy, often with a marked animus. Men have taken sides on



these matters, and so are engaged in controversy on the merits of



the current rgime and on the question of possible relief and



remedy for what are considered to be its iniquities. Under the



shadow of this controversy, it is nearly unavoidable that any



expression or citation of fact that will bear a partisan



construction will habitually be so construed. The vehicle



necessarily employed must almost unavoidably infuse the analysis



with an unintended colour of bias, to one side or the other of



the presumed merits of the case. A degree of patient attention is



therefore due at points where the facts cited, and the



characterization of these facts and their bearing, would seem, on



a superficial view, to bear construction as controversial matter.







    In this episode of institutional growth, plainly, the



executive head is the central figure. The light fails on him



rather than on the forces that move him, and it comes as a matter



of course to pass opinions on the resulting incidents and



consequences, as the outcome of his free initiative rather than



of the circumstances whose creature he is. No doubt, his



initiative, if any, is a powerful factor in the case, but it is



after all a factor of transmission and commutation rather than of



genesis and self-direction; for he is chosen for the style and



measure of initiative with which he is endowed, and unless he



shall be found to measure up to expectations in kind and degree



in this matter he will go in the discard, and his personal ideals



and initiative will count as little more than a transient



obstruction. He will hold his place, and will count as a creative



force in his world, in much the same degree in which he responds



with ready flexibility to the impact of those forces of popular



sentiment and class conviction that have called him to be their



servant. Only so can he be a "strong man"; only in so far as, by



fortunate bent or by its absence, he is enabled to move



resistlessly with the parallelogram of forces.



    The exigencies of a businesslike administration demand that



there be no division of powers between the academic executive and



the academic staff; but the exigencies of the higher learning



require that the scholars and scientists must be left quite free



to follow their own bent in conducting their own work. In the



nature of things this work cannot be carried on effectually under



coercive rule. Scientific inquiry can not be pursued under



direction of a layman in the person of a superior officer. Also,



learning is, in the nature of things, not a competitive business



and can make no use of finesse, diplomatic equivocation and



tactful regard for popular prejudices, such as are of the essence



of the case in competitive business. It is, also, of no advantage



to learning to engross the trade. Tradition and present necessity



alike demand that the body of scholars and scientists who make up



the university must be vested with full powers of self-direction,



without ulterior consideration. A university can remain a



corporation of learning, de facto, on no other basis.



    As has already been remarked, business methods of course have



their place in the corporation's fiscal affairs and in the



office-work incident to the care of its material equipment. As



regards these items the university is a business concern, and no



discussion of these topics would be in place here. These things



concern the university only in its externals, and they do not



properly fall within the scope of academic policy or academic



administration. They come into consideration here only in so far



as a lively regard for them may, as it sometimes does, divert the



forces of the establishment from its ostensible purpose.



    Under the rule imposed by those businesslike preconceptions



that decide his selection for office, the first duty of the



executive head is to see to the organization of an administrative



machinery for the direction of the university's internal affairs,



and the establishment of a facile and rigorous system of



accountancy for the control and exhibition of the academic work.



In the same measure in which such a system goes into effect the



principles of competitive business will permeate the



administration in all directions; in the personnel of the



academic staff, in the control and intercourse of teachers and



students, in the schedule of instruction, in the disposition of



the material equipment, in the public exhibits and ceremonial of



the university, as well as in its pecuniary concerns.



    Within the range of academic interests proper, these business



principles primarily affect the personnel and the routine of



instruction. Here their application immediately results in an



administrative system of bureaux or departments, a hierarchical



gradation of the members of the staff, and a rigorous parcelment



and standardization of the instruction offered. Some such system



is indispensable to any effective control of the work from above,



such as is aimed at in the appointment of a discretionary head of



the university, -- particularly in a large school; and the



measure of control desired will decide the degree of thoroughness



with which this bureaucratic organization is to be carried



through. The need of a well-devised bureaucratic system is



greater the more centralized and coercive the control to which



the academic work is to be subject; and the degree of control to



be exercised will be greater the more urgent the felt need of a



strict and large accountancy may be. All of which resolves itself



into a question as to the purposes sought by the installation of



such a system.



    For the everyday work of the higher learning, as such, little



of a hierarchical gradation, and less of bureaucratic



subordination, is needful or serviceable; and very little of



statistical uniformity, standard units of erudition, or detail



accountancy, is at all feasible. This work is not of a mechanical



character and does not lend itself, either in its methods or its



results, to any mechanically standardized scheme of measurements



or to a system of accounting per cent per time unit. This range



of instruction consists substantially in the facilitation of



scholarly and scientific habits of thought, and the imposition of



any appreciable measure of such standardization and accounting



must unavoidably weaken and vitiate the work of instruction, in



just the degree in which the imposed system is effective.



    It is not within the purpose of this inquiry to go into the



bearing of all this on the collegiate (undergraduate) departments



or on the professional and technical schools associated with the



university proper in American practice. But something of a



detailed discussion of the system and principles of control



applied in these schools is necessary because of its incidental



bearing on graduate work.



    It is plain beyond need of specification that in the



practical view of the public at large, and of the governing



boards, the university is primarily an undergraduate school, with



graduate and professional departments added to it. And it is



similarly plain that the captains of erudition chosen as



executive heads share the same preconceptions, and go to their



work with a view primarily to the needs of their undergraduate



departments. The businesslike order and system introduced into



the universities, therefore, are designed primarily to meet the



needs and exploit the possibilities of the undergraduate school;



but, by force of habit, by a desire of uniformity, by a desire to



control and exhibit the personnel and their work, by heedless



imitation, or what not, it invariably happens that the same



scheme of order and system is extended to cover the graduate work



also.



    While it is the work of science and scholarship, roughly what



is known in American usage as graduate work, that gives the



university its rank as a seat of learning and keeps it in



countenance as such with laymen and scholars, it is the



undergraduate school, or college, that still continues to be the



larger fact, and that still engages the greater and more



immediate attention in university management. This is due in part



to received American usage, in part to its more readily serving



the ends of competitive ambition; and it is a fact in the current



academic situation which must be counted in as a chronic



discrepancy, not to be got clear of or to be appreciably



mitigated so long as business principles continue to rule.



    What counts toward the advancement of learning and the



scholarly character of the university is the graduate work, but



what gives statistically formidable results in the way of a



numerous enrolment, many degrees conferred, public exhibitions,



courses of instruction -- in short what rolls up a large showing



of turnover and output -- is the perfunctory work of the



undergraduate department, as well as the array of vocational



schools latterly subjoined as auxiliaries to this end. Hence the



needs and possibilities of the undergraduate and vocational



schools are primarily, perhaps rather solely, had in view in the



bureaucratic organization of the courses of instruction, in the



selection of the personnel, in the divisions of the school year,



as well as in the various accessory attractions offered, such as



the athletic equipment, facilities for fraternity and other club



life, debates, exhibitions and festivities, and the customary



routine of devotional amenities under official sanction.







    The undergraduate or collegiate schools, that now bulk so



large in point of numbers as well as in the attention devoted to



their welfare in academic management, have undergone certain



notable changes in other respects than size, since the period of



that shifting from clerical control to a business administration



that marks the beginning of the current rgime. Concomitant with



their growth in numbers they have taken over an increasing volume



of other functions than such as bear directly on matters of



learning. At the same time the increase in numbers has brought a



change in the scholastic complexion of this enlarged student



body, of such a nature that a very appreciable proportion of



these students no longer seek residence at the universities with



a view to the pursuit of knowledge, even ostensibly. By force of



conventional propriety a "college course" -- the due term of



residence at some reputable university, with the collegiate



degree certifying honourable discharge -- has become a requisite



of gentility. So considerable is the resulting genteel contingent



among the students, and so desirable is their enrolment and the



countenance of their presence, in the apprehension of the



university directorate, that the academic organization is in



great part, and of strategic necessity, adapted primarily to



their needs.



    This contingent, and the general body of students in so far



as this contingent from the leisure class has leavened the lump,



are not so seriously interested in their studies that they can in



any degree be counted on to seek knowledge on their own



initiative. At the same time they have other interests that must



be taken care of by the school, on pain of losing their custom



and their good will, to the detriment of the university's



standing in genteel circles and to the serious decline in



enrolment which their withdrawal would occasion. Hence college



sports come in for an ever increasing attention and take an



increasingly prominent and voluminous place in the university's



life; as do also other politely blameless ways and means of



dissipation, such as fraternities, clubs, exhibitions, and the



extensive range of extra-scholastic traffic known as "student



activities."



    At the same time the usual and average age of the college



students has been slowly falling farther back into the period of



adolescence; and the irregularities and uncertain temper of that



uneasy period consequently are calling for more detailed



surveillance and a more circumspect administration of college



discipline. With a body of students whose everyday interest, as



may be said without exaggeration, lies in the main elsewhere than



in the pursuit of knowledge, and with an imperative tradition



still standing over that requires the college to be (ostensibly



at least) an establishment for the instruction of the youth, it



becomes necessary to organize this instruction on a coercive



plan, and hence to itemize the scholastic tasks of the inmates



with great nicety of subdivision and with a meticulous regard to



an exact equivalence as between the various courses and items of



instruction to which they are to be subjected. Likewise as



regards the limits of permissible irregularities of conduct and



excursions into the field of sports and social amenities.



    To meet the necessities of this difficult control, and to



meet them always without jeopardizing the interests of the school



as a competitive concern, a close-cut mechanical standardization,



uniformity, surveillance and accountancy are indispensable. As



regards the schedule of instruction, bona fide students will



require but little exacting surveillance in their work, and



little in the way of an apparatus of control. But the collegiate



school has to deal with a large body of students, many of whom



have little abiding interest in their academic work, beyond the



academic credits necessary to be accumulated for honourable



discharge, -- indeed their scholastic interest may fairly be said



to centre in unearned credits.



    For this reason, and also because of the difficulty of



controlling a large volume of perfunctory labour, such as is



involved in undergraduate instruction, the instruction offered



must be reduced to standard units of time, grade and volume. Each



unit of work required, or rather of credit allowed, in this



mechanically drawn scheme of tasks must be the equivalent of all



the other units; otherwise a comprehensive system of scholastic



accountancy will not be practicable, and injustice and irritation



will result both among the pupils and the schoolmasters. For the



greater facility and accuracy in conducting this scholastic



accountancy, as well as with a view to the greater impressiveness



of the published schedule of courses offered, these mechanical



units of academic bullion are increased in number and decreased



in weight and volume; until the parcelment and mechanical balance



of units reaches a point not easily credible to any outsider who



might naively consider the requirements of scholarship to be an



imperative factor in academic administration. There is a



well-considered preference for semi-annual or quarterly periods



of instruction, with a corresponding time limit on the courses



offered; and the parcelment of credits is carried somewhat beyond



the point which this segmentation of the school year would



indicate. So also there prevails a system of grading the credits



allowed for the performance of these units of task-work, by



percentages (often carried out to decimals) or by some equivalent



scheme of notation; and in the more solicitously perfected



schemes of control of this task-work, the percentages so turned



in will then be further digested and weighed by expert



accountants, who revise and correct these returns by the help of



statistically ascertained index numbers that express the mean



average margin of error to be allowed for each individual student



or instructor.



    In point of formal protestation, the standards set up in this



scholastic accountancy are high and rigorous; in application, the



exactions of the credit system must not be enforced in so



inflexible a spirit as to estrange that much-desired contingent



of genteel students whose need of an honourable discharge is



greater than their love of knowledge. Neither must its demands on



the student's time and energy be allowed seriously to interfere



with those sports and "student activities" that make up the chief



attraction of college life for a large proportion of the



university's young men, and that are, in the apprehension of



many, so essential a part in the training of the modern



gentleman.



    Such a system of accountancy acts to break the continuity and



consistency of the work of instruction and to divert the interest



of the students from the work in hand to the making of a passable



record in terms of the academic "miner's inch." Typically, this



miner's inch is measured in terms of standard text per time unit,



and the immediate objective of teacher and student so becomes the



compassing of a given volume of prescribed text, in print or



lecture form, -- leading up to the broad principle: "Nichts als



was im Buche steht." Which puts a premium on mediocrity and



perfunctory work, and brings academic life to revolve about the



office of the Keeper of the Tape and Sealing Wax. Evidently this



organization of departments, schedules of instruction, and scheme



of scholastic accountancy, is a matter that calls for insight and



sobriety on the part of the executive; and in point of fact there



is much deliberation and solicitude spent on this behalf.



    The installation of a rounded system of scholastic



accountancy brings with it, if it does not presume, a painstaking



distribution of the personnel and the courses of instruction into



a series of bureaux or departments. Such an organization of the



forces of the establishment facilitates the oversight and control



of the work, at the same time that it allows the array of



scheduled means, appliances and personnel at its disposal to be



statistically displayed to better effect. Under existing



circumstances of rivalry among these institutions of learning,



there is need of much shrewd management to make all the available



forces of the establishment count toward the competitive end; and



in this composition it is the part of worldly wisdom to see that



appearances may often be of graver consequence than achievement,



-- as is true in all competitive business that addresses its



appeal to a large and scattered body of customers. The



competition is for custom, and for such prestige as may procure



custom, and these potential customers on whom it is desirable to



produce an impression, especially as regards the undergraduate



school, are commonly laymen who are expected to go on current



rumour and the outward appearance of things academic.



    The exigencies of competitive business, particularly of such



retail trade as seems chiefly to have contributed to the



principles of businesslike management in the competing schools,



throw the stress on appearances. In such business, the "good



will" of the concern has come to be (ordinarily) its most valued



and most valuable asset. The visible success of the concern, or



rather the sentiments of confidence and dependence inspired in



potential customers by this visible success, is capitalized as



the chief and most substantial element of the concern's



intangible assets. And the accumulation of such intangible



assets, to be gained by convincing appearances and well-devised



pronouncements, has become the chief object of persistent



endeavour on the part of sagacious business men engaged in such



lines of traffic. This, that the substance must not be allowed to



stand in the way of the shadow, is one of the fundamental



principles of management which the universities, under the



guidance of business ideals, have taken over from the wisdom of



the business community.



    Accepting the point of view of the captains of erudition, and



so looking on the universities as competitive business concerns,



and speaking in terms applicable to business concerns generally,



the assets of these seminaries of learning are in an exceptional



degree intangible assets. There is, of course, the large item of



the good-will or prestige of the university as a whole,



considered as a going concern. But this collective body of



"immaterial capital" that pertains to the university at large is



made up in great part of the prestige of divers eminent persons



included among its personnel and incorporated in the fabric of



its bureaucratic departments, and not least the prestige of its



executive head; in very much the same way as the like will hold



true, e. g., for any company of public amusement, itinerant or



sedentary, such as a circus, a theatrical or operatic enterprise,



which all compete for the acclamation and custom of those to whom



these matters appeal.



    For the purposes of such competition the effectual prestige



of the university as a whole, as well as the detail prestige of



its personnel, is largely the prestige which it has with the



laity rather than with the scholarly classes. And it is safe to



say that a somewhat more meretricious showing of magnitude and



erudition will pass scrutiny, for the time being, with the laity



than with the scholars. Which suggests the expediency for the



university, as a going concern competing for the traffic, to take



recourse to a somewhat more tawdry exhibition of quasi-scholarly



feats, and a somewhat livelier parade of academic splendour and



magnitude, than might otherwise be to the taste of such a body of



scholars and scientists. As a business proposition, the



meretricious quality inherent in any given line of publicity



should not consign it to neglect, so long as it is found



effectual for the end in view.



     Competitive business concerns that find it needful to



commend themselves to a large and credulous body of customers,



as, e. g., newspapers or department stores, also find it



expedient somewhat to overstate their facilities for meeting all



needs, as also to overstate the measure of success which they



actually enjoy. Indeed, much talent and ingenuity is spent in



that behalf, as well as a very appreciable outlay of funds. So



also as touches the case of the competitive seminaries of



learning. And even apart from the exigencies of intercollegiate



rivalry, taken simply as a question of sentiment it is gratifying



to any university directorate to know and to make known that the



stock of merchantable knowledge on hand is abundant and



comprehensive, and that the registration and graduation lists



make a brave numerical showing, particularly in case the



directive head is duly imbued with a businesslike penchant for



tests of accountancy and large figures. It follows directly that



many and divers bureaux or departments are to be erected, which



will then announce courses of instruction covering all accessible



ramifications of the field of learning, including subjects which



the corps of instructors may not in any particular degree be fit



to undertake. A further and unavoidable consequence of this



policy, therefore, is perfunctory work.



    For establishments that are substantially of secondary school



character, including colleges and undergraduate departments, such



a result may not be of extremely serious consequence; since much



of the instruction in these schools is of a perfunctory kind



anyway. But since the university and the college are, in point of



formal status and of administrative machinery, divisions of the



same establishment and subject to the same executive control; and



since, under competitive business principles, the collegiate



division is held to be of greater importance, and requires the



greater share of attention; it comes about that the college in



great measure sets the pace for the whole, and that the



undergraduate scheme of credits, detailed accountancy, and



mechanical segmentation of the work, is carried over into the



university work proper. Such a result follows more consistently



and decisively, of course, in those establishments where the line



of demarkation between undergraduate and graduate instruction is



advisedly blurred or disregarded. It is not altogether unusual



latterly, advisedly to efface the distinction between the



undergraduate and the graduate division and endeavour to make a



gradual transition from the one to the other.(5*) This is done in



the less conspicuous fashion of scheduling certain courses as



Graduate and Senior, and allowing scholastic credits acquired in



certain courses of the upper-class undergraduate curriculum to



count toward the complement of graduate credits required of



candidates for advanced degrees. More conspicuously and with



fuller effect the same end is sought at other universities by



classifying the two later years of the undergraduate curriculum



as "Senior College"; with the avowed intention that these two



concluding years of the usual four are scholastically to lie



between the stricter undergraduate domain, now reduced to the



freshman and sophomore years, on the one hand, and the graduate



division as such on the other hand. This "Senior College"



division so comes to be accounted in some sort a halfway graduate



school; with the result that it is assimilated to the graduate



work in the fashion of its accountancy and control; or rather,



the essentially undergraduate methods that still continue to rule



unabated in the machinery and management of this "senior college"



are carried over by easy sophistication of expediency into the



graduate work; which so takes on the usual, conventionally



perfunctory, character that belongs by tradition and necessity to



the undergraduate division; whereby in effect the instruction



scheduled as "graduate" is, in so far, taken out of the domain of



the higher learning and thrown back into the hands of the



schoolmasters. The rest of the current undergraduate standards



and discipline tends strongly to follow the lead so given and to



work over by insensible precession into the graduate school;



until in the consummate end the free pursuit of learning should



no longer find a standing-place in the university except by



subreption and dissimulation; much after the fashion in which, in



the days of ecclesiastical control and scholastic lore, the



pursuit of disinterested knowledge was constrained to a shifty



simulation of interest in theological speculations and a



disingenuous formal conformity to the standards and methods that



were approved for indoctrination in divinity.



    Perfunctory work and mechanical accountancy may be



sufficiently detrimental in the undergraduate curriculum, but it



seems altogether and increasingly a matter of course in that



section; but it is in the graduate division that it has its



gravest consequences. Yet even in undergraduate work it remains



true, as it does in all education in a degree, that the



instruction can be carried on with best effect only on the ground



of an absorbing interest on the part of the instructor; and he



can do the work of a teacher as it should be done only so long as



he continues to take an investigator's interest in the subject in



which he is called on to teach. He must be actively engaged in an



endeavour to extend the bounds of knowledge at the point where



his work as teacher falls. He must be a specialist offering



instruction in the specialty with which he is occupied; and the



instruction offered can reach its best efficiency only in so far



as it is incidental to an aggressive campaign of inquiry on the



teacher's part.



    But no one is a competent specialist in many lines; nor is



any one competent to carry on an assorted parcel of special



inquiries, cut to a standard unit of time and volume. One line,



somewhat narrowly bounded as a specialty, measures the capacity



of the common run of talented scientists and scholars for



first-class work, whatever side-lines of subsidiary interest they



may have in hand and may carry out with passably creditable



results. The alternative is schoolmaster's task-work; or if the



pretense of advanced learning must be kept up, the alternative



which not unusually goes into effect is amateurish pedantry, with



the charlatan ever in the near background. By and large, if the



number of distinct lines of instruction offered by a given



departmental corps appreciably exceeds the number of men on the



staff, some of these lines or courses will of necessity be



carried in a perfunctory fashion and can only give mediocre



results, at the best. What practically happens at the worst is



better left under the cover of a decent reticence.



    Even those preferred lines of instruction which in their own



right engage the serious interest of the instructors can get



nothing better than superficial attention if the time and energy



of the instructors are dissipated over a scattering variety of



courses. Good work, that is to say sufficiently good work to be



worth while, requires a free hand and a free margin of time and



energy. If the number of distinct lines of instruction is



relatively large, and if, as happens, they are distributed



scatteringly among the members of the staff, with a relatively



large assignment of hours to each man, so as to admit no assured



and persistent concentration on any point, the run of instruction



offered will necessarily be of this perfunctory character, and



will therefore be of such amateurish and pedantic quality. Such



an outcome is by no means unusual where regard is had primarily



to covering a given inclusive range of subjects, rather than to



the special aptitudes of the departmental corps; as indeed



commonly happens, and as happens particularly where the school or



the department in question is sufficiently imbued with a



businesslike spirit of academic rivalry. It follows necessarily



and in due measure on the introduction of the principles,



methods, and tests of competitive business into the work of



instruction.(6*)



    Under these principles of accountancy and hierarchical



control, each of the several bureaux of erudition -- commonly



called departments -- is a competitor with all its fellow bureaux



in the (thrifty) apportionment of funds and equipment, -- for the



businesslike university management habitually harbours a larger



number of departments than its disposable means will adequately



provide for. So also each department competes with its fellow



departments, as well as with similar departments in rival



universities, for a clientele in the way of student



registrations. These two lines of competition are closely



interdependent. An adverse statistical showing in the number of



students, or in the range, variety and volume of courses of



instruction offered by any given department; is rated by the



businesslike general directorate as a shortcoming, and it is



there fore likely to bring a reduction of allowances. At the same



time, of course, such an adverse showing reflects discredit on



the chief of bureau, while it also wounds his self-respect. The



final test of competency in such a chief, under business



principles, is the statistical test; in part because numerical



tests have a seductive air of businesslike accountancy, and also



because statistical exhibits have a ready use as advertising



material to be employed in appeals to the potential donors and



the unlearned patrons of the university, as well as to the public



at large.



    So the chief of bureau, with the aid and concurrence of his



loyal staff, will aim to offer as extensive and varied a range of



instruction as the field assigned his department will admit. Out



of this competitive aggrandizement of departments there may even



arise a diplomatic contention between heads of departments, as to



the precise frontiers between their respective domains; each



being ambitious to magnify his office and acquire merit by



including much of the field and many of the students under his



own dominion.(7*) Such a conflict of jurisdiction is particularly



apt to arise in case, as may happen, the number of scholastic



departments exceeds the number of patently distinguishable



provinces of knowledge; and competitive business principles



constantly afford provocation to such a discrepancy, at the hands



of an executive pushed by the need of a show of magnitude and



large traffic. It follows, further, from these circumstances,



that wherever contiguous academic departments are occupied with



such closely related subject matter as would place them in a



position to supplement one another's work, the negotiations



involved in jealously guarding their respective frontiers may



even take on an acrimonious tone, and may involve more or less of



diplomatic mischief-making; so that, under this rule of



competitive management, opportunities for mutual comfort and aid



will not infrequently become occasion for mutual distrust and



hindrance.



    The broader the province and the more exuberant the range of



instruction appropriated to a given department and its corps of



teachers, the more creditable will be the statistical showing,



and the more meagre and threadbare are likely to be the



scientific results. The corps of instructors will be the more



consistently organized and controlled with a view to their



dispensing accumulated knowledge, rather than to pursue further



inquiry in the direction of their scholarly inclination or



capacity; and frequently, indeed, to dispense a larger volume and



a wider range of knowledge than they are in any intimate sense



possessed of.



    It is by no means that no regard is had to the special



tastes, aptitudes, and attainments of the members of the staff,



in so apportioning the work; these things are, commonly, given



such consideration as the exigencies of academic competition will



permit; but these exigencies decide that the criterion of special



fitness becomes a secondary consideration. Wherever the



businesslike demands of a rounded and extensive schedule of



courses traverse the lines of special aptitude and training, the



requirements of the schedule must rule the case; whereas, of



course, the interests of science and scholarship, and of the best



efficiency in the instruction given, would decide that no demands



of the schedule be allowed to interfere with each man's doing the



work which he can do best, and nothing else.



    A schedule of instruction drawn on such lines of efficiency



would avoid duplication of course, and would curtail the number



of courses offered by any given department to such a modicum as



the special fitness of the members of the staff would allow them



to carry to the best effect. It would also proceed on the obvious



assumption that co-ordinate departments in the several



universities should supplement one another's work, -- an



assumption obvious to the meanest academic common sense. But



amicable working arrangements of this kind between departments of



different universities, or between the several universities as a



whole, are of course virtually barred out under the current



policy of competitive duplication. It is out of the question, in



the same manner and degree as the like co-operation between rival



department stores is out of the question. Yet so urgently right



and good is such a policy of mutual supplement and support,



except as a business proposition, that some exchange of academic



civilities paraded under its cloak is constantly offered to view



in the manoeuvres of the competing captains of erudition. The



well-published and nugatory(8*) periodic conferences of



presidents commonly have such an ostensible purpose.



    Competitive enterprise, reinforced with a sentimental



penchant for large figures, demands a full schedule of



instruction. But to carry such a schedule and do the work well



would require a larger staff of instructors in each department,



and a larger allowance of funds and equipment, than business



principles will countenance. There is always a dearth of funds,



and there is always urgent use for more than can be had; for the



enterprising directorate is always eager to expand and project



the business of the concern into new provinces of school



work,secondary, primary, elementary, normal, professional,



technical, manual-training, art schools, schools of music,



elocution, book-keeping, housekeeping, and a further variety that



will more readily occur to those who have been occupied with



devising ways and means of extending the competitive traffic of



the university. Into these divers and sundry channels of sand the



pressure of competitive expansion is continually pushing



additional half-equipped, under-fed and over-worked ramifications



of the academic body. And then, too, sane competitive business



practice insists on economy of cost as well as a large output of



goods. It is "bad business" to offer a better grade of goods than



the market demands, particularly to customers who do not know the



difference, or to turn out goods at a higher cost than other



competing concerns. So business exigencies, those exigencies of



economy to which the businesslike governing boards are very much



alive, preclude any department confining itself to the work which



it can do best, and at the same stroke they preclude the



authorities from dealing with any department according to such a



measure of liberality as would enable it to carry on the required



volume of work in a competent manner.



    In the businesslike view of the captains of erudition, taken



from the standpoint of the counting-house, learning and



university instruction are a species of skilled labour, to be



hired at competitive wages and to turn out the largest



merchantable output that can be obtained by shrewd bargaining



with their employees; whereas, of course, in point of fact and of



its place in the economic system, the pursuit of learning is a



species of leisure, and the work of instruction is one of the



modes of a life so spent in "the increase and diffusion of



knowledge among men." It is to be classed as "leisure" only in



such a sense of that term as may apply to other forms of activity



that have no economic, and more particularly no pecuniary, end or



equivalence. It is by no means hereby intended to imply that such



pursuit of knowledge is an aimless or indolent manner of life;



nothing like dissipation has a legitimate place in it, nor is it



"idle" in any other sense than that it is extra-economic, not



without derogation to be classed as a gainful pursuit. Its aim is



not the increase or utilization of the material means of life;



nor can its spirit and employment be bought with a price. Any



salary, perquisites, or similar emoluments assigned the scholars



and scientists in the service of civilization, within the



university or without, are (should be) in the nature of a



stipend, designed to further the free use of their talent in the



prosecution of this work, the value of which is not of a



pecuniary kind. But under the stress of businesslike management



in the universities the drift of things sets toward letting the



work of science and scholarship to the lowest bidder, on a



roughly applicable piece-wage plan. The result is about such a



degree of inefficiency, waste and stultification as might fairly



be expected; whereof there are abundantly many examples, that



humble the pride of the scholars and rejoice the heart of the



captains of erudition.



    The piece-wage plan never goes into effect in set form, or



has not hitherto done so, -- although there are schools of



nominally university grade in which there is a recognized and



avowed endeavour so to apportion the weekly hours of class-room



exercises to the pay of the teachers as to bring the pay per



class-hour per semester to a passably uniform level for the



general body of the staff. That the piece-wage plan has so little



avowed vogue in the academic wage scheme may at first sight seem



strange; the body of academic employees are as defenceless and



unorganized as any class of the wage-earning population, and it



is among the unorganized and helpless that the piece-wage plan is



commonly applied with the best effect; at the same time the



system of scholastic accountancy, worked out for other purposes



and already applied both to instructors, to courses of



instruction, and to divisions of the school year, has already



reduced all the relevant items to such standard units and



thorough equivalence as should make a system of piece-wages



almost a matter of course. That it has not formally been put in



practice appears to be due to tradition, and to that long-term



common sense appreciation of the nature of learning that will



always balk at rating this work as a frankly materialistic and



pecuniary occupation. The academic personnel, e. g., are unable



to rid themselves of a fastidious -- perhaps squeamish --



persuasion that they are engaged in this work not wholly for



pecuniary returns; and the community at large are obscurely, but



irretrievably and irresponsibly, in the same suspicious frame of



mind on that head. The same unadvised and unformulated persuasion



that academic salaries are after all not honestly to be rated as



wages, is doubtless accountable for certain other features of



academic management touching the pay-roll; notably the failure of



the employees to organize anything like a trades-union, or to



fall into line on any workable basis of solidarity on such an



issue as a wage-bargain, as also the equivocal footing on which



the matter of appointments and removals is still allowed to



stand; hence also the unsettled ethics of the trade in this



respect.



    For divers reasons, but mainly reasons of competitive



statistics, which resolve themselves, again, in the main into



reasons of expedient publicity, it is desired that the enrolment



should be very large and should always and unremittingly



increase, -- due regard being always had, of course, to the



eminent desirability of drawing into the enrolment many students



from the higher levels of gentility and pecuniary merit. To this



end it is well, as has already been remarked above, to announce a



very full schedule of instruction and a free range of elective



alternatives, and also to promote a complete and varied line of



scholastic accessories, in the way of athletics, clubs,



fraternities, "student activities," and similar devices of



politely blameless dissipation.



    These accessories of college life have been strongly on the



increase since the business rgime has come in. They are held to



be indispensable, or unavoidable; not for scholarly work, of



course, but chiefly to encourage the attendance of that



decorative contingent who take more kindly to sports, invidious



intrigue and social amenities than to scholarly pursuits.



Notoriously, this contingent is, on the whole, a serious drawback



to the cause of learning, but it adds appreciably, and adds a



highly valued contribution, to the number enrolled; and it gives



also a certain, highly appreciated, loud tone ("college spirit")



to the student body; and so it is felt to benefit the corporation



of learning by drawing public attention. Corporate means expended



in provision for these academic accessories -- "side shows," as



certain ill-disposed critics have sometimes called them -- are



commonly felt to be well spent. Persons who are not intimately



familiar with American college life have little appreciation of



the grave solicitude given to these matters.



    During some considerable number of years past, while the



undergraduate enrolment at the universities has been increasing



rapidly, the attitude of the authorities has progressively been



undergoing a notable change touching these matters of



extra-scholastic amenity. It is in great measure a continuation



of changes that have visibly been going forward in the older



universities of the country for a longer period, and it is



organically bound up with the general shifting of ground that



marks the incursion of business principles.



    While the authorities have turned their attention primarily



to the undergraduate division and its numerical increase, they



have at the same time, and largely with the same end in view,



endeavoured to give it more of the character of a "gentleman's



college", that is to say, an establishment for the cultivation of



the graces of gentility and a suitable place of residence for



young men of spendthrift habits. The improvement sought in these



endeavours is not so much the increase and acceleration of



scholarly pursuits, as a furthering of "social" proficiency. A



"gentleman's college" is an establishment in which scholarship is



advisedly made subordinate to genteel dissipation, to a grounding



in those methods of conspicuous consumption that should engage



the thought and energies of a well-to-do man of the world. Such



an ideal, more or less overtly, appears to be gaining ground



among the larger universities; and, needless to say, it is



therefore also gaining, by force of precedent and imitation,



among the younger schools engaged in more of a struggle to



achieve a secure footing of respectability.



    Its bearing on the higher learning is, of course,



sufficiently plain; and its intimate connection with business



principles at large should be equally plain. The scheme of



reputability in the pecuniary culture comprises not only the



imperative duty of acquiring something more than an equitable



share of the community's wealth, but also the dutiful privilege



of spending this acquired wealth, and the leisure that goes with



it, in a reputably conspicuous way, according to the ritual of



decorum in force for the time being. So that proficiency in the



decorously conspicuous waste of time and means is no less



essential in the end than proficiency in the gainful conduct of



business. The ways and means of reputably consuming time and



substance, therefore, is by prescriptive necessity to be included



in the training offered at any well-appointed undergraduate



establishment that aims in any comprehensive sense to do its



whole duty by the well-to-do young men under its tutelage.(9*) It



is, further and by compulsion of the same ideals, incumbent on



such an establishment to afford these young men a precinct



dedicate to cultured leisure, and conventionally sheltered from



the importunities of the municipal police, where an adequate but



guarded indulgence may be had for those extravagances of



adolescence that count for so much in shaping the canons of



genteel intercourse.



    There is, of course, no intention here to find fault with



this gentlemanly ideal of undergraduate indoctrination, or with



the solicitude shown in this behalf by the captains of erudition,



in endeavouring to afford time, place and circumstance for its



due inculcation among college men. It is by no means here assumed



that learning is substantially more to be desired than



proficiency in genteel dissipation. It is only that the higher



learning and the life of fashion and affairs are two widely



distinct and divergent lines, both lying within the current



scheme of civilization; and that it is the university's



particular office in this scheme to conserve and extend the



domain of knowledge. There need be no question that it is a work



of great social merit and consequence to train adepts in the



ritual of decorum, and it is doubtless a creditable work for any



school adapted to that purpose to equip men for a decorative



place in polite society, and imbue them with a discriminating



taste in the reputable waste of time and means. And all that may



perhaps fall, not only legitimately, but meritoriously, within



the province of the undergraduate school; at least it is not here



intended to argue the contrary. At the same time a secure



reputation for efficiency and adequate facilities along this line



of aspirations on the part of any such school will serve a good



business purpose in duly attracting students -- or residents --



from the better classes of society, and from those classes that



aspire to be "better."



    But this is essentially not university work. In the nature of



the case it devolves on the college, the undergraduate school;



and it can not be carried through with due singleness of purpose



in an establishment bound by tradition to make much of that



higher learning that is substantially alien to the spirit of this



thing. If, then, as indications run, the large undergraduate



schools are in due course to develop somewhat unreservedly into



gentlemen's colleges, that is an additional reason why, in the



interest of both parties, the divorce of the university from the



collegiate division should be made absolute. Neither does the



worldly spirit that pervades the gentlemen's college further the



university's interest in scholarship, nor do the university's



scholarly interests further the college work in gentility.



    Well to the front among these undergraduate appurtenances of



gentlemanship are the factional clubs known as Greek-letter



fraternities. These touch the province of learning in the



universities only incidentally and superficially, as they do not



in practice enter the graduate division except by way of a thin



aftermath of factional animus, which may occasionally infect such



of the staff as are gifted with a particularly puerile



temperament. They are, in effect, competitive organizations for



the elaboration of the puerile irregularities of adolescence, and



as such they find little scope among the graduate students or



among the adult personnel at large. But as part of the apparatus



of the undergraduate division they require a strict surveillance



to keep them within the (somewhat wide) limits of tolerance; and



so their presence affects the necessary discipline of the school



at large, entailing a more elaborate and rigorous surveillance



and more meddling with personal habits than would otherwise be



required, and entailing also some slight corporate expense.



    Much the same is true for the other social clubs, not of an



advisedly factional character, that are latterly being installed



by authority under university patronage and guaranteed by the



university funds; as, also, and in a more pronounced degree, for



college athletics, except that the item of expense in connection



with these things is much more serious and the resulting



diversion of interest from all matters of learning is



proportionally greater. Among these means of dissipating energy



and attention, college athletics is perhaps still the most



effective; and it is also the one most earnestly pushed by the



businesslike authorities, at the same time that it is the most



widely out of touch with all learning, whether it be the pursuit



of knowledge or the perfunctory taskwork of the collegiate



division. So notorious, indeed, is the discrepancy between



college athletics and scholarly work that few college authorities



latterly venture to avow as cordial a support of this training in



sportsmanship as they actually give. Yet so efficient a means of



attracting a certain class of young men is this academic



enterprise in sports that, in practical effect, few schools fail



to give it all the support that the limits of decorum will admit.



There is probably no point at which specious practices and



habitual prevarication are carried so far as here. Little need be



said of the threadbare subterfuges by which (ostensibly



surreptitious) pecuniary inducements are extended to students and



prospective students who promise well as college athletes;(10*)



or of the equally threadbare expedients by which these members of



the gild of sportsmen are enabled to meet the formal requirements



of scholarship imposed by shamefaced intercollegiate



bargaining.(11*)



    But apart from such petty expedients, however abundant and



commonplace, there is the more significant practice of retaining



trainers and helpers at the university's expense and with



academic countenance. There is the corps of workmen and



assistants to take care of the grounds, buildings and apparatus,



and there is the corps of trainers and coaches, masseurs and



surgeons, masquerading under the caption of "physical culture,"



whose chief duty is to put the teams in form for the various



contests. One may find a football or baseball coach retained



officially as a member of the faculty and carried on the academic



pay-roll, in a university that practices a penurious economy in



the equipment and current supply of materials and services



necessary to the work of its scientific laboratories, and whose



library is in a shameful state of neglect for want of adequate



provision for current purchases and attendance. The



qualifications of such a "professor" are those of a coach, while



in point of scholarly capacity and attainments it would be a



stretch of charity to say that he is of quite a neutral



composition. Still, under the pressure of intercollegiate



competition for the services of such expert lanistae, he may have



to be vested with the highest academic rank and conceded the



highest scholastic honours, with commensurate salary. Expediency



may so decide, partly to cloak the shamefulness of the



transaction, partly to meet the exacting demands of a coach whose



professional services have a high commercial rating in the



sporting community, and who is presumed to be indispensable to



the university's due success in intercollegiate athletics.



    The manifest aim, and indeed the avowed purpose, of these



many expedients of management and concessions to fashion and



frailty is the continued numerical growth of the undergraduate



school, -- the increase of the enrolment and the obtaining of



funds by use of which to achieve a further increase. To bring



this assiduous endeavour into its proper light, it is to be added



that most of these undergraduate departments are already too



large for the best work of their kind. Since these undergraduate



schools have grown large enough to afford a secure contrast as



against the smaller colleges that are engaged in the same general



field, it is coming to be plain to university men who have to do



with the advanced instruction that, for the advanced work in



science and scholarship, the training given by a college of



moderate size commonly affords a better preparation than is had



in the very large undergraduate schools of the great



universities. This holds true, in a general way, in spite of the



fact that the smaller schools are handicapped by an inadequate



equipment, are working against the side-draft of a religious



bias, with a corps of under-paid and over-worked teachers in



great part selected on denominational grounds, and are



under-rated by all concerned. The proposition, however, taken in



a general way and allowing for exceptions, is too manifestly true



to admit of much question; particularly in respect of preparation



for the sciences proper, as contrasted with the professions.



    The causes of this relative inefficiency that seems to attach



unavoidably to the excessively large undergraduate establishments



can not be gone into here; in part they are obvious, in part



quite obscure. But in any case the matter can not be gone into



here, except so far as it has an immediate bearing on the



advanced work of the university, through the inclusion of these



collegiate schools in the university corporation and under the



same government. As has already been remarked, by force of the



competitive need of a large statistical showing and a wide sweep



of popular prestige and notoriety, and by reason of other



incentives of a nature more intimate to the person of the



executive, it is in effect a matter of course that the



undergraduate school and its growth becomes the chief object of



solicitude and management with a businesslike executive; and that



so its shaping of the foundations of the establishment as a whole



acts irresistibly to fashion the rest of the university



administration and instruction in the image of the undergraduate



policy. Under the same compulsion it follows also that whatever



elements in the advanced work of the university will not lend



themselves to the scheme of accountancy, statistics,



standardization and coercive control enforced in and through the



undergraduate division, will tend to be lost by disuse and



neglect, as being selectively unfit to survive under that system.



    The advanced work falls under the same stress of competition



in magnitude and visible success; and the same scheme of enforced



statistical credits will gradually insinuate itself into the work



for the advanced degrees; so that these as well as the lower



degrees will come to be conferred on the piece-work plan.



Throughout the American universities there is apparent such a



movement in the direction of a closer and more mechanical



specification of the terms on which the higher degrees are to be



conferred, -- a specification in terms of stipulated courses of



class-room work and aggregate quantity of standard credits and



length of residence. So that his need of conformity to the



standard credit requirements will therefore constrain the



candidate for an advanced degree to make the substantial pursuit



of knowledge subordinate to the present pursuit of credits, to be



attended to, if at all, in the scant interstitial intervals



allowed by a strictly drawn accountancy. The effect of it all on



their animus, and on the effective prosecution of the higher



learnings by the instructors, should be sufficiently plain; but



in case of doubt any curious person may easily assure himself of



it by looking over the current state of things as they run in any



one of the universities that grant degrees.



    Nothing but continued workday familiarity with this system of



academic grading and credit, as it takes effect in the conduct



and control of instruction, and as its further elaboration



continues to employ the talents and deliberation of college men,



can enable any observer to appreciate the extraordinary lengths



to which this matter is carried in practice, and the pervasive



way in which it resistlessly bends more and more of current



instruction to its mechanical tests and progressively sterilizes



all personal initiative and ambition that comes within its sweep.



And nothing but the same continued contact with the relevant



facts could persuade any outsider that all this skilfully devised



death of the spirit is brought about by well-advised efforts of



improvement on the part of men who are intimately conversant with



the facts, and who are moved by a disinterested solicitude for



the best academic good of the students under their charge. Yet



such, unmistakably, are the facts of the case.



    While the initial move in this sterilization of the academic



intellect is necessarily taken by the statistically-minded



superior officers of the corporation of learning, the detail of



schedules and administrative routine involved is largely left in



the discretion of the faculty. Indeed, it is work of this



character that occupies nearly the whole of the attention of the



faculty as a deliberative body, as well as of its many and



various committees. In these matters of administrative routine



and punctilio the faculty, collectively and severally, can



exercise a degree of initiative and discretion. And these duties



are taken as seriously as well may be, and the matters that so



come within the faculty's discretion are handled in the most



unambiguous spirit of responsible deliberation. Each added move



of elaboration is taken only after the deliberative body has



assured itself that it embodies a needed enhancement of the



efficiency of the system of control. But each improvement and



amplification also unavoidably brings the need of further



specification and apparatus, desired to take care of further



refinements of doubt and detail that arise out of the last



previous extensions of the mechanism. The remedy sought in all



such conjunctures is to bring in further specifications and



definitions, with the effect of continually making two



specifications grow where one grew before, each of which in its



turn will necessarily have to be hedged about on both sides by



like specifications, with like effect;(12*) with the consequence



that the grading and credit system is subject to a ceaseless



proliferation of ever more meticulous detail. The underlying



difficulty appears to be not that the collective wisdom of the



faculty is bent on its own stultification, as an unsympathetic



outsider might hastily conclude, but that there is in all the



deliberations of such a body a total disregard of common sense.



It is, presumably, not that the constituent members are quite



devoid of that quality, but rather that no point in their



elaboration of apparatus can feasibly be reached, beyond which a



working majority can be brought conscientiously to agree that



dependence may safely be placed on common sense rather than on



further and more meticulous and rigorous specification.







    It is at this point that the American system of fellowships



falls into the scheme of university policy; and here again the



effect of business principles and undergraduate machinery is to



be seen at work. At its inception the purpose of these



fellowships was to encourage the best talent among the students



to pursue disinterested advanced study farther and with greater



singleness of purpose and it is quite plain that at that stage of



its growth the system was conceived to have no bearing on



intercollegiate competition or the statistics of registration.



This was something over thirty years ago. A fellowship was an



honourable distinction; at the same time it was designed to



afford such a stipend as would enable the incumbent to devote his



undivided energies to scholastic work of a kind that would yield



no pecuniary return. Ostensibly, such is still the sole purpose



of the fellowships; the traditional decencies require (voluble



and reiterated) professions to that effect. But in point of



practical effect, and progressively, concomitant with the



incursion of business principles into university policy, the



exigencies of competitive academic enterprise have turned the



fellowships to account in their own employ. So that, in effect,



today the rival universities use the fellowships to bid against



one another for fellows to come into residence, to swell the



statistics of graduate registration and increase the number of



candidates for advanced degrees. And the eligible students have



learned so to regard the matter, and are quite callously



exploiting the system in that sense.



    Not that the fellowships have altogether lost that character



of a scholarly stipendiary with which they started out; but they



have, under businesslike management, acquired a use not



originally intended; and the new, competitive use of them is



unequivocally their main use today. It would be hazardous to



guess just how far the directorates of the rival universities



consciously turn the fellowships to account in this enterprising



way, or how far, on the other hand, they are able to let



self-deception cover the policy of competitive bargaining in



which they are engaged; but it would be difficult to believe that



their right hand is altogether ignorant of what their left hand



is doing. It would doubtless also be found that both the practice



and the animus back of it differ appreciably from one school to



another. But there is no element of hazard in the generalization



that, by and large, such competitive use of the fellowships is



today their chief use; and that such is the fact is quite openly



avowed among the academic staff of some universities at least.



    As a sequel and symptom of this use of the fellowship



stipends in bargaining for an enlarged enrolment of advanced



students, it has become a moot question in academic policy



whether a larger number of fellowships with smaller stipends will



give a more advantageous net statistical result than a smaller



number of more adequate stipends. An administration that looks



chiefly to the short-term returns -- as is commonly the practice



in latterday business enterprise -- will sensibly incline to make



the stipends small and numerous; while the converse will be true



where regard is had primarily to the enrolment of carefully



selected men who may reflect credit on the institution in the



long run. Up-to-date business policy will apparently commend the



former rather than the latter course; for business practice, in



its later phases, is eminently guided by consideration of



short-term gains. It is also true that the average stipend



attached to the fellowships offered today is very appreciably



lower than was the practice some two or three decades ago; at the



same time that the cost of living -- which these stipends were



originally designed to cover -- has increased by something like



one hundred per cent. As final evidence of the decay of scholarly



purpose in the matter of fellowships, and as a climax of



stultification, it is to be added that stipends originally



established as an encouragement to disinterested scholarship are



latterly being used to induce enrolment in the professional



schools attached to the universities.(13*)







    One further point of contact and contamination is necessary



to be brought into this account of the undergraduate



administration and its bearing on advanced work. The scholastic



accessories spoken of above -- clubs, fraternities, devotional



organizations, class organizations, spectacles and social



functions, athletics, and "student activities" generally -- do



not in any appreciable degree bear directly on the advanced work,



in as much as they find no ready lodgement among the university



students proper. But they count, indirectly and effectually,



toward lowering the scholarly ideals and keeping down the number



of advanced students, chiefly by diverting the interest and



energies of the undergraduate men from scholarly pursuits and



throwing them into various lines of business and sportsmanship.



    The subsidized clubs work, in these premises, to much the



same effect as the fraternities; both are, in effect, designed to



cultivate expensive habits of life. The same is true in a higher



degree of athletic sports. The full round of sportsmanlike



events, as well as the round schedule of social amenities for



which the polite side of undergraduate life (partly subsidized)



is designed to give a taste and training, are beyond the compass



of men devoted to scholarship. In effect these things come in as



alternatives to the pursuit of knowledge. These things call for a



large expenditure of time and means, neither of which can be



adequately met by the scientist or scholar. So that men who have



been trained to the round of things that so go to make up the



conventional scheme of undergraduate interests can not well look



to a career in the higher learning as a possible outcome of their



residence in college. On the other hand, young men habitually,



and no doubt rightly, expect a business career to yield an income



somewhat above the average of incomes in the community, and more



particularly in excess of the commonplace incomes of academic



men; such an income, indeed, as may afford the means to cover the



conventional routine of such polite expenditures. So that, in the



absence of an independent income, some sort of a business career



that promises well in the pecuniary respect becomes the necessary



recourse of the men to whom these amenities of expenditure have



become habitual through their undergraduate training. With like



effect the mental discipline exercised by these sports and polite



events greatly favours the growth of tactful equivocation and a



guarded habit of mind, such as makes for worldly wisdom and



success in business, but which is worse than useless in the



scholar or scientist. And further and perhaps more decisively, an



undergraduate who does his whole duty in the way of sports,



fraternities, clubs, and reputable dissipation at large, commonly



comes through his undergraduate course with a scanty and



superficial preparation for scholarly or scientific pursuits, if



any. So that even in case he should still chance to harbour a



penchant for the pursuit of learning he will be unfit by lack of



training.







NOTES:







1. Cf. George T. Ladd, "The Need of Administrative Changes in the



American University," reprinted in University Control, by J.



McKeen Cattell; especially pp. 352-353.







2. Cf. George T. Ladd, as above, pp. 351-352.







3. Apart from the executive's need of satisfying the prejudices



of the laity in this matter, there is no ground for this



competition between the universities, either in the pecuniary



circumstances of the several establishments or in the work they



are to take care of. So much is admitted on all hands. But the



fact remains that no other one motive has as much to do with



shaping academic policy as this same competition for traffic. The



cause of it appears to be very little if anything else than that



the habits of thought induced by experience in business are



uncritically carried over into academic affairs.



    Critics of the present rgime are inclined to admit that the



colleges of the land are in great part so placed as to be thrown



into competition by force of circumstances, both as to the



acquisition of funds and as to the enrolment of students. The



point may be conceded, though with doubt and reservation, as



applies to the colleges; for the universities there is no visible



ground of such rivalry, apart from unreflecting prejudice on the



part of the laity, and an ambition for popular acclaim on the



part of the university directorate.







4. An incumbent of executive office, recently appointed, in one



of the greater universities was at pains a few years ago to speak



his mind on this head, to the effect that the members of the



academic staff are employees in the pay of the university and



under the orders of its president, and as such they are bound to



avoid all criticism of him and his administration so long as they



continue on the pay-roll; and that if any member of the staff has



any fault to find with the conduct of affairs he must first sever



his connection with the university, before speaking his mind.



These expressions were occasioned by the underhand dismissal of a



scholar of high standing and long service, who had incurred the



displeasure of the president then in charge, by overt criticism



of the administration. As to its general features the case might



well have been the one referred to by Professor Ladd (University



Control, as above, p. 359), though the circumstances of the



dismissal offer several details of a more discreditable character



than Professor Ladd appears to have been aware of.







5. The strategic reason for this is the desire to retain for



graduate registration any student who might otherwise prefer to



look for graduate instruction elsewhere. The plan has not been



found to work well, and it is still on trial.







6. At least one such businesslike chief of bureau has seriously



endeavoured so to standardize and control the work of his staff



as to have all courses of lectures professed in the department



reduced to symmetrical and permanent shape under the form of



certified syllabi, which could then be taken over by any member



of the staff, at the discretion of the chief, and driven home in



the lecture room with the accredited pedagogical circumstance and



apparatus. The scheme has found its way into academic anecdote,



on the lighter side, as being a project to supply standard



erudition in uniform packages, "guaranteed under the pure food



law, fully sterilized. and sealed without solder or acids"; to



which it is only necessary to "add hot air and serve."







7. So, e. g., it is known to have, on occasion, became a



difficult question of inter-bureaucratic comity, whether



commercial geography belongs of right to the department of



geology or to that of economics; whether given courses in Hebrew



are equitably to be assigned to the department of Semitics or to



that of Religions; whether Church History is in fairness to be



classed with profane History or with Divinity, etc., -- questions



which, except in point of departmental rivalry, have none but a



meretricious significance.







8. Nugatory, that is, for the ostensible purpose of reducing



inter-academic rivalry and duplication. However, there are other



matters of joint interest to the gild of university executives,



as, e.g., the inter-academic, or inter-executive, blacklist, and



similar recondite matters of presidential courtesy and prestige,



necessary to be attended to though not necessary to be spread



abroad.







9. The English pattern of boys' schools and gentlemanly



university residence has doubtless afforded notable guidance to



the "Educators" who have laboured for the greater gentility of



American college life; at the same time that the grave



authenticity of these English customs has at many a difficult



passage sewed opportunely to take the edge off the



gentlemen-educators' sense of shame.







10. Illustrative instances have little value as anecdotes and not



much more as circumstantial evidence; their abundance and



outrance are such as to have depreciated their value in both



respects. Yet to any who may not know of this traffic by familiar



contact one or two commonplace instances may perhaps not seem too



much. So, a few years ago, in one of the greater of the new



universities, a valued member of one of the athletic teams was



retained at an allowance of $40 a month as bookkeeper to the



janitor of one of the boys' dormitories on the campus. At the



same university and about the same time two other athletes were



carried on university pay as assistants to the editor of the



weekly bulletin announcing the programme of academic events for



the week; though in this case, to the relief of the editor in



question, only one of the two assistants reported at his office,



and that only once, during the year of their incumbency. These,



as already remarked, are commonplace occurrences. The more



spectacular instances of shrewd management in these premises can



not well be dealt with otherwise than by a canny silence; that



being also the course approved by current practice.







11. A single instance may tolerantly be admitted here. Among the



formal requirements that would admit students to a free pursuit



of sportsmanship, at the same university as above mentioned,



without imputation of professionalism, was specified the ability



to read at sight such a passage in a given foreign language as



would satisfy the instructor in charge that the candidate was



competent in the language in question. The instructor responsible



in this case, a man of high academic rank and gifted with a



sympathetic good-will toward the "boys," submitted in fulfilment



of the test a copy of the Lord's Prayer in this foreign tongue,



and passed the (several) candidates on finding them able passably



to repeat the same in English. It would scarcely be fair to



distinguish this episode by giving names and places, since



equally ingenious expedients have been in use elsewhere.







12. "And then there came another locust and carried off another



grain of wheat, and then there came another locust," etc., etc.







13. More than one instance might be cited where a student whose



privately avowed and known aim was the study and practice of Law



has deliberately been induced by the offer of a fellowship



stipend to register, for the time being, as an academic graduate



student and as candidate for the academic doctor's degree. In the



instances that come to mind the students in question have since



completed their law studies and entered practice, without further



troubling about the academic degree for which they once were



ostensible candidates.







CHAPTER IV







Academic Prestige and the Material Equipment







    In the course of the preceding chapter it has appeared that



the introduction of business principles into university policy



has had the immediate and ubiquitous effect of greatly



heightening the directorate's solicitude for a due and creditable



publicity, a convincing visible success, a tactful and effectual



showing of efficiency reflected in an uninterrupted growth in



size and other tangible quantitative features. This is good



policy as seen from the point of view of competitive business



enterprise. In competitive business it is of the gravest



importance to keep up the concern's prestige, or "good will." A



business concern so placed must be possessed of such prestige as



will draw and hold a profitable traffic; otherwise the enterprise



is in a precarious case. For the objective end and aim of



business enterprise is profitable sales, or the equivalent of



such sales if the concern is not occupied with what would



strictly be called sales. The end sought is a net gain over



costs; in effect, to buy cheap and sell dear. The qualities that



count as of prime consequence in business enterprise, therefore,



particularly in such business enterprise as has to do with many



impressionable customers, are the salesmanlike virtues of



effrontery and tact. These are high qualities in all business,



because their due exercise is believed to bring a net return



above the cost of the goods to the seller, and, indeed, above



their value to the buyer. Unless the man in competitive business



is able, by force of these businesslike aptitudes, to get



something more than he gives, it is felt that he has fallen short



of the highest efficiency. So the efficient salesman, and



similarly the efficiently managed business concern, are enabled



to add to their marketable goods an immaterial increment of



"prestige value," as some of the economists are calling it. A



margin of prepossessions or illusions as to their superior, but



intangible and inexpensive, utility attaches to a given line of



goods because of the advertiser's or salesman's work, -- work



spent not so much on the goods as on the customer's



sensibilities.



    In case these illusions of superior worth are of an enduring



character, they will add an increment of such intangible utility



also to goods or other marketable items subsequently to be



offered by the same concern; and they can be added up as a



presumptive aggregate and capitalized as intangible assets of the



business concern in question. Such a body of accumulated and



marketable illusions constitute what is known as "good-will," in



the stricter sense of the term. The illusions in question need,



of course, not be delusions; they may be well or ill founded; for



the purpose in hand that is an idle question.



    The most familiar and convincing illustrations of such good



will are probably those afforded by the sales of patent



medicines, and similar proprietary articles of household



consumption; but intangible values of a similar nature are



involved in nearly all competitive business. They are the product



of salesmanship, not of workmanship; and they are useful to the



seller, not to the buyer. They are useful for purposes of



competitive gain to the businessman, not for serviceability to



the community at large, and their value to their possessor lies



in the differential advantage which they give to one seller as



against another. They have, on the whole, no aggregate value or



utility. From the point of view of the common good, work and



expenditure so incurred for these competitive purposes are



bootless waste.







    Under compulsion of such precedents, drawn from the conduct



of competitive business, publicity and "goodwill" have come to



take a foremost place in the solicitude of the academic



directorate. Not that this notoriety and prestige, or the efforts



that go to their cultivation, conduce in any appreciable degree



to any ostensible purpose avowed, or avowable, by any university.



These things, that is to say, rather hinder than help the cause



of learning, in that they divert attention and effort from



scholarly workmanship to statistics and salesmanship. All that is



beyond cavil. The gain which so accrues to any university from



such an accession of popular illusions is a differential gain in



competition with rival seats of learning, not a gain to the



republic of learning or to the academic community at large; and



it is a gain in marketable illusions, not in serviceability for



the ends of learning or for any other avowed or avowable end



sought by the universities. But as competitors for the good-will



of the unlettered patrons of learning the university directorates



are constrained to keep this need of a reputable notoriety



constantly in mind, however little it may all appeal to their own



scholarly tastes.



    It is in very large part, if not chiefly, as touches the



acquirement of prestige, that the academic work and equipment are



amenable to business principles, -- not overlooking the pervasive



system of standardization and accountancy that affects both the



work and the equipment, and that serves other purposes as well as



those of publicity; so that "business principles" in academic



policy comes to mean, chiefly, the principles of reputable



publicity. It means this more frequently and more consistently



than anything else, so far as regards the academic



administration, as distinguished from the fiscal management of



the corporation.



    Of course, the standards, ideals, principles and procedure of



business traffic enter into the scheme of university policy in



other relations also, as has already appeared and as will be



shown more at large presently; but after all due qualification is



had, it remains true that this business of publicity necessarily,



or at least commonly, accounts for a disproportionately large



share of the business to be taken care of in conducting a



university, as contrasted with such an enterprise, e.g., as a



bank, a steel works, or a railway company, on a capital of about



the same volume. This follows from the nature of the case. The



common run of business concerns are occupied with industrial



enterprise of some kind, and with transactions in credit, -- with



a running sequence of bargains from which the gains of the



concern are to accrue, -- and it is upon these gains that



attention and effort centers, and to which the management of the



concern constantly looks. Such concerns have to meet their



competitors in buying, selling, and effecting contracts of all



kinds, from which their gains are to come. A university, on the



other hand, can look to no such gains in the work which is its



sole ostensible interest and occupation; and the pecuniary



transactions and arrangements which it enters into on the basis



of its accumulated prestige are a relatively very trivial matter.



There is, in short, no appreciable pecuniary gain to be looked



for from any traffic resting on the acquired prestige, and



therefore there is no relation of equivalence or discrepancy



between any outlay incurred in this behalf and the volume of



gainful business to be transacted on the strength of it; with the



result that the academic directorate applies itself to this



pursuit without arrire pense. So far as the acquired prestige



is designed to serve a pecuniary end it can only be useful in the



way of impressing potential donors, a highly speculative line of



enterprise, offering a suggestive parallel to the drawings of a



lottery.



    Outlay for the purpose of publicity is not confined to the



employment of field-agents and the circulation of creditable



gossip and reassuring printed matter. The greater share of it



comes in as incidental to the installation of plant and equipment



and the routine of academic life and ceremony. As regards the



material equipment, the demands of a creditable appearance are



pervading and rigorous; and their consequences in the way of



elaborate and premeditated incidentals are, perhaps, here seen at



their best. To the laity a "university" has come to mean, in the



first place and indispensably, an aggregation of buildings and



other improved real-estate. This material equipment strikes the



lay attention directly and convincingly; while the pursuit of



learning is a relatively obscure matter, the motions of which can



not well be followed by the unlettered, even with the help of the



newspapers and the circular literature that issues from the



university's publicity bureau. The academic work is, after all,



unseen, and it stays in the background. Current expenditure for



the prosecution of this work, therefore, offers the enterprise in



advertisement a less advantageous field for the convincing use of



funds than the material equipment, especially the larger items,



-- laboratory and library buildings, assembly halls, curious



museum exhibits, grounds for athletic contests, and the like.



There is consequently a steady drift of provocation towards



expenditure on conspicuous extensions of the "plant," and a



correlative constant temptation to parsimony in the more obscure



matter of necessary supplies and service, and similar



running-expenses without which the plant can not effectually be



turned to account for its ostensible use; with the result, not



infrequently, that the usefulness of an imposing plant is



seriously impaired for want of what may be called "working



capital."(1*)



    Indeed, instances might be cited where funds that were much



needed to help out in meeting running expenses have been turned



to use for conspicuous extensions of the plant in the way of



buildings, in excess not only of what was needed for their



alleged purpose but in excess of what could conveniently be made



use of. More particularly is there a marked proclivity to extend



the plant and the school organization into new fields of



scholastic enterprise, often irrelevant or quite foreign to the



province of the university as a seminary of learning; and to push



these alien ramifications, to the neglect of the urgent needs of



the academic work already in hand, in the way of equipment,



maintenance, supplies, service and instruction.



    The running-expenses are always the most urgent items of the



budget, as seen from the standpoint of the academic work; and



they are ordinarily the item that is most parsimoniously provided



for. A scanty provision at this point unequivocally means a



disproportionate curtailment of the usefulness of the equipment



as well as of the personnel, -- as, e.g., the extremely common



and extremely unfortunate practice of keeping the allowance for



maintenance and service in the university libraries so low as



seriously to impair their serviceability. But the exigencies of



prestige will easily make it seem more to the point, in the eyes



of a businesslike executive, to project a new extension of the



plant; which will then be half-employed, on a scanty allowance,



in work which lies on the outer fringe or beyond the university's



legitimate province.(2*)



    In so discriminating against the working capacity of the



university, and in favour of its real-estate, this pursuit of



reputable publicity further decides that the exterior of the



buildings and the grounds should have the first and largest



attention. It is true, the initial purpose of this material



equipment, it is ostensibly believed, is to serve as housing and



appliances for the work of inquiry and instruction. Such, of



course, continues to be avowed its main purpose, in a



perfunctorily ostensible way. This means a provision of



libraries, laboratories, and lecture rooms. The last of these is



the least exacting, and it is the one most commonly well



supplied. It is also, on the whole, the more conspicuous in



proportion to the outlay. But all these are matters chiefly of



interior arrangement, appliances and materials, and they are all



of a relatively inconspicuous character. Except as detailed in



printed statistics they do not ordinarily lend themselves with



appreciable effect to the art of advertising. In meeting all



these material requirements of the work in hand a very large



expenditure of funds might advantageously be made --



advantageously to the academic use which they are to serve --



without much visible effect as seen in perspective from the



outside. And so far as bears on this academic use, the exterior



of the buildings is a matter of altogether minor consequence, as



are also the decorative appointments of the interior.



    In practice, under compulsion of the business principles of



publicity, it will be found, however, that the exterior and the



decorative appointments are the chief object of the designer's



attention; the interior arrangement and working appointments will



not infrequently become a matter of rude approximation to the



requirements of the work, care being first taken that these



arrangements shall not interfere with the decorative or



spectacular intent of the outside. But even with the best-advised



management of its publicity value, it is always appreciably more



difficult to secure appropriations for the material equipment of



a laboratory or library than for the shell of the edifice, and



still more so for the maintenance of an adequate corps of



caretakers and attendants.



    As will be found true of other lines of this university



enterprise in publicity, so also as to this presentation of a



reputable exterior; it is designed to impress not the academic



personnel, or the scholarly element at large, but the laity. The



academic folk and scholars are commonly less susceptible to the



appeal of curious facades and perplexing feats of architecture;



and then, such an appeal would have no particular motive in their



case; it is not necessary to impress them. It is in the eyes of



the unlettered, particularly the business community, that it is



desirable for the university to present an imposing front; that



being the feature of academic installation which they will



readily appreciate. To carry instant conviction of a high



academic worth to this large element of the populace, the



university buildings should bulk large in the landscape, should



be wastefully expensive, and should conform to the architectural



mannerisms in present vogue. In a few years the style of



architectural affectations will change, of course, as fashions



necessarily change in any community whose tastes are governed by



pecuniary standards; and any particular architectural contrivance



will therefore presently lose much of its prestige value; but by



the time it so is overtaken by obsolescence, the structures which



embody the particular affectation in question will have made the



appeal for which they were designed, and so will have served



their purpose of publicity. And then, too, edifices created with



a thrifty view to a large spectacular effect at a low cost are



also liable to so rapid a physical decay as to be ready for



removal and replacement before they have greatly outlived their



usefulness in this respect.



    In recent scholastic edifices one is not surprised to find



lecture rooms acoustically ill designed, and with an annoying



distribution of light, due to the requirements of exterior



symmetry and the decorative distribution of windows; and the like



holds true even in a higher degree for libraries and



laboratories, since for these uses the demands in these respects



are even more exacting. Nor is it unusual to find waste of space



and weakness of structure, due, e.g., to a fictitious winding



stair, thrown into the design to permit such a facade as will



simulate the defensive details of a mediaeval keep, to be



surmounted with embrasured battlements and a (make-believe)



loopholed turret. So, again, space will, on the same ground, be



wasted in heavy-ceiled, ill-lighted lobbies; which might once



have served as a mustering place for a body of unruly



men-at-arms, but which mean nothing more to the point today, and



in these premises, than so many inconvenient flagstones to be



crossed in coming and going.



    These principles of spectacular publicity demand a nice



adjustment of the conspicuous features of the plant to the



current vagaries in decorative art and magnificence,that is to



say, conformity to the sophistications current on that level of



culture on which these unlettered men of substance live and move



and have their being. As touches the case of the seats of



learning, these current lay sophistications draw on several more



or less diverse, and not altogether congruous, lines of



conventionally approved manifestation of the ability to pay. Out



of the past comes the conventional preconception that these



scholastic edifices should show something of the revered traits



of ecclesiastical and monastic real-estate; while out of the



present comes an ingrained predilection for the more sprightly



and exuberant effects of decoration and magnificence to which the



modern concert-hall, the more expensive cafes and clubrooms, and



the Pullman coaches have given a degree of authentication. Any



one given to curious inquiry might find congenial employment in



tracing out the manner and proportion in which these, and the



like, strains of aesthetic indoctrination are blended in the



edifices and grounds of a well-advised modern university.



    It is not necessary here to offer many speculations on the



enduring artistic merit of these costly stage properties of the



seats of learning, since their permanent value in that respect is



scarcely to be rated as a substantial motive in their



construction. But there is, e. g., no obvious reason why, with



the next change in the tide of mannerism, the disjointed



grotesqueries of an eclectic and modified Gothic should not



presently pass into the same category of apologetic neglect, with



the architectural evils wrought by the mid-Victorian generation.



But there is another side to this architecture of notoriety, that



merits some slight further remark. It is consistently and



unavoidably meretricious. Just at present the enjoined vogue is



some form of bastard antique. The archaic forms which it



ostensibly preserves are structurally out of date, ill adapted to



the modern materials and the modern builder's use of materials.



Modern building, on a large scale and designed for durable



results, is framework building. The modern requirements of light,



heating, ventilation and access require it to be such; and the



materials used lend themselves to that manner of construction.



The strains involved in modern structures are frame-work strains;



whereas the forms which these edifices are required to simulate



are masonry forms. The outward conformation and ostensible



structure of the buildings, therefore, are commonly meaningless,



except as an architectural prevarication. They have to be



adapted, simulated, deranged, because in modern use they are



impracticable in the shape, proportion and combination that of



right belonged to them under the circumstances of materials and



uses under which they were once worked out. So there results a



meaningless juxtaposition of details, that prove nothing in



detail and contradict one another in assemblage. All of which may



suggest reflections on the fitness of housing the quest of truth



in an edifice of false pretences.



    These architectural vagaries serve no useful end in academic



life. As an object lesson they conduce, in their measure, to



inculcate in the students a spirit of disingenuousness. But they



spread abroad the prestige of the university as an ornate and



spendthrift establishment; which is believed to bring increased



enrolment of students and, what is even more to the point, to



conciliate the good-will of the opulent patrons of learning. That



these edifices are good for this purpose, and that this policy of



architectural mise en scene is wise, appears from the greater



readiness with which funds are procured for such ornate



constructions than for any other academic use. It appears that



the successful men of affairs to whom the appeal for funds is



directed, find these wasteful, ornate and meretricious edifices a



competent expression of their cultural hopes and ambitions.







NOTES:







1. A single illustrative instance may serve to show how the land



lies in this respect, even though it may seem to the uninitiated



to be an extreme if not an exaggerated case; while it may perhaps



strike those familiar with these matters as a tedious



commonplace. A few years ago, in one of the larger, younger and



more enterprising universities, a commodious laboratory, well



appointed and adequately decorated, was dedicated to one of the



branches of biological science. To meet the needs of scientific



work such a laboratory requires the services of a corps of



experienced and intelligent assistants and caretakers,



particularly where the establishment is equipped with modern



appliances for heating, ventilation and the like, as was the case



in this instance. In this laboratory the necessary warmth was



supplied by what is sometimes called the method of indirect steam



heat; that is to say, the provision for heat and for ventilation



were combined in one set of appliances, by bringing the needed



air from the open through an outdoor "intake," passing it over



steam-heated coils (in the basement of the building), and so



distributing the air necessary for ventilation, at the proper



temperature, throughout the building by means of a suitable



arrangement of air-shafts. Such was the design. But intelligent



service comes high, and ignorant janitors are willing to



undertake what may be asked of them. And sufficient warmth can be



had in an inclement climate and through a long winter season only



at an appreciable expense. So, with a view to economy, and



without the knowledge of the scientific staff who made use of the



laboratory, the expedient was hit upon by the academic executive,



in consultation with a suitable janitor, that the outdoor intake



be boarded up tightly. so that the air which passed over the



heating coils and through the air-shafts to the laboratory rooms



was thenceforth drawn not from the extremely cold atmosphere of



outdoors but from the more temperate supply that filled the



basement and had already had the benefit of circulating over the



steam coils and through the ventilating shafts. By this means an



obvious saving in fuel would be effected, corresponding to the



heat differential between the outdoor air, at some 0* to -20* and



that already confined in the building, at some 60*. How long this



fuel-saving expedient was in force can not well be ascertained,



but it is known to have lasted at least for more than one season.



    The members of the scientific staff meantime mysteriously but



persistently fell sick after a few weeks of work in the



laboratory, recurrently after each return from enforced



vacations. Until, in the end, moved by persistent suspicions of



sewer-gas -- which, by the way, had in the meantime cost some



futile inconvenience and expense occasioned by unnecessary



overhauling of the plumbing -- one of the staff pried into the



janitor's domain in the basement; where he found near the chamber



of the steam coils a loosely closed man-hole leading into the



sewers, from which apparently such air was drawn as would



necessarily go to offset the current leakage from this closed



system of ventilation.







2. This is a nearly universal infirmity of American university



policy, but it is doubtless not to be set down solely to the



account of the penchant for a large publicity on the part of the



several academic executives. It is in all likelihood due as much



to the equally ubiquitous inability of the governing boards to



appreciate or to perceive what the current needs of the academic



work are, or even what they are like. Men trained in the conduct



of business enterprise, as the governing boards are, will have



great difficulty in persuading themselves that expenditures which



yield neither increased dividends nor such a durable physical



product as can be invoiced and added to the capitalization, can



be other than a frivolous waste of good money; so that what is



withheld from current academic expenditure is felt to be saved,



while that expenditure which leaves a tangible residue of



(perhaps useless) real estate is, by force of ingrained habit,



rated as new investment.







CHAPTER V







The Academic Personnel











    As regards the personnel of the academic staff the control



enforced by the principles of competitive business is more



subtle, complex and far-reaching, and should merit more



particular attention. The staff is the university, or it should



so be if the university is to deserve the place assigned it in



the scheme of civilization. Therefore the central and gravest



question touching current academic policy is the question of its



bearing on the personnel and the work which there is for them to



do. In the apprehension of many critics the whole question of



university control is comprised in the dealings of the executive



with the staff.



    Whether the power of appointment vests formally in one man or



in a board, in American practice it commonly vests, in effect, in



the academic executive. In practice, the power of removal, as



well as that of advancement, rests in the same hands. The



businesslike requirements of the case bring it to this outcome de



facto, whatever formalities of procedure may intervene de jure.



    It lies in the nature of the case that this appointing power



will tend to create a faculty after its own kind. It will be



quick to recognize efficiency within the lines of its own



interests, and slower to see fitness in those lines that lie



outside of its horizon, where it must necessarily act on outside



solicitation and hearsay evidence.



    The selective effect of such a bias, guided as one might say,



by a "consciousness of kind," may be seen in those establishments



that have remained under clerical tutelage; where, notoriously,



the first qualification looked to in an applicant for work as a



teacher is his religious bias. But the bias of these governing



boards and executives that are under clerical control has after



all been able to effect only a partial, though far-reaching,



conformity to clerical ideals of fitness in the faculties so



selected; more especially in the larger and modernized schools of



this class. In practice it is found necessary somewhat to wink at



devotional shortcomings among their teachers; clerical, or



pronouncedly devout, scientists that are passably competent in



their science, are of very rare occurrence; and yet something



presentable in the way of modern science is conventionally



required by these schools, in order to live, and so to effect any



part of their purpose. Half a loaf is better than no bread. None



but the precarious class of schools made up of the lower grade



and smaller of these colleges, such as are content to save their



souls alive without exerting any effect on the current of



civilization, are able to get along with faculties made up



exclusively of God-fearing men.



    Something of the same kind, and in somewhat the same degree,



is true for the schools under the tutelage of businessmen. While



the businesslike ideal may be a faculty wholly made up of men



highly gifted with business sense, it is not practicable to



assemble such a faculty which shall at the same time be plausibly



competent in science and scholarship. Scientists and scholars



given over to the pursuit of knowledge are conventionally



indispensable to a university, and such are commonly not largely



gifted with business sense, either by habit or by native gift.



The two lines of interest -- business and science -- do not pull



together; a competent scientist or scholar well endowed with



business sense is as rare as a devout scientist -- almost as rare



as a white blackbird. Yet the inclusion of men of scientific



gifts and attainments among its faculty is indispensable to the



university, if it is to avoid instant and palpable



stultification.



    So that the most that can practically be accomplished by a



businesslike selection and surveillance of the academic personnel



will be a compromise; whereby a goodly number of the faculty will



be selected on grounds of businesslike fitness, more or less



pronounced, while a working minority must continue to be made up



of men without much business proficiency and without pronounced



loyalty to commercial principles.



    This fluctuating margin of limitation has apparently not yet



been reached, perhaps not even in the most enterprising of our



universities. Such should be the meaning of the fact that a



continued commercialization of the academic staff appears still



to be in progress, in the sense that businesslike fitness counts



progressively for more in appointments and promotions. These



businesslike qualifications do not comprise merely facility in



the conduct of pecuniary affairs, even if such facility be



conceived to include the special aptitudes and proficiency that



go to the making of a successful advertiser. In academic circles



as elsewhere businesslike fitness includes solvency as well as



commercial genius. Both of these qualifications are useful in the



competitive manoeuvres in which the academic body is engaged. But



while the two are apparently given increasing weight in the



selection and grading of the academic personnel, the precedents



and specifications for a standard rating of merit in this bearing



have hitherto not been worked out to such a nicety as to allow



much more than a more or less close approach to a consistent



application of the principle in the average case. And there lies



always the infirmity in the background of the system that if the



staff were selected consistently with an eye single to business



capacity and business animus the university would presently be



functa officio, and the captain of erudition would find his



occupation gone.



    A university is an endowed institution of culture; whether



the endowment take the form of assigned income, as in the state



establishments, or of funded wealth, as with most other



universities. Such fraction of the income as is assigned to the



salary roll, and which therefore comes in question here, is



apportioned among the staff for work which has no determinate



market value. It is not a matter of quid pro quo; since one



member of the exchange, the stipend or salary, is measurable in



pecuniary terms and the other is not. This work has no business



value, in so far as it is work properly included among the duties



of the academic men. Indeed, it is a fairly safe test; work that



has a commercial value does not belong in the university. Such



services of the academic staff as have a business value are those



portions of their work that serve other ends than the higher



learning; as, e.g., the prestige and pecuniary gain of the



institution at large, the pecuniary advantage of a given clique



or faction within the university, or the profit and renown of the



directive head. Gains that accrue for services of this general



character are not, properly speaking, salary or stipend payable



toward "the increase and diffusion of knowledge among men," even



if they are currently so designated, in the absence of suitable



distinctions. Instances of such a diversion of corporate funds to



private ends have in the past occurred in certain monastic and



priestly orders, as well as in some modern political



organizations. Organized malversation of this character has



latterly been called "graft." The long-term common sense of the



community would presently disavow any corporation of learning



overtly pursuing such a course, as being faithless to its trust,



and the conservation of learning would so pass into other hands.



Indeed, there are facts current which broadly suggest that the



keeping of the higher learning is beginning to pass into other,



and presumptively more disinterested, hands.



    The permeation of academic policy by business principles is a



matter of more or less, not of absolute, dominance. It appears to



be a question of how wide a deviation from scholarly singleness



of purpose the long-term common sense of the community will



tolerate. The cult of the idle curiosity sticks too deep in the



instinctive endowment of the race, and it has in modern



civilization been too thoroughly ground into the shape of a quest



of matter-of-fact knowledge, to allow this pursuit to be



definitively set aside or to fall into abeyance. It is by too



much an integral constituent of the habits of thought induced by



the discipline of workday life. The faith in and aspiration after



matter-of-fact knowledge is too profoundly ingrained in the



modern community, and too consonant with its workday habit of



mind, to admit of its supersession by any objective end alien to



it, -- at least for the present and until some stronger force



than the technological discipline of modern life shall take over



the primacy among the factors of civilization, and so give us a



culture of a different character from that which has brought on



this modern science and placed it at the centre of things human.



    The popular approval of business principles and businesslike



thrift is profound, disinterested, alert and insistent; but it



does not, at least not yet, go the length of unreservedly placing



a businesslike exploitation of office above a faithful discharge



of trust. The current popular animus may not, in this matter,



approach that which animates the business community, specifically



so-called, but it is sufficiently "practical" to approve



practical sagacity and gainful traffic wherever it is found; yet



the furtherance of knowledge is after all an ideal which engages



the modern community's affections in a still more profound way,



and, in the long run, with a still more unqualified insistence.



For good or ill, in the apprehension of the civilized peoples,



matter-of-fact knowledge is an end to be sought; while gainful



enterprise is, after all, a means to an end. There is, therefore,



always this massive hedge of slow but indefeasible popular



sentiment that stands in the way of making the seats of learning



over into something definitively foreign to the purpose which



they are popularly believed to serve.(1*)







    Perhaps the most naive way in which a predilection for men of



substantial business value expresses itself in university policy



is the unobtrusive, and in part unformulated, preference shown



for teachers with sound pecuniary connections, whether by



inheritance or by marriage. With no such uniformity as to give



evidence of an advised rule of precedence or a standarized



schedule of correlation, but with sufficient consistency to



merit, and indeed to claim, the thoughtful attention of the



members of the craft, a scholar who is in a position to plead



personal wealth or a wealthy connection has a perceptibly better



chance of appointment on the academic staff, and on a more



advantageous scale of remuneration, than men without pecuniary



antecedents. Due preferment also appears to follow more as a



matter of course where the candidate has or acquires a tangible



standing of this nature.



    This preference for well-to-do scholars need by no means be



an altogether blind or impulsive predilection for commercial



solvency on the part of the appointing power; though such a



predilection is no doubt ordinarily present and operative in a



degree. But there is substantial ground for a wise discrimination



in this respect. As a measure of expediency, particularly the



expediency of publicity, it is desirable that the incumbents of



the higher stations on the staff should be able to live on such a



scale of conspicuous expensiveness as to make a favourable



impression on those men of pecuniary refinement and expensive



tastes with whom they are designed to come in contact. The



university should be worthily represented in its personnel,



particularly in such of its personnel as occupy a conspicuous



place in the academic hierarchy; that is to say, it should be



represented with becoming expensiveness in all its social contact



with those classes from whose munificence large donations may



flow into the corporate funds. Large gifts of this kind are



creditable both to him that gives and him that takes, and it is



the part of wise foresight so to arrange that those to whom it



falls to represent the university, as potential beneficiary, at



this juncture should do so with propitiously creditable



circumstance. To meet and convince the opulent patrons of



learning, as well as the parents and guardians of possible



opulent students, it is, by and large, necessary to meet them on



their own ground, and to bring into view such evidence of culture



and intelligence as will readily be appreciated by them. To this



end a large and well appointed domestic establishment is more



fortunate than a smaller one; abundant, well-chosen and



well-served viands, beverages and narcotics will also



felicitously touch the sensibilities of these men who are



fortunate enough to have learned their virtue; the better, that



is to say, on the whole, the more costly, achievements in dress



and equipage will "carry farther" in these premises than a



penurious economy. In short, it is well that those who may be



called to stand spokesmen for the seat of learning in its contact



with men and women of substantial means, should be accustomed to,



and should be pecuniarily competent for, a scale of living



somewhat above that which the ordinary remuneration for academic



work will support. An independent income, therefore, is a



meritorious quality in an official scholar.



    The introduction of these delegates from the well-to-do among



the academic personnel has a further, secondary effect that is



worth noting. Their ability freely to meet any required pecuniary



strain, coupled with that degree of social ambition that commonly



comes with the ability to pay, will have a salutary effect in



raising the standard of living among the rest of the staff, --



salutary as seen from the point of view of the bureau of



publicity. In the absence of outside resources, the livelihood of



academic men is somewhat scant and precarious. This places them



under an insidious temptation to a more parsimonious manner of



life than the best (prestige) interests of the seat of learning



would dictate. By undue saving out of their current wages they



may easily give the academic establishment an untoward air of



indigence, such as would be likely to depreciate its prestige in



those well-to-do circles where such prestige might come to have a



commercial value, in the way of donations, and it might at the



same time deter possible customers of the same desirable class



from sending their young men to the university as students.



    The American university is not an eleemosynary institution;



it does not plead indigence, except in that Pickwickian sense in



which indigence may without shame be avowed in polite circles;



nor does it put its trust in donations of that sparseness and



modesty which the gifts of charity commonly have. Its recourse



necessarily is that substantial and dignified class of gifts that



are not given thriftily on compunction of charity, but out of the



fulness of the purse. These dignified gifts commonly aim to



promote the most reputable interests of humanity, rather than the



sordid needs of creature comfort, at the same time that they



serve to fortify the donor' s good name in good company.



Donations to university funds have something of the character of



an investment in good fame; they are made by gentlemen and



gentlewomen, to gentlemen, and the transactions begin and end



within the circle of pecuniary respectability. An impeccable



respectability, authentic in the pecuniary respect, therefore,



affords the only ground on which such a seminary of learning can



reasonably claim the sympathetic attention of the only class



whose attentions are seriously worth engaging in these premises;



and respectability is inseparable from an expensive scale of



living, in any community whose scheme of life is conventionally



regulated by pecuniary standards.



    It is accordingly expedient, for its collective good repute,



that the members of the academic staff should conspicuously



consume all their current income in current expenses of living.



Hence also the moral obligation incumbent on all members of the



staff -- and their households -- to take hands and help in an



endless chain of conspicuously expensive social amenities, where



their social proficiency and their ostensible ability to pay may



effectually be placed on view. An effectual furtherance to this



desirable end is the active presence among the staff of an



appreciable number who are ready to take the lead at a pace



slightly above the competency of the common run of university



men. Their presence insures that the general body will live up to



their limit; for in this, as in other games of emulation, the



pace-maker is invaluable.



    Besides the incentive so given to polite expenditure by the



presence of a highly solvent minority among the academic



personnel, it has also been found expedient that the directorate



take thought and institute something in the way of an authentic



curriculum of academic festivities and exhibitions of social



proficiency. A degree of expensive gentility is in this way



propagated by authority, to be paid for in part out of the



salaries of the faculty.



    Something in this way of ceremonial functions and public



pageants has long been included in the ordinary routine of the



academic year among the higher American schools. It dates back to



the time when they were boys' schools under the tutelage of the



clergy, and it appears to have had a ritualistic origin, such as



would comport with what is found expedient in the service of the



church. By remoter derivation it should probably be found to rest



on a very ancient and archaic faith in the sacramental or magical



efficacy of ceremonial observances. But the present state of the



case can by no means be set down to the account of aimless



survival alone. Instead of being allowed in any degree to fall



into abeyance by neglect, the range and magnitude of such



observances have progressively grown appreciably greater since



the principles of competitive business have come to rule the



counsels of the universities. The growth, in the number of such



observances, in their pecuniary magnitude, in their ritualistic



circumstance, and in the importance attached to them, is greater



in the immediate present than at any period in the past; and it



is, significantly, greater in those larger new establishments



that have started out with few restraints of tradition. But the



move so made by these younger, freer, more enterprising seats of



learning falls closely in with that spirit of competitive



enterprise that animates all alike though unequally. 1



    That it does so, that this efflorescence of ritual and



pageantry intimately belongs in the current trend of things



academic, is shown by the visible proclivity of the older



institutions to follow the lead given in this matter by the



younger ones, so far as the younger ones have taken the lead. In



the mere number of authorized events, as contrasted with the



average of some twenty-five or thirty years back, the present



average appears, on a somewhat deliberate review of the available



data, to compare as three or four to one. For certain of the



younger and more exuberant seats of learning today, as compared



with what may be most nearly comparable in the academic situation



of the eighties, the proportion is perhaps twice as large as the



larger figure named above. Broadly speaking, no requirement of



the academic routine should be allowed to stand in the way of an



available occasion for a scholastic pageant.



    These genteel solemnities, of course, have a cultural



significance, probably of a high order, both as occasions of



rehearsal in all matters of polite conformity and as a stimulus



to greater refinement and proficiency in expenditure on seemly



dress and equipage. They may also be believed to have some



remote, but presumably salutary, bearing on the higher learning.



This latter is an obscure point, on which it would be impossible



at present to offer anything better than abstruse speculative



considerations; since the relation of these genteel exhibitions



to scientific inquiry or instruction is of a peculiarly



intangible nature. But it is none of these cultural bearings of



any such round of polite solemnities and stately pageants that



comes in question here. It is their expediency in point of



businesslike enterprise, or perhaps rather their businesslike



motive, on the one hand, and their effect Upon the animus and



efficiency of the academic personnel, on the other hand.



    In so far as their motive should not (by unseemly imputation)



be set down to mere boyish exuberance of make-believe, it must be



sought among considerations germane to that business enterprise



that rules academic policy. However attractive such a derivation



might seem, this whole traffic in pageantry and ceremonial



amenities can not be traced back to ecclesiastical ground, except



in point of remote pedigree; it has grown greater since the



businessmen took over academic policy out of the hands of the



clergy. Nor can it be placed to the account of courtly,



diplomatic, or military antecedents or guidance; these fields of



activity, while they are good breeding ground for pomp and



circumstance, do not overlap, or even seriously touch, the



frontiers of the republic of learning. On the other hand, in



seeking grounds or motives for it all, it is also not easy to



find any close analogy in the field of business enterprise of the



larger sort, that has to do with the conduct of industry. There



is little of this manner of expensive public ceremonial and



solemn festivities to be seen, e.g., among business concerns



occupied with railroading or banking, in cottonspinning, or



sugar-refining, or in farming, shipping, coal, steel, or oil. In



this field phenomena of this general class are of rare



occurrence, sporadic at the best; and when they occur they will



commonly come in connection with competitive sales of products,



services or securities, particularly the latter. Nearer business



analogues will be found in retail merchandising, and in



enterprises of popular amusement, such as concert halls, beer



gardens, or itinerant shows. The street parades of the latter,



e.g., show a seductive, though, it is believed, misleading



analogy to the ceremonial pageants that round off the academic



year.



    Phenomena that come into view in the later and maturer growth



of the retail trade, as seen, e. g., in the larger and more



reputable department stores, are perhaps nearer the point. There



are formal "openings" to inaugurate the special trade of each of



the four seasons, desired to put the patrons of the house on a



footing of good-humoured familiarity with the plant and its



resources, with the customs of the house, the personnel and the



stock of wares in hand, and before all to arrest the attention



and enlist the interest of those classes that may be induced to



buy. There are also occasional gatherings of a more ceremonial



character, by special invitation of select customers to a



promised exhibition of peculiarly rare and curious articles of



trade. This will then be illuminated with shrewdly conceived



harangues setting forth the alleged history, adventures and



merits, past and future, of the particular branch of the trade,



and of the particular house at whose expense the event is



achieved. In addition to these seasonal and occasional set pieces



of mercantile ceremony, there will also run along in the day' s



work an unremitting display of meritorious acts of commission and



omission. Like their analogues in academic life these ceremonials



of trade are expensive, edifying, enticing, and surrounded with a



solicitous regard for publicity; and it will be seen that they



are, all and several, expedients of advertising.







    To return to the academic personnel and their implication in



these recurrent spectacles and amenities of university life. As



was remarked above, apart from outside resources the livelihood



that comes to a university man is, commonly, somewhat meagre. The



tenure is uncertain and the salaries, at an average, are not



large. Indeed, they are notably low in comparison with the high



conventional standard of living which is by custom incumbent on



university men. University men are conventionally required to



live on a scale of expenditure comparable with that in vogue



among the well-to-do businessmen, while their university incomes



compare more nearly with the lower grades of clerks and salesmen.



The rate of pay varies quite materially, as is well known. For



the higher grades of the staff, whose scale of pay is likely to



be publicly divulged, it is, perhaps, adequate to the average



demands made on university incomes by polite usage; but the large



majority of university men belong on the lower levels of grade



and pay; and on these lower levels the pay is, perhaps, lower



than any outsider appreciates.(3*)



    With men circumstanced as the common run of university men



are, the temptation to parsimony is ever present, while on the



other hand, as has already been noted, the prestige of the



university -- and of the academic head -- demands of all its



members a conspicuously expensive manner of living. Both of these



needs may, of course, be met in some poor measure by saving in



the obscurer items of domestic expense, such as food, clothing,



heating, lighting, floor-space, books, and the like; and making



all available funds count toward the collective end of reputable



publicity, by throwing the stress on such expenditures as come



under the public eye, as dress and equipage, bric-a-brac,



amusements, public entertainments, etc. It may seem that it



should also be possible to cut down the proportion of obscure



expenditures for creature comforts by limiting the number of



births in the family, or by foregoing marriage. But, by and



large, there is reason to believe that this expedient has been



exhausted. As men have latterly been at pains to show, the



current average of children in academic households is not high;



whereas the percentage of celibates is. There appears, indeed, to



be little room for additional economy on this head, or in the



matter of household thrift, beyond what is embodied in the family



budgets already in force in academic circles.



    So also, the tenure of office is somewhat precarious; more so



than the documents would seem to indicate. This applies with



greater force to the lower grades than to the higher. Latterly,



under the rule of business principles, since the prestige value



of a conspicuous consumption has come to a greater currency in



academic policy, a member of the staff may render his tenure more



secure, and may perhaps assure his due preferment, by a sedulous



attention to the academic social amenities, and to the more



conspicuous items of his expense account; and he will then do



well in the same connection also to turn his best attention in



the day's work to administrative duties and schoolmasterly



discipline, rather than to the increase of knowledge. Whereas he



may make his chance of preferment less assured, and may even



jeopardize his tenure, by a conspicuously parsimonious manner of



life, or by too pronounced an addiction to scientific or



scholarly pursuits, to the neglect of those polite exhibitions of



decorum that conduce to the maintenance of the university's



prestige in the eyes of the (pecuniarily) cultured laity.



    A variety of other untoward circumstances, of a similarly



extra-scholastic bearing, may affect the fortunes of academic men



to a like effect; as, e.g., unearned newspaper notoriety that may



be turned to account in ridicule; unconventional religious, or



irreligious convictions -- so far as they become known; an



undesirable political affiliation; an impecunious marriage, or



such domestic infelicities as might become subject of remark.



None of these untoward circumstances need touch the



serviceability of the incumbent for any of the avowed, or



avowable, purposes of the seminary of learning; and where action



has to be taken by the directorate on provocation of such



circumstances it is commonly done with the (unofficial) admission



that such action is taken not on the substantial merits of the



case but on compulsion of appearances and the exigencies of



advertising. That some such effect should be had follows from the



nature of things, so far as business principles rule.



    In the degree, then, in which these and the like motives of



expediency are decisive, there results a husbanding of time,



energy and means in the less conspicuous expenditures and duties,



in order to a freer application to more conspicuous uses, and a



meticulous cultivation of the bourgeois virtues. The workday



duties of instruction, and more particularly of inquiry, are, in



the nature of the case, less conspicuously in evidence than the



duties of the drawing-room, the ceremonial procession, the formal



dinner, or the grandstand on some red-letter day of



intercollegiate athletics.(4*) For the purposes of a reputable



notoriety the everyday work of the classroom and laboratory is



also not so effective as lectures to popular audiences outside;



especially, perhaps, addresses before an audience of devout and



well-to-do women. Indeed, all this is well approved by



experience. In many and devious ways, therefore, a university man



may be able to serve the collective enterprise of his university



to better effect than by an exclusive attention to the scholastic



work on which alone he is ostensibly engaged.



    Among the consequences that follow is a constant temptation



for the members of the staff to take on work outside of that for



which the salary is nominally paid. Such work takes the public



eye; but a further incentive to go into this outside and



non-academic work, as well as to take on supernumerary work



within the academic schedule, lies in the fact that such outside



or supernumerary work is specially paid, and so may help to eke



out a sensibly scant livelihood. So far as touches the more



scantily paid grades of university men, and so far as no alien



considerations come in to trouble the working-out of business



principles, the outcome may be schematized somewhat as follows.



These men have, at the outset, gone into the university



presumably from an inclination to scholarly or scientific



pursuits; it is not probable that they have been led into this



calling by the pecuniary inducements, which are slight as



compared with the ruling rates of pay in the open market for



other work that demands an equally arduous preparation and an



equally close application. They have then been apportioned rather



more work as instructors than they can take care of in the most



efficient manner, at a rate of pay which is sensibly scant for



the standard of (conspicuous) living conventionally imposed on



them. They are, by authority, expected to expend time and means



in such polite observances, spectacles and quasi-learned



exhibitions as are presumed to enhance the prestige of the



university. They are so induced to divert their time and energy



to spreading abroad the university's good repute by creditable



exhibitions of a quasi-scholarly character, which have no



substantial bearing on a university man's legitimate interests;



as well as in seeking supplementary work outside of their



mandatory schedule, from which to derive an adequate livelihood



and to fill up the complement of politely wasteful expenditures



expected of them. The academic instruction necessarily suffers by



this diversion of forces to extra-scholastic objects; and the



work of inquiry, which may have primarily engaged their interest



and which is indispensable to their continued efficiency as



teachers, is, in the common run of cases, crowded to one side and



presently drops out of mind. Like other workmen, under pressure



of competition the members of the academic staff will endeavour



to keep up their necessary income by cheapening their product and



increasing their marketable output. And by consequence of this



pressure of bread-winning and genteel expenditure, these



university men are so barred out from the serious pursuit of



those scientific and scholarly inquiries which alone can,



academically speaking, justify their retention on the university



faculty, and for the sake of which, in great part at least, they



have chosen this vocation. No infirmity more commonly besets



university men than this going to seed in routine work and



extra-scholastic duties. They have entered on the academic career



to find time, place, facilities and congenial environment for the



pursuit of knowledge, and under pressure they presently settle



down to a round of perfunctory labour by means of which to



simulate the life of gentlemen.(5*)



    Before leaving the topic it should further be remarked that



the dissipation incident to these polite amenities, that so are



incumbent on the academic personnel, apparently also has



something of a deteriorative effect on their working capacity,



whether for scholarly or for worldly uses. Prima facie evidence



to this effect might be adduced, but it is not easy to say how



far the evidence would bear closer scrutiny. There is an



appreciable amount of dissipation, in its several sorts, carried



forward in university circles in an inconspicuous manner, and not



designed for publicity. How far this is induced by a loss of



interest in scholarly work, due to the habitual diversion of the



scholars' energies to other and more exacting duties, would be



hard to say; as also how far it may be due to the lead given by



men-of-the-world retained on the faculties for other than



scholarly reasons. At the same time there is the difficulty that



many of those men who bear a large part in the ceremonial



dissipation incident to the enterprise in publicity are retained,



apparently, for their proficiency in this line as much as for



their scholarly attainments, or at least so one might infer; and



these men must be accepted with the defects of their qualities.



    As bearing on this whole matter of pomp and circumstance,



social amenities and ritual dissipation, quasi-learned



demonstrations and meretricious publicity, in academic life, it



is difficult beyond hope of a final answer to determine how much



of it is due directly to the masterful initiative of the strong



man who directs the enterprise, and how much is to be set down to



an innate proclivity for all that sort of thing on the part of



the academic personnel. A near view of these phenomena leaves the



impression that there is, on the whole, less objection felt than



expressed among the academic men with regard to this routine of



demonstration; that the reluctance with which they pass under the



ceremonial yoke is not altogether ingenuous; all of which would



perhaps hold true even more decidedly as applied to the faculty



households.(6*) But for all that, it also remains true that



without the initiative and countenance of the executive head



these boyish movements of sentimental spectacularity on the part



of the personnel would come to little, by comparison with what



actually takes place. It is after all a matter for executive



discretion, and, from whatever motives, this diversion of effort



to extra-scholastic ends has the executive sanction;(7*) with the



result that an intimate familiarity with current academic life is



calculated to raise the question whether make-believe does not,



after all, occupy a larger and more urgent place in the life of



these thoughtful adult male citizens than in the life of their



children.







NOTES:







1. It was a very wise and adroit politician who found out that



"You can not fool all the people all the time."







2.  La gloria di colui che tutto muove,



    Per l'universo pentra e risplende



    In una parte pi* e meno altr'ove.







3. In a certain large and enterprising university, e.g., the pay



of the lowest, and numerous, rank regularly employed to do full



work as teachers, is proportioned to that of the highest -- much



less numerous -- rank about as one to twelve at the most, perhaps



even as low as one to twenty. And it may not be out of place to



enter the caution that the nominal rank of a given member of the



staff is no secure index of his income, even where the salary



"normally" attached to the given academic rank is known. Not



unusually a "normal" scale of salaries is formally adopted by the



governing board and spread upon their records, and such a scale



will then be surreptitiously made public. But departures from the



scale habitually occur, whereby the salaries actually paid come



to fall short of the "normal" perhaps as frequently as they



conform to it.



    There is no trades-union among university teachers, and no



collective bargaining. There appears to be a feeling prevalent



among them that their salaries are not of the nature of wages,



and that there would be a species of moral obliquity implied in



overtly so dealing with the matter. And in the individual



bargaining by which the rate of pay is determined the directorate



may easily be tempted to seek an economical way out, by offering



a low rate of pay coupled with a higher academic rank. The plea



is always ready to hand that the university is in want of the



necessary funds and is constrained to economize where it can. So



an advance in nominal rank is made to serve in place of an



advance in salary, the former being the less costly commodity for



the time being. Indeed, so frequent are such departures from the



normal scale as to have given rise to the (no doubt ill-advised)



suggestion that this may be one of the chief uses of the adopted



schedule of normal salaries. So an employee of the university may



not infrequently find himself constrained to accept, as part



payment, an expensive increment of dignity attaching to a higher



rank than his salary account would indicate. Such an outcome of



individual bargaining is all the more likely in the academic



community, since there is no settled code of professional ethics



governing the conduct of business enterprise in academic



management, as contrasted with the traffic of ordinary



competitive business.







4. So, e.g., the well-known president of a well and favourably



known university was at pains a few years ago to distinguish one



of his faculty as being his "ideal of a university man"; the



grounds of this invidious distinction being a lifelike imitation



of a country gentleman and a fair degree of attention to



committee work in connection with the academic administration;



the incumbent had no distinguishing marks either as a teacher or



as a scholar, and neither science nor letters will be found in



his debt. It is perhaps needless to add that for reasons of



invidious distinction, no names can be mentioned in this



connection. It should be added in illumination of the instance



cited, that in the same university, by consistent selection and



discipline of the personnel, it had come about that, in the



apprehension of the staff as well as of the executive, the



accepted test of efficiency was the work done on the



administrative committees -- rather than that of the class rooms



or laboratories.







5. Within the past few years an academic executive of great note



has been heard repeatedly to express himself in facetious doubt



of this penchant for scholarly inquiry on the part of university



men, whether as "reserch" or as "rsearch"; and there is



doubtless ground for scepticism as to its permeating the academic



body with that sting of ubiquity that is implied in many



expressions on this head. And it should also be said, perhaps in



extenuation of the expression cited above, that the president was



addressing delegations of his own faculty, and presumably



directing his remarks to their special benefit; and that while he



professed (no doubt ingenuously) a profound zeal for the cause of



science at large, it had come about, selectively, through a long



course of sedulous attention on his own part to all other



qualifications than the main fact, that his faculty at the time



of speaking was in the main an aggregation of slack-twisted



schoolmasters and men about town. Such a characterization,



however, does not carry any gravely invidious discrimination, nor



will it presumably serve in any degree to identify the seat of



learning to which it refers.







6. The share and value of the "faculty wives" in all this routine



of resolute conviviality is a large topic, an intelligent and



veracious account of which could only be a work of naive



brutality:







    "But the grim, grim Ladies, Oh, my brothers!



        They are ladling bitterly.



    They are ladling in the work-time of the others,



        In the country of the free."



    (Mrs. Elizabret Harte Browning, in The Cry of the Heathen



Chinee.)







7. What takes place without executive sanction need trouble no



one.







CHAPTER VI







The Portion of the Scientist







    The principles of business enterprise touch the life and work



of the academic staff at divers points and with various effect.



Under their rule, and in so far as they rule, the remuneration



shifts from the basis of a stipend designed to further the



pursuit of knowledge, to that of a wage bargain, partaking of the



nature of a piece-work scheme, designed to procure class-room



instruction at the lowest practicable cost. A businesslike system



of accountancy standardizes and measures this instruction by



mechanically gauged units of duration and number, amplitude and



frequency, and so discountenances work that rises above a staple



grade of mediocrity. Usage and the urgent need of a reputable



notoriety impose on university men an extraneous and excessively



high standard of living expenses, which constrains them to take



on supernumerary work in excess of what they can carry in an



efficient manner. The need of university prestige enforces this



high scale of expenses, and also pushes the members of the staff



into a routine of polite dissipation, ceremonial display,



exhibitions of quasi-scholarly proficiency and propagandist



intrigue.



    If these business principles were quite free to work out



their logical consequences, untroubled by any disturbing factors



of an unbusinesslike nature, the outcome should be to put the



pursuit of knowledge definitively in abeyance within the



university, and to substitute for that objective something for



which the language hitherto lacks a designation.



    For divers reasons of an unbusinesslike kind, such a



consummate ("sweat-shop") scheme has never fully been achieved,



particularly not in establishments that are, properly speaking,



of anything like university grade. This perfect scheme of



low-cost perfunctory instruction, high-cost stage properties and



press-agents, public song and dance, expensive banquets,



speech-making and processions, is never fully rounded out. This



amounts to admitting a partial defeat for the gild of



businesslike "educators." While, as a matter of speculative



predilection, they may not aim to leave the higher learning out



of the university, the rule of competitive business principles



consistently pushes their administration toward that end; which



they are continually prevented from attaining, by the necessary



conditions under which their competitive enterprise is carried



on.



    For better or worse, there are always and necessarily present



among the academic corps a certain number of men whose sense of



the genteel properties is too vague and meagre, whose grasp of



the principles of official preferment is too weak and



inconsequential, whose addiction to the pursuit of knowledge is



too ingrained, to permit their conforming wholly to the



competitive exigencies of the case. By force of the exigencies of



competitive prestige there is, of course, a limit of tolerance



that sets decent bounds both to the number of such supererogatory



scholars harboured by the university, and the latitude allowed



them in their intemperate pursuit of knowledge; but their



presence in the academic body is, after all, neither an



irrelevant accident nor a transient embarrassment. It is, in one



sense of the expression, for the use of such men, and for the use



which such men find for it, that the university exists at all; in



some such sense, indeed, as a government, a political machine, a



railway corporation or a toll-road, may be said to exist for the



use of the community from which they get their living. It is true



in the sense that this ostensible use can not be left out of



account in the long run. But even from day to day this scholarly



purpose is never quite lost sight of. The habit of counting it



in, as a matter of course, affects all concerned, in some degree;



and complacent professions of faith to that effect cross one



another from all quarters. It may frequently happen that the



enterprising men in whom academic discretion centres will have no



clear conception of what is implied in this scholarly purpose to



which they give a perfunctory matter-of-course endorsement, and



much of their professions on that head may be ad captandum; but



that it need be a matter of course argues that it must be counted



with.



    Still, in the degree in which business principles rule the



case the outcome will be of much the same complexion as it might



be in the absence of any such prepossession, intelligent or



otherwise, in favour of the higher learning on the part of the



directorate; for competition has the same effect here as



elsewhere, in that it permits none of the competitors to forego



any expedient that has been found advantageous by any one of



them. So that, whatever course might be dictated by the



sentiments of the directorate, the course enjoined by the



principles of competitive business sets toward the suppression or



elimination of all such scholarly or scientific work from the



university as does not contribute immediately to its prestige, --



except so far as the conditions alluded to make such a course



impracticable.



    It is not an easy or a graceful matter for a businesslike



executive to get rid of any undecorative or indecorous scientist,



whose only fault is an unduly pertinacious pursuit of the work



for which alone the university claims to exist, whose failure



consists in living up to the professions of the executive instead



of professing to live up to them. Academic tradition gives a



broad, though perhaps uncertain, sanction to the scientific



spirit that moves this obscure element in the academic body. And



then, their more happily gifted, more worldly-wise colleagues



have also a degree of respect for such a single-minded pursuit of



knowledge, even while they may view these naive children of



impulse with something of an amused compassion; for the general



body of the academic staff is still made up largely of men who



have started out with scholarly ideals, even though these ideals



may have somewhat fallen away from them under the rub of



expediency. At least in a genial, speculative sense of the



phrase, scholarship still outranks official preferment in the



esteem of the generality of academic men, particularly so long as



the question does not become personal and touch their own



preferment. In great part the academic corps still understands



and appreciates the scholarly animus, and looks, on the whole,



kindly and sympathetically -- indeed, with a touch of envy -- on



those among them who are so driven to follow their own scientific



bent, to the neglect of expedient gentility and publicity.



    The like can, of course, not be so freely said of that body



of businessmen in whom is vested the final control; yet this



sentiment of genial approval that pervades the academic body



finds some vague response even among these; and in any event it



is always to be reckoned with and is not to be outraged, unless



for a good and valuable consideration. It can not altogether be



set aside, although, it is true, the conduct of certain executive



heads, grown old in autocratic rule and self-complacency, may at



times appear to argue the contrary. So that, by and large, there



results an unstable compromise between the requirements of



scholarly fitness and those of competitive enterprise, with a



doubtful and shifting issue. Just at present, under the firm hand



of an enterprising and autocratic executive, the principles of



competitive business are apparently gaining ground in the greater



universities, where the volume of traffic helps to cloud the



details of suppression, and the cult of learning is gradually



falling into a more precarious position.



    In a curious way, too, the full swing of business principles



in academic life is hindered by the necessary ways and means



through which these principles are worked out; so much so,



indeed, as to throw a serious doubt on their ultimately achieving



an undivided dominion. Taken as a business concern, the



university is in a very singular position. The reason for its



being, at all, is the educational aspiration that besets modern



mankind. Its only ostensible reason for being, and so for its



being governed and managed, competitively or otherwise, is the



advancement of learning. And this advancement of learning is in



no degree a business proposition; and yet it must, for the



present at least, remain the sole ostensible purpose of the



businesslike university. In the main, therefore, all the



competitive endeavours and manoeuvres of the captains of



erudition in charge must be made under cover of an ostensible



endeavour to further this non-competitive advancement of



learning, at all costs. Since learning is not a competitive



matter; since, indeed, competition in any guise or bearing in



this field is detrimental to learning; the competitive manoeuvres



of the academic executive must be carried on surreptitiously, in



a sense, cloaked as a non-competitive campaign for the increase



of knowledge without fear or favour.



    All this places the executive in a very delicate position. On



the one hand the principles of competitive business, embodied in



a plenary board of control and in a critical scrutiny from the



side of the business community at large, demand that all



appointments, promotions, dismissals, ceremonials, pronouncements



and expenditures, must be made with a constant view to their



highest advertising effect; whereas the notions current as to



what is fitting in a seminary of the higher learning, on the



other hand, somewhat incongruously demand that all these deeds of



commission and omission be done with an eye single to the



increase of knowledge, regardless of appearances. And this double



responsibility falls, of necessity, on the executive head of the



university, under the present rgime of centralized autocratic



rule. Any ethical code that shall permit the executive head to



accomplish what is expected of him in the way of a competitive



enterprise under these circumstances, will necessarily be vague



and shifty, not to and men who have tried to do say tenuous and



shadowy; their whole duty in these premises are ready to admit



that they have been called on to face many distasteful



situations, where honesty would not approve itself as the best



policy.(1*)







    Whatever expedients of decorative real-estate, spectacular



pageantry, bureaucratic magnificence, elusive statistics,



vocational training, genteel solemnities and sweat-shop



instruction, may be imposed by the exigencies of a competitive



business policy, the university is after all a seat of learning,



devoted to the cult of the idle curiosity, -- otherwise called



the scientific spirit. And stultification, broad and final, waits



on any university directorate that shall dare to avow any other



end as its objective. So the appearance of an unwavering devotion



to the pursuit of knowledge must be kept up. Hence the presence



of scholars and scientists of accepted standing is indispensable



to the university, as a means of keeping up its prestige. The



need of them may be a need of their countenance rather than of



their work, but they are indispensable, and they bring with them



the defects of their qualities. When a man achieves such



notoriety for scientific attainments as to give him a high value



as an article of parade, the chances are that he is endowed with



some share of the scientific animus, and he is likely to have



fallen into the habit of rating the triumphs of science above



those of the market place. Such a person will almost unavoidably



affect the spirit of any academic corps into which he is



intruded. He will also, in a measure, bend the forces of the



establishment to a long-term efficiency in the pursuit of



knowledge, rather than to the pursuit of a reputable notoriety



from day to day. To the enterprising captain of erudition he is



likely to prove costly and inconvenient, but he is unavoidable.



    This will hold true in a general way, and with due



exceptions, for men prominent in those material sciences that



have to do with data of such a tangible character, and give their



results in such terms of mechanical fact, as to permit a passably



close appreciation of their worth by the laity. It applies only



more loosely, with larger exceptions and a wider margin of error,



in the humanities and the so-called moral and social sciences. In



this latter field a clamorous conformity to current



prepossessions, particularly the conventional prepossessions of



respectability, or an edifying and incisive rehearsal of



commonplaces, will commonly pass in popular esteem for scholarly



and scientific merit. A truculent quietism is often accepted as a



mark of scientific maturity. The reason for this will appear



presently. But so far as popular esteem is a truthful index of



scientific achievement. the proposition holds, that scientists



who have done great things have a business value to the captain



of erudition as a means of advancing the university's prestige;



and so far the indicated consequences follow. In some measure the



scientific men so intruded into the academic body are in a



position to give a direction to affairs within their field and



within the framework of the general policy. They are able to



claim rank and discretion, and their choice, or at least their



assent, must be consulted in the selection of their subalterns,



and in a degree also in the organization of the department's



work. It is true, men whose talent, interest and experience run



chiefly within the lines of scientific inquiry, are commonly



neither skilled nor shrewd managers in that give and take of



subtleties and ambiguities by which the internal machinery of the



university is kept in line and running under a businesslike



administration; but even so, their aims and prepossessions will



in a measure affect the animus and shape the work of the academic



body. All this applies particularly on the higher levels of



research, as contrasted with the commonplace (undergraduate) work



of instruction. But at this point, therefore, the principles of



competitive publicity carry with them a partial neutralization of



their own tendency.



    This necessity of employing scientists of a commanding force



and rank raises a point of some delicacy in the administration of



the competitive university. It is necessary to assign these men a



relatively high rank in the academic hierarchy; both because they



will accept no subordinate place and because the advertising



value of their prestige will be curtailed by reducing them to an



inconspicuous position. And with high rank is necessarily



associated a relatively large discretion and a wide influence in



academic affairs, at least on the face of things. Such men, so



placed, are apt to be exacting in matters which they conceive to



bear on the work in their own sciences, and their exactions may



not be guided chiefly by the conspicuousness of the equipment



which they require or of the results at which they aim. They are



also not commonly adroit men of affairs, in the business sense of



the term; not given to conciliatory compromises and an exhibition



of complaisant statistics. The framing of shrewd lines of



competitive strategy, and the bureaucratic punctilios of



university administration, do not commonly engage their best



interest, even if it does not stir them to an indecorous



impatience.(2*)



    Should such a man become unduly insistent in his advocacy of



scholarship, so as seriously to traverse the statistical



aspirations of the executive, or in any way to endanger the



immediate popular prestige of the university, then it may become



an open question whether his personal prestige has not been



bought at too high a cost. As a business proposition, it may even



become expedient to retire him. But his retirement may not be an



easy matter to arrange. The businesslike grounds of it can not



well be avowed, since it is involved in the scheme of academic



decorum, as well as in the scheme of publicity, that motives of



notoriety must not be avowed. Colourable grounds of another kind



must be found, such as will divert the popular imagination from



the point at issue. By a judicious course of vexation and



equivocations, an obnoxious scientist may be manoeuvred into such



a position that his pride will force a "voluntary" resignation.



Failing this, it may become necessary, however distasteful,



delicately to defame his domestic life, or his racial, religious



or political status. In America such an appeal to the baser



sentiments will commonly cloud the issue sufficiently for the



purpose in hand, even though it all has nothing to do with the



man's fitness for university work. Such a step, however, is not



to be taken unless the case is urgent; if there is danger of



estranging the affections of potential donors, or if it involves



anything like overt disloyalty to the executive head.



    This is one of the points at which it is necessary to recall



the fact that no settled code of business ethics has yet been



worked out for the guidance of competitive university management;



nor is it easy to see how such a code can be worked out, so long



as the university remains ostensibly a seat of learning, unable



to avow any other ground of action than a single-minded pursuit



of knowledge. It has been alleged -- indeed it is fast becoming a



tradition -- that the executives of the great competitive



universities habitually allow some peculiar latitude as touches



the canons of truth and fair dealing. If this describes the



facts, it should not be counted against these discreet men who so



have to tax their ingenuity, but against the situation in which



they are placed, which makes it impracticable to observe a nice



discrimination in matters of veracity. Statements of fact, under



such conditions, will in great part be controlled by the end to



be accomplished, rather than by antecedent circumstances; such



statements are necessarily of a teleological order. As in other



competitive business, facts have in this connection only a



strategic value; but the exigencies of strategy here are



peculiarly exacting, and often rigorous.







    Academic tradition and current common sense unite in imposing



on the universities the employment of prominent scholars and



scientists, in that men of note in this class have a high



prestige value for purposes of publicity; and it was suggested



above that a reservation of some breadth must be made on this



head. Common notoriety is the due test of eminence which the



competitive university must apply in the selection of its



notables. But in the sciences that deal with the less tangible



and measureable data, the so-called moral or social sciences,



common notoriety is not even an approximately accurate index of



scientific capacity or attainments; and still it is, of course,



the standing of the incumbents in point of common notoriety that



must chiefly be had in view in any strict valuation of them for



purposes of academic prestige. They are needed for the



advertising value which they bring, and for this purpose they are



valuable somewhat in proportion to the rank awarded them by



common report among that unlearned element, whose good opinion



the competitive university must conciliate. But in the nature of



the case, within the range of sciences named, the estimate of the



unlearned is necessarily in the wrong.



    With the exception of archaeological inquiries and the study



of law, as commonly pursued, these moral or social sciences are



occupied with inquiry into the nature of the conventions under



which men live, the institutions of society -- customs, usages,



traditions, conventions, canons of conduct, standards of life, of



taste, of morality and religion, law and order. No faithful



inquiry into these matters can avoid an air of scepticism as to



the stability or finality of some one or other among the received



articles of institutional furniture. An inquiry into the nature



and causes, the working and the outcome, of this institutional



apparatus, will disturb the habitual convictions and



preconceptions on which they rest, even if the outcome of the



inquiry should bear no colour of iconoclasm; unless, indeed, the



inquirer were so fortunate as to start with an inalienable



presumption that the received convictions on these matters need



no inquiry and are eternally right and good; in which case he



does best to rest content at his point of departure. Scepticism



is the beginning of science. Herein lies the difference between



homiletical exposition and scientific inquiry.



    Now, on these matters of habit and convention, morality and



religion, law and order -- matters which intimately touch the



community's accepted scheme of life -- all men have convictions;



sentimental convictions to which they adhere with an instinctive



tenacity, and any disturbance of which they resent as a violation



of fundamental truth. These institutions of society are made up



of the habits of thought of the people who live under them. The



consensus of the unlearned, or unscientific, as regards the



scientific validity of inquiries which touch these matters means



little else than the collective expressions of a jealous



orthodoxy with respect to the articles of the current social



creed. One who purports to be a scientist in this field can gain



popular approval of his scientific capacity, particularly the



businessmen's approval, only by accepting and confirming current



convictions regarding those elements of the accepted scheme of



life with which his science is occupied. Any inquiry which does



not lead to corroboration of the opinions in vogue among the



unlearned is condemned as being spurious and dangerously



wrong-headed; whereas an unbiassed inquiry into these things, of



course, neither confirms nor disputes the scheme of things into



which it inquires. And so, at the best, it falls into the same



class with the fabled Alexandrine books that either agreed with



the Koran or disagreed with it, and were therefore either idle or



sacrilegious.



    Within this field, vulgar sentiment will tolerate a sceptical



or non-committal attitude toward vulgar convictions only as



regards the decorative furnishings, not as regards the substance



of the views arrived at. Some slight play of hazardous phrases



about the fringe of the institutional fabric may be tolerated by



the popular taste, as an element of spice, and as indicating a



generous and unbiassed mind; but in such cases the conclusive



test of scientific competency and leadership, in the popular



apprehension, is a serene and magniloquent return to the orthodox



commonplaces, after all such playful excursions. In fact,



substantially nothing but homiletics and woolgathering will pass



popular muster as science in this connection.



    So it comes about that the men who are by common notoriety



held to be the leaders in this field of learning, and who



therefore are likely to be thrown up by official preferment, are



such as enlarge on the commonplace and aphoristic wisdom of the



laity. Not that the official sanction falls unfailingly on the



paragons of mediocrity; there are many and illustrious



exceptions, a fair proportion of whom would be illustrious even



without the official sanction; and in this connection it is in



place to recall that business principles have not hitherto held



undivided and sovereign dominion in this province, and that there



is even reason to believe that they are not yet coming fully into



their own.



    These putative leaders of science referred to are, in the



common run of cases, not men with whom the science will have to



count; but by virtue of their eligibility as academic spokesmen



of the science, they are men with whom their contemporaries in



the science will have to count. As is shown by the experience of



the past, they are likely to be well forgotten by the generation



that follows them, but they are, perforce, equally well



remembered by their contemporaries. It is not the long-term



serviceability of these official scientists that counts toward



their availability for academic leadership, but their popular



prestige. They may not be such leaders as the science needs, but



they are such exponents of opinion as are believed to commend



themselves to the tastes of the well-to-do laity. A citation of



instances would seem invidious, nor, presumably, is it called



for. The anecdotal history of contemporary events is particularly



full at this juncture; while to outsiders who are not in a



position to appreciate either the urgency or the subtlety of the



motives of academic expediency in this bearing, a recital of



illustrative instances might seem either libellous or farcical.



The exigencies of competitive academic enterprise, especially in



its relation to the maintenance and increase of endowment, place



the executive in a very delicate position in this matter and



leave little room for squeamish deliberation.



    At the risk of tedium, it is necessary to push the analysis



of businesslike motives and their bearing a step farther at this



point. It is not simply the vulgar, commonplace convictions of



the populace that must receive consideration in this field of the



moral and social sciences, -- including such matters as religion,



sociology, economics, and political science, so-called. What is



especially to be conciliated by the official scientists is the



current range of convictions on all these heads among those



well-to-do classes from whom the institution hopes to draw



contributions to its endowment, on the one hand, and the more



reputable part of its undergraduate clientle, on the other hand.



Which comes, broadly, to saying that a jealous eye must be had to



the views and prepossessions prevalent among the respectable,



conservative middle class; with a particular regard to that more



select body of substantial citizens who have the disposal of



accumulated wealth. This select and substantial element are on



the whole more conservative, more old-fashioned in their views of



what is right, good and true, and hold their views on more



archaic grounds of conviction, than the generality of the vulgar.



And within this conservative body, again, it is the elderly



representatives of the old order that are chiefly to be



considered, -- since it is the honourable custom among men of



large means not to give largely to institutions of learning until



late in life.



    It is to be accounted one of the meritorious customs of the



greater businessmen that, one with another, they eventually



convert a share of their takings to the installation of schools



and similar establishments designed to serve and to conserve the



amenities of civilized life. Usually it is in later life, or as



an act of leave-taking, that this munificence is exercised.



Usually, too, the great men who put forth this large munificence



do not hamper their bounty with many restrictions on the



character of the enlightenment which it is to serve. Indeed,



there is in this respect a certain large modesty and continence



customarily associated with the large donations. But like other



men of force and thoughtfulness, the large and elderly



businessmen have well-assured convictions and preferences; and as



is the case with other men of the passing generation, so with the



superannuated businessmen, their convictions and preferences fall



out on the side of the old order rather than contrariwise. A wise



academic policy, conducted by an executive looking to the fiscal



interests of the university, will aim not to alienate the



affections of the large businessmen of a ripe age, by harbouring



specialists whose inquires are likely to traverse these



old-settled convictions in the social, economic, political, or



religious domain. It is bad business policy to create unnecessary



annoyance. So it comes about that the habitual munificence of the



captains of industry who have reached their term will have grave



consequences for that range of academic science that is occupied



with matters on which they hold convictions.(3*)



    There results a genial endeavour to keep step with the



moribund captains of industry and the relics of the wealthy dead.



Remotely by force of a worldly-wise appointing power, proximately



by force of the good taste and sober sense of well-chosen



incumbents, something of filial piety comes to pervade the



academic handling of those institutional phenomena that touch the



sentiments of the passing generation. Hence it comes that current



academic work in the province of the social, political, and



economic sciences, as well as in the sciences that touch the



religious interest, has a larger reputation for assurance and



dignity than for an incisive canvassing of the available



material.



    Critics of the latterday university policies have from time



to time called attention to an apparent reluctance on the part of



these academic scientists to encounter present-day facts



hand-to-hand, or to trace out the causes to which current



conditions are due. Distempered critics have even alleged that



the academic leaders in the social sciences are held under some



constraint, as being, in some sort, in the pay of the well-to-do



conservative element; that they are thereby incapacitated from



following up any inquiry to its logical conclusion, in case the



conclusion might appear to traverse the interest or the opinions



of those on whom these leaders are in this way pecuniarily



dependent.



    Now, it may be conceded without violence to notorious facts,



that these official leaders of science do commonly reach



conclusions innocuous to the existing law and order, particularly



with respect to religion, ownership, and the distribution of



wealth. But this need imply no constraint, nor even any peculiar



degree of tact, much less a moral obliquity. It may confidently



be asserted, without fear of contradiction from their side, that



the official leaders in this province of academic research and



indoctrination are, commonly, in no way hindered from pushing



their researches with full freedom and to the limit of their



capacity; and that they are likewise free to give the fullest



expression to any conclusions or convictions to which their



inquiries may carry them. That they are able to do so is a



fortunate circumstance, due to the fact that their intellectual



horizon is bounded by the same limits of commonplace insight and



preconceptions as are the prevailing opinions of the conservative



middle class. That is to say, a large and aggressive mediocrity



is the prime qualification for a leader of science in these



lines, if his leadership is to gain academic authentication.



    All this may seem too much like loose generality. With a view



to such precision as the case admits, it may be remarked that



this province of academic science as habitually pursued, is



commonly occupied with questions of what ought to be done, rather



than with theories of the genesis and causation of the



present-day state of things, or with questions as to what the



present-day drift of things may be, as determined by the causes



at work. As it does in popular speculation, so also in this



academic quasi-science, the interest centres on what ought to be



done to improve conditions and to conserve those usages and



conventions that have by habit been imbedded in the received



scheme of use and wont, and so have come to be found good and



right. It is of the essence of popular speculations on this range



of topics that they are focussed on questions of use; that they



are of a teleological order; that they look to the expediency of



the observed facts and to their exploitation, rather than to a



scientific explanation of them. This attitude, of course, is the



attitude of expediency and homiletics, not of scientific inquiry.



    A single illustrative instance of the prevalence of this



animus in the academic social sciences may be in place. It is



usual among economists, e.g., to make much of the proposition



that economics is an "art" -- the art of expedient management of



the material means of life; and further that the justification of



economic theory lies in its serviceability in this respect. Such



a quasi-science necessarily takes the current situation for



granted as a permanent state of things; to be corrected and



brought back into its normal routine in case of aberration, and



to be safeguarded with apologetic defence at points where it is



not working to the satisfaction of all parties. It is a "science"



of complaisant interpretations, apologies, and projected



remedies.



    The academic leaders in such a quasi-science should be gifted



with the aspirations and limitations that so show up in its



pursuit. Their fitness in respect of this conformity to the known



middle-class animus and apprehension of truth may, as it



expediently should, be considered when their selection for



academic office and rank is under advisement; but, provided the



choice be a wise one, there need be no shadow of constraint



during their incumbency. The incumbent should be endowed with a



large capacity for work, particularly for "administrative" work,



with a lively and enduring interest in the "practical" questions



that fall within his academic jurisdiction, and with a shrewd



sense of the fundamental rightness of the existing order of



things, social, economic, political, and religious. So, by and



large, it will be found that these accredited leaders of



scientific inquiry are fortunate enough not narrowly to



scrutinize, or to seek particular explanation of, those



institutional facts which the conservative common sense of the



elderly businessman accepts as good and final; and since their



field of inquiry is precisely this range of institutional facts,



the consequence is that their leadership in the science conduces



more to the stability of opinions than to the advancement of



knowledge.



    The result is by no means that nothing is accomplished in



this field of science under this leadership of forceful



mediocrity, but only that, in so far as this leadership decides,



the work done lies on this level of mediocrity. Indeed, the



volume of work done is large and of substantial value, but it



runs chiefly on compilation of details and on the scrutiny and



interpretation of these details with a view to their conformity



with the approved generalizations of the day before yesterday, --



generalizations that had time to grow into aphoristic



commonplaces at a date before the passing generation of



businessmen attained their majority.



    What has just been said of this academic leadership in the



social sciences, of course, applies only with due qualification.



It applies only in so far as the principles of competitive



enterprise control the selection of the personnel, and even then



only with exceptions. There is no intention to depreciate the



work of those many eminent scholars, of scientific animus and



intellectual grasp, whose endeavours are given to this range of



inquiry. Its application, indeed, is intended to reach no farther



than may serve to cover the somewhat tactful and quietistic



attitude of the moral sciences in the universities. As they are



cultivated in the great seminaries of learning, these sciences



are commonly of a somewhat more archaic complexion than the



contemporary material sciences; they are less iconoclastic, have



a greater regard for prescriptive authority and authenticity, are



more given to rest their inquiry on grounds of expediency, as



contrasted with grounds of cause and effect. They are content to



conclude that such and such events are expedient or inexpedient,



quite as often and as easily as that such are the causes or the



genetic sequence of the phenomena under discussion. In short,



under this official leadership these sciences will have an



attitude toward their subject of inquiry resembling that taken by



the material sciences something like a century ago.



    To the credit of this academic leadership in the social



sciences, then, it should be said that both the leaders and their



disciples apply themselves with admirable spirit to these



inquiries into the proper, expedient, and normal course of



events; and that the conclusions arrived at also shed much



salutary light on what is proper, expedient, and normal in these



premises. Inquiries carried on in this spirit in the field of



human institutions belong, of course, in the category of worldly



wisdom rather than of science. "Practical" questions occupy these



scientists in great part, and practical, or utilitarian,



considerations guide the course of the inquiry and shape the



system of generalizations in these sciences, to a much greater



extent than in the material sciences with which they are here



contrasted. An alert sense of the practical value of their



inquiries and their teaching is one of the chief requisites for



official recognition in the scientists who occupy themselves with



these matters, and it is one of the chief characteristics of



their work. So that, in so far as it all conforms to the



principles of competitive business, the line of demarcation



between worldly wisdom and theoretical validity becomes



peculiarly indistinct in this province of science. And, it may be



remarked by the way, the influence of this academic science, both



in its discipline and in its tenets, appears to be wholly



salutary; it conduces, on the whole, to a safe and sane, if not



an enthusiastic, acceptance of things as they are, without undue



curiosity as to why they are such.



    What has here been said of the place and use of the scientist



under the current rgime of competitive enterprise describes what



should follow from the unrestrained dominion of business



principles in academic policy, rather than what has actually been



accomplished in any concrete case; it presents an ideal situation



rather than a relation of events, though without losing touch



with current facts at any point. The run of the facts is, in



effect, a compromise between the scholar's ideals and those of



business, in such a way that the ideals of scholarship are



yielding ground, in an uncertain and varying degree, before the



pressure of businesslike exigencies.







NOTES:







1. Cf. also J. J. Chapman, paper on "Professional Ethics," in



University Control, as above, for an estimate of the inefficiency



of academic opinion as a corrective of the executive power on his



head.







2. "The lambs play always, they know no better, They are only one



times one."







3. "He was a trusted and efficient employee of an institution



made possible and maintained by men of great wealth, men who not



only live on the interest of their money, but who expend millions



in the endowment of colleges and universities in which



enthusiastic young educators... find lucrative and honourable



employment." -- Editorial on the dismissal of Dr. Nearing, in the



Minneapolis Journal, August II, 1915.







CHAPTER VII







Vocational Training







    In this latterday academic enterprise, that looks so shrewdly



to practical expediency, "vocational training" has, quite as a



matter of course, become a conspicuous feature. The adjective is



a new one, installed expressly to designate this line of



endeavour, in the jargon of the educators; and it carries a note



of euphemism. "Vocational training" is training for proficiency



in some gainful occupation, and it has no connection with the



higher learning, beyond that juxtaposition given it by the



inclusion of vocational schools in the same corporation with the



university; and its spokesmen in the university establishments



accordingly take an apologetically aggressive attitude in



advocating its claims. Educational enterprise of this kind has,



somewhat incontinently, extended the scope of the corporation of



learning by creating, "annexing," or "affiliating" many



establishments that properly lie outside the academic field and



deal with matters foreign to the academic interest, -- fitting



schools, high-schools, technological, manual and other training



schools for mechanical, engineering and other industrial



pursuits, professional schools of divers kinds, music schools,



art schools, summer schools, schools of "domestic science,"



"domestic economy," "home economics", (in short, housekeeping),



schools for the special training of secondary-school teachers,



and even schools that are avowedly of primary grade; while a



variety of "university extension" bureaux have also been



installed, to comfort and edify the unlearned with lyceum



lectures, to dispense erudition by mail-order, and to maintain



some putative contact with amateur scholars and dilettanti beyond



the pale.



    On its face, this enterprise in assorted education simulates



the precedents given by the larger modern business coalitions,



which frequently bring under one general business management a



considerable number and variety of industrial plants. Doubtless a



boyish imitation of such business enterprise has had its share in



the propagation of these educational excursions. It all has an



histrionic air, such as would suggest that its use, at least in



good part, might be to serve as an outlet for the ambition and



energies of an executive gifted with a penchant for large and



difficult undertakings, and with scant insight into the needs and



opportunities of a corporation of the higher learning, and who



might therefore be carried off his scholastic footing by the



glamour of the exploits of the trustmakers. No doubt, the



histrionic proclivities of the executive, backed by a similar



sensibility to dramatic effect on the part of their staff and of



the governing boards, must be held accountable for much of this



headlong propensity to do many other things half-way rather than



do the work well that is already in hand. But this visible



histrionic sensibility, and the glamour of great deeds, will by



no means wholly account for current university enterprise along



this line; not even when there is added the urgent competitive



need of a show of magnitude, such as besets all the universities;



nor do these several lines of motivation account for the



particular direction so taken by these excursions in partes



infidelium. At the same time, reasons of scholarship or science



plainly have no part in the movement.



    Apart from such executive weakness for spectacular magnitude,



and the competitive need of formidable statistics, the prime



mover in the case is presumably the current unreflecting



propensity to make much of all things that bear the signature of



the "practical." These various projections of university



enterprise uniformly make some plausible claim of that nature.



Any extension of the corporation's activity can be more readily



effected, is accepted more as an expedient matter of course, if



it promises to have such a "practical" value. "Practical" in this



connection means useful for private gain; it need imply nothing



in the way of serviceability to the common good.



    The same spirit shows itself also in a ceaseless revision of



the schedule of instruction offered by the collegiate or



undergraduate division as such, where it leads to a



multiplication of courses desired to give or to lead up to



vocational training. So that practical instruction, in the sense



indicated, is continually thrown more into the foreground in the



courses offered, as well as in the solicitude of the various



administrative boards, bureaux and committees that have to do



with the organization and management of the academic machinery.



    As has already been remarked, these directive boards,



committees, and chiefs of bureau are chosen, in great part, for



their businesslike efficiency, because they are good office-men,



with "executive ability"; and the animus of these academic



businessmen, by so much, becomes the guiding spirit of the



corporation of learning, and through their control it acts



intimately and pervasively to order the scope and method of



academic instruction. This permeation of the university's



everyday activity by the principles of competitive business is



less visible to outsiders than the various lines of extraneous



enterprise already spoken of, but it touches the work within the



university proper even more radically and insistently; although,



it is true, it affects the collegiate (undergraduate) instruction



more immediately than what is fairly to be classed as university



work. The consequences are plain. Business proficiency is put in



the place of learning. It is said by advocates of this move that



learning is hereby given a more practical bent; which is



substantially a contradiction in terms. It is a case not of



assimilation, but of displacement and substitution, garnished



with circumlocution of a more or less ingenuous kind.







    Historically, in point of derivation and early growth, this



movement for vocational training is closely related to the



American system of "electives" in college instruction, if it may



not rather be said to be a direct outgrowth of that pedagogical



expedient.(1*) It dates back approximately to the same period for



its beginnings, and much of the arguments adduced in its favour



are substantially the same as have been found convincing for the



system of electives. Under the elective system a considerable and



increasing freedom has been allowed the student in the choice of



what he will include in his curriculum; so that the colleges have



in this way come to refer the choice of topics in good part to



the guidance of the student's own interest. To meet the resulting



range and diversity of demands, an increasing variety of courses



has been offered, at the same time that a narrower specialization



has also taken effect in much of the instruction offered. Among



the other leadings of interest among students, and affecting



their choice of electives, has also been the laudable practical



interest that these young men take in their own prospective



material success.(2*) So that this -- academically speaking,



extraneous -- interest has come to mingle and take rank with the



scholarly interests proper in shaping the schedule of



instruction. A decisive voice in the ordering of the affairs of



the higher learning has so been given to the novices, or rather



to the untutored probationers of the undergraduate schools, whose



entrance on a career of scholarship is yet a matter of



speculative probability at the best.



    Those who have spoken for an extensive range of electives



have in a very appreciable measure made use of that expedient as



a means of displacing what they have regarded as obsolete or



dispensable items in the traditional college curriculum. In so



advocating a wider range and freedom of choice, they have spoken



for the new courses of instruction as being equally competent



with the old in point of discipline and cultural value; and they



have commonly not omitted to claim -- somewhat in the way of an



obiter dictum, perhaps -- that these newer and more vital topics,



whose claims they advocate, have also the peculiar merit of



conducing in a special degree to good citizenship and the



material welfare of the community. Such a line of argument has



found immediate response among those pragmatic spirits within



whose horizon "value" is synonymous with "pecuniary value," and



to whom good citizenship means proficiency in competitive



business. So it has come about that, while the initial purpose of



the elective system appears to have been the sharpening of the



students' scholarly interests and the cultivation of a more



liberal scholarship, it has by force of circumstances served to



propagate a movement at cross purposes with all scholarly



aspiration.



    All this advocacy of the practical in education has fallen in



with the aspirations of such young men as are eager to find



gratuitous help toward a gainful career, as well as with the



desires of parents who are anxious to see their sons equipped for



material success; and not least has it appealed to the



sensibilities of those substantial citizens who are already



established in business and feel the need of a free supply of



trained subordinates at reasonable wages. The last mentioned is



the more substantial of these incentives to gratuitous vocational



training, coming in, as it does, with the endorsement of the



community's most respected and most influential men. Whether it



is training in any of the various lines of engineering, in



commerce, in journalism, or in the mechanic and manual trades,



the output of trained men from these vocational schools goes, in



the main, to supply trained employees for concerns already



profitably established in such lines of business as find use for



this class of men; and through the gratuitous, or half



gratuitous, opportunities offered by these schools, this needed



supply of trained employees comes to the business concerns in



question at a rate of wages lower than what they would have to



pay in the absence of such gratuitous instruction.



    Not that these substantial citizens, whose word counts for so



much in commendation of practical education, need be greatly



moved by selfish consideration of this increased ease in



procuring skilled labour for use in their own pursuit of gain;



but the increased and cheaper supply of such skilled workmen is



"good for business," and, in the common sense estimation of these



conservative businessmen, what is good for business is good,



without reservation. What is good for business is felt to be



serviceable for the common good; and no closer scrutiny is



commonly given to that matter. While any closer scrutiny would



doubtless throw serious doubt on this general proposition, such



scrutiny can not but be distasteful to the successful



businessmen; since it would unavoidably also throw a shadow of



doubt on the meritoriousness of that business traffic in which



they have achieved their success and to which they owe their



preferential standing in the community.



    In this high rating of things practical the captains of



industry are also substantially at one with the current



common-sense award of the vulgar, so that their advocacy of



practical education carries the weight of a self-evident



principle. It is true, in the long run and on sober reflection



the award of civilized common sense runs to the effect that



knowledge is more to be desired than things of price; but at the



same time the superficial and transient workday sense of daily



needs -- the "snap judgment" of the vulgar -- driven by the hard



usage of competitive bread-winning, says that a gainful



occupation is the first requisite of human life; and accepting it



without much question as the first requisite, the vulgar allow it



uncritically to stand as the chief or sole and that is worth an



effort. And in so doing they are not so far out of their



bearings; for to the common man, under the competitive system,



there is but a scant margin of energy or interest left over and



disposable for other ends after the instant needs of



bread-winning have been met.



    Proficiency and single-mindedness in the pursuit of private



gain is something that can readily be appreciated by all men who



have had the usual training given by the modern system of



competitive gain and competitive spending. Nothing is so



instantly recognized as being of great urgency, always and



everywhere, under this modern, pecuniary scheme of things. So



that, without reflection and as a matter of course, the first and



gravest question of any general bearing in any connection has



come to be that classic of worldly wisdom: What profiteth it a



man? and the answer is, just as uncritically, sought in terms of



pecuniary gain. And the men to whom has been entrusted the



custody of that cultural heritage of mankind that can not be



bought with a price, make haste to play up to this snap judgment



of the vulgar, and so keep them from calling to mind, on second



thought, what it is that they, after all, value more highly than



the means of competitive spending.



    Concomitant with this growing insistence on vocational



training in the schools, and with this restless endeavour of the



academic authorities to gratify the demand, there has also come



an increasing habitual inclination of the same uncritical



character among academic men to value all academic work in terms



of livelihood or of earning capacity.(3*) The question has been



asked, more and more urgently and openly, What is the use of all



this knowledge?(4*) Pushed by this popular prejudice, and



themselves also drifting under compulsion of the same prevalent



bias, even the seasoned scholars and scientists -- Matthew



Arnold's "Remnant" -- have taken to heart this question of the



use of the higher learning in the pursuit of gain. Of course it



has no such use, and the many shrewdly devised solutions of the



conundrum have necessarily run out in a string of sophistical



dialectics. The place of disinterested knowledge in modern



civilization is neither that of a means to private gain, nor that



of an intermediate step in "the roundabout process of the



production of goods."



    As a motto for the scholars' craft, Scientia pecuniae



ancillans is nowise more seemly than the Schoolmen's Philosophia



theologiae ancillans.(5*) Yet such inroads have pecuniary habits



of valuation made even within the precincts of the corporation of



learning, that university men, -- and even the scholarly ones



among them, -- are no more than half ashamed of such a parcel of



fatuity. And relatively few among university executives have not,



within the past few years, taken occasion to plead the merits of



academic training as a business proposition. The man of the world



-- that is to say, of the business world puts the question, What



is the use of this learning? and the men who speak for learning,



and even the scholars occupied with the "humanities," are at



pains to find some colourable answer that shall satisfy the



worldly-wise that this learning for which they speak is in some



way useful for pecuniary gain.(6*)



    If he were not himself infected with the pragmatism of the



market-place, the scholar's answer would have to be. Get thee



behind me!







    Benjamin Franklin -- high-bred pragmatist that he was -- once



put away such a question with the rejoinder: What is the use of a



baby? To civilized men -- with the equivocal exception of the



warlike politicians -- this latter question seems foolish,



criminally foolish. But there once was a time, in the high days



of barbarism, when thoughtful men were ready to canvass that



question with as naive a gravity as this other question, of the



use of learning, is canvassed by the substantial citizens of the



present day. At the period covered by that chapter in ancient



history, a child was, in a way, an article of equipment for the



up-keep of the family and its prestige, and more remotely for the



support of the sovereign and his prestige. So that a male child



would be rated as indubitably worth while if he gave promise of



growing into a robust and contentious man. If the infant were a



girl, or if he gave no promise of becoming an effective disturber



of the peace, the use or expediency of rearing the child would



become a matter for deliberation; and not infrequently the



finding of those old-time utilitarians was adverse, and the



investment was cancelled. The habit of so deliberating on the



pragmatic advisability of child-life has been lost, latterly; or



at any rate such of the latterday utilitarians as may still



entertain a question of this kind in any concrete case are



ashamed to have it spoken of nakedly. Witness the lame but



irrepressible sentimental protest against the Malthusian doctrine



of population.



    It is true, in out-of-the-way corners and on the lower levels



-- and on the higher levels of imperial politics where men have



not learned to shrink from shameful devices, the question of



children and of the birth-rate is still sometimes debated as a



question of the presumptive use of offspring for some ulterior



end. And there may still be found those who are touched by the



reflection that a child born may become a valuable asset as a



support for the parents' old age. Such a pecuniary rating of the



parental relation, which values children as a speculative means



of gain, may still be met with. But wherever modern civilization



has made its way at all effectually, such a provident rating of



offspring is not met with in good company. Latterday common sense



does not countenance it.



    Not that a question of expediency is no longer entertained,



touching this matter of children, but it is no longer the



patriarchal-barbarian question as to eventual gains that may be



expected to accrue to the parent or the family. Except in the



view of those statesmen of the barbarian line who see the matter



of birth-rate from the higher ground of dynastic politics, a



child born is not rated as a means, but as an end. At least



conventionally, it is no longer a question of pecuniary gain for



the parent but of expediency for the child. No mother asks



herself if her child will pay.



    Civilized men shrink from anything like rating children as a



contrivance for use in the "round-about process of the production



of goods." And in much the same spirit, and in the last analysis



on much the same grounds, although in a less secure and more



loosely speculative fashion, men also look to the higher learning



as the ripe fulfilment of material competency, rather than as a



means to material success. In their thoughtful intervals, the



most businesslike pragmatists will avow such an ideal. But in



workday detail, when the question turns concretely on the



advisability of the higher education, the workday habit of



pecuniary traffic asserts itself, and the matter is then likely



to be argued in pecuniary terms. The barbarian animus, habitual



to the quest of gain, reverts, and the deliberation turns on the



gainfulness of this education, which has in all sobriety been



acknowledged the due end of culture and endeavour. So that, in



working out the details, this end of living is made a means, and



the means is made an end.



    No doubt, what chiefly urges men to the pursuit of knowledge



is their native bent of curiosity, -- an impulsive proclivity to



master the logic of facts; just as the chief incentive to the



achievement of children has, no doubt, always been the parental



bent. But very much as the boorish element in the present and



recent generations will let the pecuniary use of children come in



as a large subsidiary ground of decision, and as they have even



avowed this to be their chief concern in the matter; so, in a



like spirit, men trained to the business system of competitive



gain and competitive spending will not be content to find that



they can afford the quest of that knowledge which their human



propensity incites them to cultivate, but they must back this



propensity with a shamefaced apology for education on the plea of



its gainfulness.



    What is here said of the businesslike spirit of the latterday



"educators" is not to be taken as reflecting disparagingly on



them or their endeavours. They respond to the call of the times



as best they can. That they do so, and that the call of the times



is of this character, is a fact of the current drift of things;



which one may commend or deprecate according as one has the



fortune to fall in with one or the other side of the case; that



is to say according to one's habitual bent; but in any event it



is to be taken as a fact of the latterday situation, and a factor



of some force and permanence in the drift of things academic, for



the present and the calculable future. It means a more or less



effectual further diversion of interest and support from science



and scholarship to the competitive acquisition of wealth, and



therefore also to its competitive consumption. Through such a



diversion of energy and attention in the schools, the pecuniary



animus at large, and pecuniary standards of worth and value,



stand to gain, more or less, at the cost of those other virtues



that are, by the accepted tradition of modern Christendom, held



to be of graver and more enduring import. It means an endeavour



to substitute the pursuit of gain and expenditure in place of the



pursuit of knowledge, as the focus of interest and the objective



end in the modern intellectual life.



    This incursion of pecuniary ideals in academic policy is seen



at its broadest and baldest in the Schools of Commerce, --



"Commerce and Politics," "Business Training," "Commerce and



Administration," "Commerce and Finance," or whatever may be the



phrase selected to designate the supersession of learning by



worldly wisdom. Facility in competitive business is to take the



place of scholarship, as the goal of university training,



because, it is alleged, the former is the more useful. The ruling



interest of Christendom, in this view, is pecuniary gain. And



training for commercial management stands to this ruling interest



of the modern community in a relation analogous to that in which



theology and homiletics stood to the ruling interest in those



earlier times when the salvation of men's souls was the prime



object of solicitude. Such a seminary of business has something



of a sacerdotal dignity. It is the appointed keeper of the higher



business animus.(7*)



    Such a school, with its corps of instructors and its



equipment, stands in the university on a tenure similar to that



of the divinity school. Both schools are equally extraneous to



that "intellectual enterprise" in behalf of which, ostensibly,



the university is maintained. But while the divinity school



belongs to the old order and is losing its preferential hold on



the corporation of learning, the school of commerce belongs to



the new order and is gaining ground. The primacy among pragmatic



interests has passed from religion to business, and the school of



commerce is the exponent and expositor of this primacy. It is the



perfect flower of the secularization of the universities. And as



has already been remarked above, there is also a wide-sweeping



movement afoot to bend the ordinary curriculum of the higher



schools to the service of this cult of business principles, and



so to make the ordinary instruction converge to the advancement



of business enterprise, very much as it was once dutifully



arranged that the higher instruction should be subservient to



religious teaching and consonant with the demands of devout



observances and creeds.



    It is not that the College of Commerce stands alone as the



exponent of worldly wisdom in the modern universities; nor is its



position in this respect singular, except in the degree of its



remoteness from all properly academic interests. Other training



schools, as in engineering and in the other professions, belong



under the same general category of practical aims, as contrasted



with the aims of the higher learning. But the College of Commerce



stands out pre-eminent among these various training schools in



two respects: (a) While the great proportion of training for the



other professions draws largely on the results of modern science



for ways and means, and therefore includes or presumes a degree



of familiarity with the work, aims and methods of the sciences,



so that these schools have so much of a bond of community with



the higher learning, the school of commerce on the other hand



need scarcely take cognizance of the achievements of science, nor



need it presume any degree of acquaintance on the part of its



students or adepts with the matter or logic of the sciences;(8*)



(b) in varying degrees, the proficiency given by training in the



other professional schools, and required for the efficient



pursuit of the other professions, may be serviceable to the



community at large; whereas the business proficiency inculcated



by the schools of commerce has no such serviceability, being



directed singly to a facile command of the ways and means of



private gain.(9*) The training that leads up to the several other



professions, of course, varies greatly in respect of its draught



on scientific information, as well as in the degree of its



serviceability to the community; some of the professions, as, e.



g., Law, approach very close to the character of business



training, both in the unscientific and unscholarly nature of the



required training and in their uselessness to the community;



while others, as, e. g., Medicine and the various lines of



engineering, differ widely from commercial training in both of



these respects. With the main exception of Law (and, some would



add, of Divinity?) the professional schools train men for work



that is of some substantial use to the community at large. This



is particularly true of the technological schools. But while the



technological schools may be occupied with work that is of



substantial use, and while they may draw more or less extensively



on the sciences for their materials and even for their methods,



they can not, for all that, claim standing in the university on



the ground of that disinterested intellectual enterprise which is



the university's peculiar domain.



    The professional knowledge and skill of physicians, surgeons,



dentists, pharmacists, agriculturists, engineers of all kinds,



perhaps even of journalists, is of some use to the community at



large, at the same time that it may be profitable to the bearers



of it. The community has a substantial interest in the adequate



training of these men, although it is not that intellectual



interest that attaches to science and scholarship. But such is



not the case with the training designed to give proficiency in



business. No gain comes to the community at large from increasing



the business proficiency of any number of its young men. There



are already much too many of these businessmen, much too astute



and proficient in their calling, for the common good. A higher



average business efficiency simply raises activity and avidity in



business to a higher average pitch of skill and fervour, with



very little other material result than a redistribution of



ownership; since business is occupied with the competitive



wealth, not with its production. It is only by a euphemistic



metaphor that we are accustomed to speak of the businessmen as



producers of goods. Gains due to such efficiency are differential



gains only. They are a differential as against other businessmen



on the one hand, and as against the rest of the community on the



other hand. The work of the College of Commerce, accordingly, is



a peculiarly futile line of endeavour for any public institution,



in that it serves neither the intellectual advancement nor the



material welfare of the community.



    The greater the number and the higher the proficiency of the



community's businessmen, other things equal, the worse must the



rest of the community come off in that game of skilled bargaining



and shrewd management by which the businessmen get their gains.



Gratuitous or partly gratuitous training for business will



presumably increase the number of highly proficient businessmen.



As the old-fashioned economists would express it, it will



increase the number of "middlemen," of men who "live by their



wits." At the same time it should presumably increase the average



efficiency of this increased number. The outcome should be that



the resulting body of businessmen will be able, between them, to



secure a larger proportion of the aggregate wealth of the



community; leaving the rest of the community poorer by that



much,except for that (extremely doubtful) amount by which shrewd



business management is likely to increase the material



wealth-producing capacity of the community. Any such presumed



increase of wealth-producing capacity is an incidental



concomitant of business traffic, and in the nature of the case it



can not equal the aggregate increased gain that goes to the



businessmen. At the best the question as to the effect which such



an aggregate increased business efficiency will have on the



community's material welfare is a question of how large the net



loss will be; that it will entail a net loss on the community at



large is in fact not an open question.



    A college of commerce is designed to serve an emulative



purpose only -- individual gain regardless of, or at the cost of,



the community at large -- and it is, therefore, peculiarly



incompatible with the collective cultural purpose of the



university. It belongs in the corporation of learning no more



than a department of athletics.(10*) Both alike give training



that is of no use to the community,except, perhaps, as a



sentimental excitement. Neither business proficiency nor



proficiency in athletic contests need be decried, of course. They



have their value, to the businessmen and to the athletes,



respectively, chiefly as a means of livelihood at the cost of the



rest of the community, and it is to be presumed that they are



worth while to those who go in for that sort of thing. Both alike



are related to the legitimate ends of the university as a drain



on its resources and an impairment of its scholarly animus. As



related to the ostensible purposes of a university, therefore,



the support and conduct of such schools at the expense of the



universities is to be construed as a breach of trust.



    What has just been said of the schools of commerce is, of



course, true also of the other training schools comprised in this



latterday university policy, in the degree in which these others



aim at the like emulative and unscholarly results. It holds true



of the law schools, e. g., typically and more largely than of the



generality of professional and technical schools. Both in point



of the purely competitive value of their training and of the



unscientific character of their work, the law schools are in very



much the same case as the schools of commerce; and, no doubt, the



accepted inclusion of law schools in the university corporation



has made the intrusion of the schools of commerce much easier



than it otherwise would have been. The law school's inclusion in



the university corporation has the countenance of ancient



tradition, it comes down as an authentic usage from the mediaeval



era of European education, and from the pre-history of the



American universities. But in point of substantial merit the law



school belongs in the modern university no more than a school of



fencing or dancing. This is particularly true of the American law



schools, in which the Austinian conception of law is followed,



and it is more particularly true the more consistently the "case



method" is adhered to. These schools devote themselves with great



singleness to the training of practitioners, as distinct from



jurists; and their teachers stand in a relation to their students



analogous to that in which the "coaches" stand to the athletes.



What is had in view is the exigencies, expedients and strategy of



successful practice; and not so much a grasp of even those



quasi-scientific articles of metaphysics that lie at the root of



the legal system. What is required and inculcated in the way of a



knowledge of these elements of law is a familiarity with their



strategic use.



    The profession of the Law is, of course, an honourable



profession, and it is doubtless believed by its apologists to be



a useful profession, on the whole; but a body of lawyers somewhat



less numerous, and with a lower average proficiency in legal



subtleties and expedients, would unquestionably be quite as



serviceable to the community at large as a larger number of such



men with a higher efficiency; at the same time they would be less



costly, both as to initial cost and as to the expenses of



maintenance that come of that excessive volume and retardation of



litigation due to an extreme facility in legal technique on the



part of the members of the bar.



    It will also be found true that both the schools of law and



those of commerce, and in a less degree the other vocational



schools, serve the advantage of one class as against another. In



the measure in which these schools accomplish what they aim at,



they increase the advantage of such men as already have some



advantage over the common run. The instruction is half-way



gratuitous; that is the purpose of placing these schools on a



foundation or maintaining them at the public expense. It is



presumed to be worth more than its cost to the students. The fees



and other incidental expenses do not nearly cover the cost of the



schools; otherwise no foundation or support from the public funds



would be required, and the universities would have no colourable



excuse for going into this field. But even if the instruction and



facilities offered by these schools are virtually gratuitous, yet



the fees and incidental expenses, together with the expenditure



of time and the cost of living required for a residence at the



schools, make up so considerable an item of expense as



effectually to exclude the majority of those young men who might



otherwise be inclined to avail themselves of these advantages. In



effect, none can afford the time and expense of this business



training, whether in Commerce, Law, or the other professions,



except those who are already possessed of something more than the



average wealth or average income; and none, presumably, take



kindly to this training, in commerce or law, e.g., except those



who already have something more than the average taste and



aptitude for business traffic, or who have a promising "opening"



of this character in sight. So that this training that is desired



to serve the private advantage of commercial students is, for the



greater part, extended to a select body of young men; only such



applicants being eligible, in effect, as do not on any showing



need this gratuity.



    In proportion to the work which it undertakes, the College of



Commerce is -- or it would be if it lived up to its professions



-- the most expensive branch of the university corporation. In



this connection the case of the law school offers a significant



object-lesson of what to expect in the further growth of the



schools of commerce. The law school is of older standing and



maturer growth, at the same time that its aims and circumstances



are of much the same general character as those that condition



the schools of commerce; and it is therefore to be taken as



indicating something of what must be looked for in the college of



commerce if it is to do the work for which it is established. The



indications, then, are (a) that the instruction in the field of



commercial training may be expected gradually to fall into a more



rigidly drawn curriculum, which will discard all irrelevant



theoretical excursions and will diverge more and more widely from



the ways of scientific inquiry, in proportion as experience and



tactful organization bring the school to a maturer insight into



its purposes and a more consistent adherence to its chief purpose



of training expert men for the higher business practice; and (b)



that the personnel of its staff must increasingly be drawn from



among the successful businessmen, rather than from men of



academic training.



    Among the immediate consequences of this latter feature, as



shown in the example of the law schools, is a relatively high



cost. The schedule of salaries in the law schools attached to the



universities, e. g., runs appreciably higher than in the



university proper. the reason being, of course, that men suitable



efficiently to serve as instructors and directive officials in a



school of law are almost necessarily men whose services in the



practice of the law would command a high rate of pay. What is



needed in the law school (as in the school of commerce) is men



who are practically conversant with the ways and means of earning



large fees, -- that being the point of it all. Indeed, the scale



of pay which their services will command in the open market is



the chief and ordinary test of their fitness for the work of



instruction. The salaries paid these men of affairs, who have so



been diverted to the service of the schools, is commonly some



multiple of the salary assigned to men of a comparable ability



and attainments in the academic work proper. The academic rank



assigned them is also necessarily, and for the like reason,



commensurate with their higher scale of pay; all of which throws



an undue preponderance of discretion and authority into the hands



of these men of affairs, and so introduces a disproportionate



bias in favour of unscientific and unscholarly aims and ideals in



the university at large.



    Judged by the example of the law schools, then, the college



of commerce, if it is to live and thrive, may be counted on to



divert a much larger body of funds from legitimate university



uses, and to create more of a bias hostile to scholarly and



scientific work in the academic body, than the mere numerical



showing of its staff would suggest. It is fairly to be expected



that capable men of affairs, drawn from the traffic of successful



business for this service, will require even a higher rate of



pay, at the same time that they will be even more cordially out



of sympathy with the ideals of scholarship, than the personnel of



the law schools. Such will necessarily be the outcome, if these



schools are at all effectually to serve the purpose for which



they are created.



    But for the present, as matters stand now, near the inception



of this enterprise in training masters of gain, such an outcome



has not been reached. Neither have the schools of commerce yet



been placed on such a footing of expensiveness and authoritative



discretion as the high sanction of the quest of gain would seem



properly to assign them; nor are they, as at present organized



and equipped, at all eminently fit to carry out the work



entrusted to their care. Commonly, it is to be admitted, the men



selected for the staff are men of some academic training, rather



than men of affairs who have shown evidence of fitness to give



counsel and instruction, by eminently gainful success in



business. They are, indeed, commonly men of moderate rating in



the academic community, and are vested with a moderate rank and



authority; and the emoluments of these offices are also such as



attach to positions of a middling grade in academic work, instead



of being comparable with the gains that come to capable men



engaged in the large business outside. Yet it is from among these



higher grades of expert businessmen outside that the schools of



commerce must draw their staff of instructors and their



administrative officers if they are to accomplish the task



proposed to them. A movement in this direction is already visibly



setting in.



    It is reasonably to be expected that one or the other result



should follow: either the college of commerce must remain,



somewhat as in practice it now is, something in the way of an



academic division, with an academic routine and standards, and



with an unfulfilled ambition to serve the higher needs of



business training; with a poorly paid staff of nondescript



academic men, not peculiarly fitted to lead their students into



the straight and narrow way of business success, nor yet



eminently equipped for a theoretical inquiry into the phenomena



of business traffic and their underlying causes so that the



school will continue to stand, in effect, as a more or less



pedantic and equivocal adjunct of a department of economics; or



the schools must be endowed and organized with a larger and



stricter regard to the needs of the higher business traffic; with



a personnel composed of men of the highest business talent and



attainments, tempted from such successful business traffic by the



offer of salaries comparable with those paid the responsible



officials of large corporations engaged in banking, railroading,



and industrial enterprises, -- and they must also be fitted out



with an equipment of a corresponding magnitude and liberality.



    Apart from a large and costly material equipment, such a



college would also, under current conditions, have to be provided



with a virtually unlimited fund for travelling expenses, to carry



its staff and its students to the several typical seats and



centres of business traffic and maintain them there for that



requisite personal contact with affairs that alone can contribute



to a practical comprehension of business strategy. In short, the



schools would have to meet those requirements of training and



information which men who today aim to prepare themselves for the



larger business will commonly spend expensive years of



apprenticeship to acquire. It is eminently true in business



training, very much as it is in military strategy, that nothing



will take the place of first-hand observation and personal



contact with the processes and procedure involved; and such



first-hand contact is to be had only at the cost of a more or



less protracted stay where the various lines of business are



carried on.



    The creation and maintenance of such a College of Commerce,



on such a scale as will make it anything more than a dubious



make-believe, would manifestly appear to be beyond the powers of



any existing university. So that the best that can be compassed



in this way, or that has been achieved, by the means at the



disposal of any university hitherto, is a cross between a



secondary school for bank-clerks and travelling salesmen and a



subsidiary department of economics.



    All this applies with gradually lessened force to the other



vocational schools, occupied with training for occupations that



are of more substantial use to the community and less widely out



of touch with the higher learning. In the light of their



professions on the one side and the degree of their fulfilment on



the other, it would be hazardous to guess how far the university



directorate in any given case is animated with a spontaneous zeal



for the furtherance of these "practical" aims which the



universities so pursue, and how far on the other hand it may be a



matter of politic management, to bring content to those



commercially-minded laymen whose good-will is rated as a valuable



asset. These men of substance have a high appreciation of



business efficiency -- a species of self-respect, and therefore



held as a point of honour -- and are consequently inclined to



rate all education in terms of earning-capacity. Failure to meet



the presumed wishes of the businessmen in this matter, it is



apprehended, would mean a loss of support in endowment and



enrolment. And since endowment and enrolment, being the chief



elements of visible success, are the two main ends of current



academic policy, it is incumbent on the directorate to shape



their policy accordingly.



    So the academic authorities face the choice between scholarly



efficiency and vocational training, and hitherto the result has



been equivocal. The directorate should presumably be in a



position to appreciate the drift of their own action, in so



diverting the university's work to ends at variance with its



legitimate purpose; and the effect of such a policy should



presumably be repugnant to their scholarly tastes, as well as to



their sense of right and honest living. But the circumstances of



their office and tenure leave them somewhat helpless, for all



their presumed insight and their aversion to this malpractice;



and these conditions of office require them, as it is commonly



apprehended, to take active measures for the defeat of learning,



-- hitherto with an equivocal outcome. The schools of commerce,



even more than the other vocational schools, have been managed



somewhat parsimoniously, and the effectual results have



habitually fallen far short of the clever promises held out in



the prospectus. The professed purpose of these schools is the



training of young men to a high proficiency in the larger and



more responsible affairs of business, but for the present this



purpose must apparently remain a speculative, and very



temperately ingenuous, aspiration, rather than a practicable



working programme.







NOTES:







1. "Our professors in the Harvard of the '50s were a set of



rather eminent scholars and highly respectable men. They attended



to their studies with commendable assiduity and drudged along in



a dreary, humdrum sort of way in a stereotyped method of



classroom instruction...



    "And that was the Harvard system. It remains in essence the



system still -- the old, outgrown, pedagogic relation of the



large class-recitation room. The only variation has been through



Eliot's effort to replace it by the yet more pernicious system of



premature specialization. This is a confusion of the college and



university functions and constitutes a distinct menace to all



true higher education. The function of the college is an



all-around development, as a basis for university



specializations. Eliot never grasped that fundamental fact, and



so he undertook to turn Harvard college into a German university



-- specializing the student at 18. He instituted a system of



one-sided contact in place of a system based on no contact at



all. It is devoutly to be hoped that, some day, a glimmer of true



light will effect an entrance into the professional educator's



head. It certainly hadn't done so up to 1906."- Charles Francis



Adams, An Autobiography.







2. The college student's interest in his studies has shifted from



the footing of an avocation to that of a vocation.







3. So, e.g., in the later eighties, at the time when the



confusion of sentiments in this matter of electives and practical



academic instruction was reaching its height, one of the most



largely endowed of the late-founded universities set out avowedly



to bend its forces singly to such instruction as would make for



the material success of its students; and, moreover, to



accomplish this end by an untrammelled system of electives,



limited only by the general qualification that all instruction



offered was to be of this pragmatic character. The establishment



in question, it may be added, has in the course of years run a



somewhat inglorious career, regard being had to its unexampled



opportunities, and has in the event come to much the same footing



of compromise between learning and vocational training, routine



and electives, as its contemporaries that have approached their



present ambiguous position from the contrary direction; except



that, possibly, scholarship as such is still held in slightly



lower esteem among the men of this faculty -- selected on grounds



of their practical bias -- than among the generality of academic



men.







4. "And why the sea is boiling hot, And whether pigs have wings."







5. Cf. Adam Smith on the "idle curiosity." Moral Sentiments, 1st



ed., p. 351 -- , esp. 355.







6. So, a man eminent as a scholar and in the social sciences has



said, not so long ago: "The first question I would ask is, has



not this learning a large part to play in supplementing those



practical powers, instincts and sympathies which can be developed



only in action, only through experience?... That broader training



is just what is needed by the higher and more responsible ranks



of business, both private and public.... Success in large trading



has always needed breadth of view."







7. Cf., e.g., Report of a Conference on Commercial Education and



Business Progress; In connection with the dedication of the



Commerce Building, at the University of Illinois, 1913. The



somewhat raucous note of self-complacency that pervades this



characteristic document should not be allowed to lessen its value



as evidence of the spirit for which it speaks. Indeed, whatever



it may show, of effrontery and disingenuousness, is rather to be



taken as of the essence of the case. It might prove difficult to



find an equally unabashed pronouncement of the like volume and



consistency put forth under the like academic auspices; but it



does by no means stand alone, and its perfections should not be



counted against it.







8. This characterization applies without abatement to the schools



of commerce as commonly designed at their foundation and set



forth in their public announcements, and to their work in so far



as they live up to their professions. At the same time it is to



be noted that few of these schools successfully keep their work



clear of all entanglement with theoretical discussions that have



only a scientific bearing. And it is also quite feasible to



organize a "school of commerce" on lines of scientific inquiry



with the avowed purpose of dealing with business enterprise in



its various ramifications as subject matter of theoretical



investigation; but such is not the avowed aim of the established



schools of this class, and such is not the actual character of



the work carried on in these schools, except by inadvertence.







9. It is doubtless within the mark to say that the training given



by the American schools of commerce is detrimental to the



community's material interests. In America, even in a more



pronounced degree than elsewhere, business management centres on



financiering and salesmanship; and American commercial schools,



even in a more pronounced degree than those of other countries,



centre their attention on proficiency in these matters, because



these are the matters which the common sense of the American



business community knows how to value, and on which it insists as



indispensable qualifications in its young men. The besetting



infirmity of the American business community, as witness the many



and circumstantial disclosures of the "efficiency engineers," and



of others who have had occasion to speak of the matter, is a



notable indifference to the economical and mechanically efficient



use, exploitation and conservation of equipment and resources,



coupled with an equally notable want of insight into the



technological needs and possibilities of the industries which



they control. The typical American businessman watches the



industrial process from ambush, with a view to the seizure of any



item of value that may be left at loose ends. Business strategy



is a strategy of "watchful waiting," at the centre of a web; very



alert and adroit, but remarkably incompetent in the way of



anything that can properly be called "industrial enterprise."



    The concatenation of circumstances that has brought American



business enterprise to this inglorious posture, and has virtually



engrossed the direction of business affairs in the hands of men



endowed with the spiritual and intellectual traits suitable to



such prehensile enterprise, can not be gone into here. The fact,



however, is patent. It should suffice to call to mind the large



fact, as notorious as it is discreditable, that the American



business community has, with unexampled freedom, had at its



disposal the largest and best body of resources that has yet



become available to modern industry, in men, materials and



geographical situation, and that with these means they have



achieved something doubtfully second-rate, as compared with the



industrial achievements of other countries less fortunately



placed in all material respects.



    What the schools of commerce now offer is further



specialization along the same line of proficiency, to give



increased facility in financiering and salesmanship. This



specialization on commerce is like other specialization in that



it draws off attention and interest from other lines than those



in which the specialization falls; thereby widening the



candidate's field of ignorance while it intensifies his



effectiveness within his specialty. The effect, as touches the



community's interest in the matter, should be an enhancement of



the candidate's proficiency in all the futile ways and means of



salesmanship and "conspiracy in restraint of trade." together



with a heightened incapacity and ignorance bearing on such work



as is of material use.







10. Latterly, it appears, the training given by the athletic



establishments attached to the universities is also coming to



have a value as vocational training; in that the men so trained



and vouched for by these establishments are finding lucrative



employment as instructors, coaches, masseurs, etc., engaged in



similar athletic traffic in various schools, public or private.



So also, and for the same reason, they are found eligible as



"muscular Christian" secretaries in charge of chapters of the



Y.M.C.A. and the like quasi-devout clubs and gilds. Indeed in all



but the name, the athletic establishments are taking on the



character of "schools" or "divisions" included under the



collective academic administration, very much after the fashion



of a "School of Education" or a "School of Journalism"; and they



are in effect "graduating" students in Athletics, with due,



though hitherto unofficial, certification of proficiency. So



also, latterly, one meets with proposals, made in good faith,



among official academic men to allow due "academic credit" for



training in athletics and let it count toward graduation. By



indirection and subreption, of course, much of the training given



in athletics already does so count.











CHAPTER VIII







Summary and Trial Balance











    As in earlier passages, so here in speaking of profit and



loss, the point of view taken is neither that of material



advantage, whether of the individuals concerned or of the



community at large, nor that of expediency for the common good in



respect of prosperity or of morals; nor is the appraisal here



ventured upon to be taken as an expression of praise or dispraise



at large, touching this incursion of business principles into the



affairs of learning.



    By and large, the intrusion of businesslike ideals, aims and



methods into this field, with all the consequences that follow,



may be commendable or the reverse. All that is matter for



attention and advisement at the hands of such as aim to alter,



improve, amend or conserve the run of institutional phenomena



that goes to make up the current situation. The present inquiry



bears on the higher learning as it comes into this current



situation, and on the effect of this recourse to business



principles upon the pursuit of learning.



    Not that this learning is therefore to be taken as



necessarily of higher and more substantial value than that



traffic in competitive gain and competitive spending upon which



business principles converge, and in which they find their



consummate expression, -- even though it is broadly to be



recognized and taken account of that such is the deliberate



appraisal awarded by the common sense of civilized mankind. The



profit and loss here spoken for is not profit and loss, to



mankind or to any given community, in respect of that inclusive



complex of interests that makes up the balanced total of good and



ill; it is profit and loss for the cause of learning, simply; and



there is here no aspiration to pass on ulterior questions. As



required by the exigencies of such an argument, it is therefore



assumed, pro forma, that profit and loss for the pursuit of



learning is profit and loss without reservation; very much as a



corporation accountant will audit income and outlay within the



affairs of the corporation, whereas, qua accountant, he will



perforce have nothing to say as to the ulterior expediency of the



corporation and its affairs in any other bearing.







                                I







    Business principles take effect in academic affairs most



simply, obviously and avowably in the way of a businesslike



administration of the scholastic routine; where they lead



immediately to a bureaucratic organization and a system of



scholastic accountancy. In one form or another, some such



administrative machinery is a necessity in any large school that



is to be managed on a centralized plan; as the American schools



commonly are, and as, more particularly, they aim to be. This



necessity is all the more urgent in a school that takes over the



discipline of a large body of pupils that have not reached years



of discretion, as is also commonly the case with those American



schools that claim rank as universities; and the necessity is all



the more evident to men whose ideal of efficiency is the



centralized control exercised through a system of accountancy in



the modern large business concerns. The larger American schools



are primarily undergraduate establishments, -- with negligible



exceptions; and under these current American conditions, of



excessive numbers, such a centralized and bureaucratic



administration appears to be indispensable for the adequate



control of immature and reluctant students; at the same time,



such an organization conduces to an excessive size. The immediate



and visible effect of such a large and centralized administrative



machinery is, on the whole, detrimental to scholarship, even in



the undergraduate work; though it need not be so in all respects



and unequivocally, so far as regards that routine training that



is embodied in the undergraduate curriculum. But it is at least a



necessary evil in any school that is of so considerable a size as



to preclude substantially all close or cordial personal relations



between the teachers and each of these immature pupils under



their charge, as, again, is commonly the case with these American



undergraduate establishments. Such a system of authoritative



control, standardization, gradation, accountancy, classification,



credits and penalties, will necessarily be drawn on stricter



lines the more the school takes on the character of a house of



correction or a penal settlement; in which the irresponsible



inmates are to be held to a round of distasteful tasks and



restrained from (conventionally) excessive irregularities of



conduct. At the same time this recourse to such coercive control



and standardization of tasks has unavoidably given the schools



something of the character of a penal settlement.



    As intimated above, the ideal of efficiency by force of which



a large-scale centralized organization commends itself in these



premises is that pattern of shrewd management whereby a large



business concern makes money. The underlying business-like



presumption accordingly appears to be that learning is a



merchantable commodity, to be Produced on a piece-rate plan,



rated, bought and sold by standard units, measured, counted and



reduced to staple equivalence by impersonal, mechanical tests. In



all its bearings the work is hereby reduced to a mechanistic,



statistical consistency, with numerical standards and units;



which conduces to perfunctory and mediocre wOrk throughout, and



acts to deter both students and teachers from a free pursuit of



knowledge, as contrasted with the pursuit of academic credits. So



far as this mechanistic system goes freely into effect it leads



to a substitution of salesmanlike proficiency -- a balancing of



bargains in staple credits -- in the place of scientific capacity



and addiction to study.



    The salesmanlike abilities and the men of affairs that so are



drawn into the academic personnel are, presumably, somewhat under



grade in their kind; since the pecuniary inducement offered by



the schools is rather low as compared with the remuneration for



office work of a similar character in the common run of business



occupations, and since businesslike employees of this kind may



fairly be presumed to go unreservedly to the highest bidder. Yet



these more unscholarly members of the staff will necessarily be



assigned the more responsible and discretionary positions in the



academic organization; since under such a scheme of



standardization, accountancy and control, the school becomes



primarily a bureaucratic organization, and the first and



unremitting duties of the staff are those of official management



and accountancy. The further qualifications requisite in the



members of the academic staff will be such as make for



vendibility, -- volubility, tactful effrontery, conspicuous



conformity to the popular taste in all matters of opinion, usage



and conventions.



    The need of such a businesslike organization asserts itself



in somewhat the same degree in which the academic policy is



guided by considerations of magnitude and statistical renown; and



this in turn is somewhat closely correlated with the extent of



discretionary power exercised by the captain of erudition placed



in control. At the same time, by provocation of the facilities



which it offers for making an impressive demonstration, such



bureaucratic organization will lead the university management to



bend its energies with somewhat more singleness to the parade of



magnitude and statistical gains. It also, and in the same



connection, provokes to a persistent and detailed surveillance



and direction of the work and manner of life of the academic



staff, and so it acts to shut off initiative of any kind in the



work done.(1*)



    Intimately bound up with this bureaucratic officialism and



accountancy, and working consistently to a similar outcome, is



the predilection for "practical efficiency" that is to say, for



pecuniary success -- prevalent in the American community.(2*)



This predilection is a matter of settled habit, due, no doubt, to



the fact that preoccupation with business interests characterizes



this community in an exceptional degree, and that pecuniary



habits of thought consequently rule popular thinking in a



peculiarly uncritical and prescriptive fashion. This pecuniary



animus falls in with and reinforces the movement for academic



accountancy, and combines with it to further a so-called



"practical" bias in all the work of the schools.



    It appears, then, that the intrusion of business principles



in the universities goes to weaken and retard the pursuit of



learning, and therefore to defeat the ends for which a university



is maintained. This result follows, primarily, from the



substitution of impersonal, mechanical relations, standards and



tests, in the place of personal conference, guidance and



association between teachers and students; as also from the



imposition of a mechanically standardized routine upon the



members of the staff, whereby any disinterested preoccupation



with scholarly or scientific inquiry is thrown into the



background and falls into abeyance. Few if any who are competent



to speak in these premises will question that such has been the



outcome. To offset against this work of mutilation and



retardation there are certain gains in expedition, and in the



volume of traffic that can be carried by any given equipment and



corps of employees. Particularly will there be a gain in the



statistical showing, both as regards the volume of instruction



offered, and probably also as regards the enrolment; since



accountancy creates statistics and its absence does not.



    Such increased enrolment as may be due to businesslike



management and methods is an increase of undergraduate enrolment.



The net effect as regards the graduate enrolment -- apart from



any vocational instruction that may euphemistically be scheduled



as "graduate" -- is in all probability rather a decrease than an



increase. Through indoctrination with utilitarian (pecuniary)



ideals of earning and spending, as well as by engendering



spendthrift and sportsmanlike habits, such a businesslike



management diverts the undergraduate students from going in for



the disinterested pursuit of knowledge, and so from entering on



what is properly university work; as witness the relatively



slight proportion of graduate students outside of the



professional schools -- who come up from the excessively large



undergraduate departments of the more expansive universities, as



contrasted with the number of those who come into university work



from the smaller and less businesslike colleges.



    The ulterior consequences that follow from such businesslike



standardization and bureaucratic efficiency are evident in the



current state of the public schools; especially as seen in the



larger towns, where the principles of business management have



had time and scope to work out in a fair degree of consistency.



The resulting abomination of desolation is sufficiently



notorious. And there appears to be no reason why a similarly



stale routine of futility should not overtake the universities,



and give similarly foolish results, as fast as the system of



standardization, accountancy and piece-work goes consistently



into effect, -- except only for the continued enforced employment



of a modicum of impracticable scholars and scientists on the



academic staff, whose unbusinesslike scholarly proclivities and



inability to keep the miner's-inch of scholastic credit always in



mind, must in some measure always defeat the perfect working of



standardization and accountancy.



    As might be expected, this rgime of graduated sterility has



already made fair headway in the undergraduate work, especially



in the larger undergraduate schools; and this in spite of any



efforts On the part of the administration to hedge against such



an outcome by recourse to an intricate system of electives and a



wide diversification of the standard units of erudition so



offered.



    In the graduate work the like effect is only less visible,



because the measures leading to it have come into bearing more



recently, and hitherto less unreservedly. But the like results



should follow here also, just so fast and so far as the same



range of business principles come to be worked into the texture



of the university organization in the same efficacious manner as



they have already taken effect in the public schools. And, pushed



on as it is by the progressive substitution of men imbued with



the tastes and habits of practical affairs, in the place of



unpractical scholarly ideals, the movement toward a perfunctory



routine of mediocrity should logically be expected to go forward



at a progressively accelerated rate. The visible drift of things



in this respect in the academic pursuit of the social sciences,



so-called, is an argument as to what may be hoped for in the



domain of academic science at large. It is only that the



executive is actuated by a sharper solicitude to keep the



academic establishment blameless of anything like innovation or



iconoclasm at this point; which reinforces the drift toward a



mechanistic routine and a curtailment of inquiry in this field;



it is not that these sciences that deal with the phenomena of



human life lend themselves more readily to mechanical description



and enumeration than the material sciences do, nor is their



subject matter intrinsically more inert or less provocative of



questions.







                                II







    Throughout the above summary review, as also through the



foregoing inquiry, the argument continually returns to or turns



about two main interests, -- notoriety and the academic



executive. These two might be called the two foci about which



swings the orbit of the university world. These conjugate foci



lie on a reasonably short axis; indeed, they tend to coincide; so



that the orbit comes near the perfection of a circle; having



virtually but a single centre, which may perhaps indifferently be



spoken of as the university's president or as its renown,



according as one may incline to conceive these matters in terms



of tangible fact or of intangible.



    The system of standardization and accountancy has this renown



or prestige as its chief ulterior purpose, -- the prestige of the



university or of its president, which largely comes to the same



net result. Particularly will this be true in so far as this



organization is designed to serve competitive ends; which are, in



academic affairs, chiefly the ends of notoriety, prestige,



advertising in all its branches and bearings. It is through



increased creditable notoriety that the universities seek their



competitive ends, and it is on such increase of notoriety,



accordingly, that the competitive endeavours of a businesslike



management are chiefly spent. It is in and through such accession



of renown, therefore, that the chief and most tangible gains due



to the injection of competitive business principles in the



academic policy should appear.



    Of course, this renown, as such, has no substantial value to



the corporation of learning; nor, indeed, to any one but the



university executive by whose management it is achieved. Taken



simply in its first incidence, as prestige or notoriety, it



conduces in no degree to the pursuit of knowledge; but in its



ulterior consequences, it appears currently to be believed, at



least ostensibly, that such notoriety must greatly enhance the



powers of the corporation of learning. These ulterior



consequences are (believed to be), a growth in the material



resources and the volume of traffic.



    Such good effects as may follow from a sedulous attention to



creditable publicity, therefore, are the chief gains to be set



off against the mischief incident to "scientific management" in



academic affairs. Hence any line of inquiry into the business



management of the universities continually leads back to the



cares of publicity, with what might to an outsider seem undue



insistence. The reason is that the businesslike management and



arrangements in question are habitually -- and primarily required



either to serve the ends of this competitive campaign of



publicity or to conform to its schedule of expediency. The felt



need of notoriety and prestige has a main share in shaping the



work and bearing of the university at every point. Whatever will



not serve this end of prestige has no secure footing in current



university policy. The margin of tolerance on this head is quite



narrow; and it is apparently growing incontinently narrower.



    So far as any university administration can, with the



requisite dignity, permit itself to avow a pursuit of notoriety,



the gain that is avowedly sought by its means is an increase of



funds, -- more or less ingenuously spoken of as an increase of



equipment. An increased enrolment of students will be no less



eagerly sought after, but the received canons of academic decency



require this object to be kept even more discreetly masked than



the quest of funds.



    The duties of publicity are large and arduous, and the



expenditures incurred in this behalf are similarly considerable.



So that it is not unusual to find a Publicity Bureau -- often



apologetically masquerading under a less tell-tale name --



incorporated in the university organization to further this



enterprise in reputable notoriety. Not only must a creditable



publicity be provided for, as one of the running cares of the



administration, but every feature of academic life, and of the



life of all members of the academic staff, must unremittingly



(though of course unavowedly) be held under surveillance at every



turn, with a view to furthering whatever may yield a reputable



notoriety, and to correcting or eliminating whatever may be



conceived to have a doubtful or untoward bearing in this respect.



    This surveillance of appearances, and of the means of



propagating appearances, is perhaps the most exacting detail of



duty incumbent on an enterprising executive. Without such a



painstaking cultivation of a reputable notoriety, it is believed,



a due share of funds could not be procured by any university for



the prosecution of its work as a seminary of the higher learning.



Its more alert and unabashed rivals, it is presumed, would in



that case be able to divert the flow of loose funds to their own



use, and would so outstrip their dilatory competitor in the race



for size and popular acclaim, and therefore, it is sought to be



believed, in scientific and scholarly application.



    In the absence of all reflection -- not an uncommon frame of



mind in this connection -- one might be tempted to think that all



this academic enterprise of notoriety and conciliation should add



something appreciable to the aggregate of funds placed at the



disposal of the universities; and that each of these competitive



advertising concerns should so gain something appreciable,



without thereby cutting into the supply of funds available for



the rest. But such is probably not the outcome, to any



appreciable extent; assuredly not apart from the case of the



state universities that are dependent on the favour of local



politicians, and perhaps apart from gifts for conspicuous



buildings.



    With whatever (slight) reservation may be due, publicity in



university management is of substantially the same nature and



effect as advertising in other competitive business; and with



such reservation as may be called for in the case of other



advertising, it is an engine of competition, and has no aggregate



effect. As is true of competitive gains in business at large, so



also these differential gains of the several university



corporations can not be added together to make an aggregate. They



are differential gains in the main, of the same nature as the



gains achieved in any other game of skill and effrontery. The



gross aggregate funds contributed to university uses from all



sources would in all probability be nearly as large in the



absence of such competitive notoriety and conformity. Indeed, it



should seem likely that such donors as are gifted with sufficient



sense of the value of science and scholarship to find it worth



while to sink any part of their capital in that behalf would be



somewhat deterred by the spectacle of competitive waste and



futile clamour presented by this academic enterprise; so that the



outcome might as well be a diminution of the gross aggregate of



donations and allowances. But such an argument doubtless runs on



very precarious grounds; it is by no means evident that these



munificent patrons of learning habitually distinguish between



scholarship and publicity. But in any case it is quite safe to



presume that to the cause of learning at large, and therefore to



the community in respect of its interest in the advancement of



learning, no appreciable net gain accrues from this competitive



publicity of the seats of learning.



    In some slight, or doubtful, degree this competitive



publicity, including academic pageants, genteel solemnities, and



the like, may conceivably augment the gross aggregate means



placed at the disposal of the universities, by persuasively



keeping the well-meaning men of wealth constantly in mind of the



university's need of additional funds, as well as of the fact



that such gifts will not be allowed to escape due public notice.



But the aggregate increase of funds due to these endeavours is



doubtless not large enough to offset the aggregate expenditure on



notoriety. Taken as a whole, and counting in all the wide-ranging



expenditure entailed by this enterprise in notoriety and the



maintenance of academic prestige, university publicity doubtless



costs appreciably more than it brings. So far as it succeeds in



its purpose, its chief effect is to divert the flow of funds from



one to another of the rival establishments. In the aggregate this



expedient for procuring means for the advancement of learning



doubtless results in an appreciable net loss.



    The net loss, indeed, is always much more considerable than



would be indicated by any statistical showing; for this academic



enterprise involves an extensive and almost wholly wasteful



duplication of equipment, personnel and output of instruction, as



between the rival seats of learning, at the same time that it



also involves an excessively parsimonious provision for actual



scholastic work, as contrasted with publicity; so also it



involves the overloading of each rival corps of instructors with



a heterogeneous schedule of courses, beyond what would conduce to



their best efficiency as teachers. This competitive parcelment,



duplication and surreptitious thrift, due to a businesslike



rivalry between the several schools, is perhaps the gravest



drawback to the American university situation.



    It should be added that no aggregate gain for scholarship



comes of diverting any given student from one school to another



duplicate establishment by specious offers of a differential



advantage; particularly when, as frequently happens, the



differential inducement takes the form of the extra-scholastic



amenities spoken of in an earlier chapter, or the greater alleged



prestige of one school as against another, or, as also happens, a



surreptitiously greater facility for achieving a given academic



degree.



    In all its multifarious ways and means, university



advertising carried beyond the modicum that would serve a due



"publicity of accounts" as regards the work to be done,



accomplishes no useful aggregate result. And, as is true of



advertising in other competitive business, current university



publicity is not an effective means of spreading reliable



information; nor is it designed for that end. Here as elsewhere,



to meet the requirements of competitive enterprise, advertising



must somewhat exceed the point of maximum veracity.



    In no field of human endeavour is competitive notoriety and a



painstaking conformity to extraneous standards of living and of



conduct so gratuitous a burden, since learning is in no degree a



competitive enterprise; and all mandatory observance of the



conventions -- pecuniary or other -- is necessarily a drag on the



pursuit of knowledge. In ordinary competitive business, as, e.g.,



merchandising, advertisement is a means of competitive selling,



and is justified by the increased profits that come to the



successful advertiser from the increased traffic; and on the like



grounds a painstaking conformity to conventional usage, in



appearances and expenditure, is there wisely cultivated with the



same end in view. In the affairs of science and scholarship,



simply as such and apart from the personal ambitions of the



university's executive, there is nothing that corresponds to this



increased traffic or these competitive profits,(3*) -- nor will



the discretionary officials avow that such increased traffic is



the purpose of academic publicity. Indeed, an increased enrolment



of students yields no increased net income, nor is the



corporation of learning engaged (avowedly, at least) in an



enterprise that looks to a net income. At the same time, such



increased enrolment as comes of this competitive salesmanship



among the universities is made up almost wholly of wasters,



accessions from the genteel and sporting classes, who seek the



university as a means of respectability and dissipation, and who



serve the advancement of the higher learning only as fire, flood



and pestilence serve the needs of the husbandman.



    Competitive publicity, therefore, and its maid-servant



conventional observance, would appear in all this order of things



to have no serious motive, or at least none that can freely be



avowed; as witness the unwillingness of any university



administration formally to avow that it seeks publicity or



expends the corporate funds in competitive advertising. So that



on its face this whole academic traffic in publicity and genteel



conventionalities appears to be little else than a boyish



imitation of the ways and means employed, with shrewd purpose, in



business enterprise that has no analog with the pursuit of



knowledge. But the aggregate yearly expenditure of the



universities on this competitive academic publicity runs well up



into the millions, and it involves also an extensive diversion of



the energies of the general body of academic men to these



purposes of creditable notoriety; and such an expenditure of



means and activities is not lightly to be dismissed as an



unadvised play of businesslike fancy on the part of the



university authorities.



    Unquestionably, an unreflecting imitation of methods that



have been found good in retail merchandising counts for something



in the case, perhaps for much; for the academic executives under



whose surveillance this singularly futile traffic is carried on



are commonly men of commonplace intelligence and aspiration,



bound by the commonplace habits of workday intercourse in a



business community. The histrionic afflatus is also by no means



wanting in current university management, and when coupled with



commonplace ideals in the dramatic art its outcome will



necessarily be a tawdry, spectacular pageantry and a straining



after showy magnitude. There is also the lower motive of



unreflecting clannishness on the part of the several university



establishments. This counts for something, perhaps for more than



one could gracefully admit. It stands out perhaps most baldly in



the sentimental rivalry -- somewhat factitious, it is true --



shown at intercollegiate games and similar occasions of invidious



comparison between the different schools. It is, of course,



gratifying to the clannish conceit of any college man to be able



to hold up convincing statistical exhibits showing the greater



glory of "his own" university, whether in athletics, enrolment,



alumni, material equipment, or schedules of instruction; whether



he be an official, student, alumnus, or member of the academic



staff; and all this array and circumstance will appeal to him the



more unreservedly in proportion as he is gifted with a more



vulgar sportsmanlike bent and is unmoved by any dispassionate



interest in matters of science or scholarship; and in proportion,



also, as his habitual outlook is that of the commonplace man of



affairs. In the uncritical eyes of the commonplace men of



affairs, whose experience in business has trained them into a



quasi-tropismatic approval of notoriety as a means of



advertising, these puerile demonstrations will, of course, have a



high value simply in their own right. Sentimental chauvinism of



this kind is a good and efficient motive to emulative enterprise,



as far as it goes, but even when backed with the directorate's



proclivity to businesslike make-believe, it can, after all,



scarcely be made to cover the whole voluminous traffic that must



on any consistent view go in under the head of competitive



publicity.











                            III







    The abiding incentives to this traffic in publicity and



genteel observance must be sought elsewhere than in the boyish



emotions of rivalry and clanish elation that animates the



academic staff, or even in the histrionic interest which the



members of the staff or the directorate may have in the prestige



of their own establishment. The staff, indeed, are not in any



sensible degree accountable for this pursuit of prestige, since



they have but little discretion in these matters; in substance,



the government of a competitive university is necessarily of an



autocratic character, whatever plausible forms of collective



action and advisement it may be found expedient to observe. The



seat of discretion is in the directorate; though many details of



administration may be left to the deliberations of the staff, so



long as these details do not impinge on the directorate's scheme



of policy. The impulse and initiative to this enterprise in



publicity, as well as the surveillance and guidance in the



matter, radiates from this centre, and it is here, presumably,



that the incentives to such enterprise are immediately felt. The



immediate discretion in the conduct of these matters rests in the



hands of the directive academic head, with the aid and advice of



his circle of personal counsellors, and with the backing of the



governing board.



    The incentives that decide the policy of publicity and guide



its execution must accordingly be such as will appeal directly to



the sensibilities of the academic head and of the members of the



governing board; and this applies not only as regards the traffic



in publicity by print and public spectacles, but also as regards



the diversion of the corporation of learning to utilitarian ends,



and as regards the traffic in conventional observances and



conformity to popular opinion. What these incentives may be, that



so appeal to the authorities in discretion, and that move them to



divert the universities from the pursuit of knowledge, is not



altogether easy to say; more particularly it is not easy to find



an explanation that shall take account of the facts and yet



reflect no discredit on the intelligence or the good faith of



these discretionary authorities.



    The motives that actuate the members of the governing boards



are perhaps less obscure than those which determine the conduct



of the academic executive. The governing boards are, in effect,



made up of businessmen, who do not habitually look beyond the



"practical" interest of commercial gain and the commonplaces of



commercial routine and political bravado. It is (should be)



otherwise with the academic management, who are, by tradition,



presumed to be animated with scholarly ideals, and whose avowed



ulterior motive is in all cases the single-minded furtherance of



the cause of learning.



    On its face it should not seem probable that motives of



personal gain, in the form of pecuniary or other material



interest, would have a serious part in the matter. In all



probability there is in no case a sensible pecuniary gain to the



university as such from its expenditures on publicity, and there



is still less question of gain in any other than the pecuniary



respect. There is also commonly no very substantial pecuniary



gain to be derived from this business either by the academic head



or by the members of the board, -- an exceptional instance to the



contrary will not vitiate this general proposition. It all brings



no appreciable pecuniary return to them, particularly so far as



it is concerned with the pursuit of prestige; and apart from



exceptional, and therefore negligible, cases it admits of no



appreciable conversion of funds to private use. At the same time



it seems almost an affront to entertain the notion that these



impassively purposeful men of affairs are greatly moved by



personal motives of vanity, vaingloriously seeking renown for



efficiently carrying on a traffic in publicity that has no other



end than renown for efficiently carrying it on. And yet it will



be found extremely difficult to take account of the facts and at



the same time avoid such an odiously personal interpretation of



them.



    Such, indeed, would have to be the inference drawn by any one



who might ingenuously take the available facts at their face



value, -- not counting as facts the dutiful protestations of the



authorities to the contrary. But it should be kept in mind that a



transparent ingenuousness is not characteristic of business



phenomena, within the university or without. A degree of



deviation, or "diplomacy," may be forced on the academic



management by the circumstances of their office, particularly by



the one-eyed business sense of their governing boards. Indeed,



admissions to such an effect are not altogether wanting.



    Rated as they are, in the popular apprehension, as gentlemen



and scholars, and themselves presumably accepting this rating as



substantially correct, no feature of the scheme of management



imposed on the academic executive by business principles should



(presumably) be so repugnant to their sensibilities and their



scholarly judgment as this covert but unremitting pursuit of an



innocuous notoriety, coupled as it necessarily is with a



systematic misdirection of the academic forces to unscholarly



ends; but prudential reasons will decide that this must be their



chief endeavour if they are to hold their own as a competitive



university. Should the academic head allow his sense of scholarly



fitness and expediency to hamper this business of reputable



notoriety, it is, perhaps with reason, feared that such



remissness would presently lead to his retirement from office; at



least something of that kind seems a fair inference from the run



of the facts. His place would then be supplied by an incumbent



duly qualified on this score of one-eyed business sagacity, and



one who would know how to keep his scholarly impulses in hand. It



is at least conceivable that the apprehension of some such



contingency may underlie current university management at some



points, and it may there fore in some instances have given the



administration of academic affairs an air of light-headed



futility, when it should rather be credited with a sagaciously



disingenuous yielding to circumstance.



    The run of the facts as outlined above, and the line of



inference just indicated as following from them, reflect no great



credit on the manly qualities of the incumbents of executive



office; but the alternative, as also noted above, is scarcely



preferable even in that respect, while it would be even less



flattering to their intellectual powers. Yet there appears to be



no avoiding the dilemma so presented. Of disinterested grounds



for the common run of academic policy there seem to be only these



two lines to choose between: -- either a short-sighted and



headlong conformity to the vulgar prejudice that does not look



beyond "practical" training and competitive expansion, coupled



with a boyish craving for popular display; or a strategic



compromise with the elders of the Philistines, a futile doing of



evil in the hope that some good may come of it.



    This latter line of apology is admissible only in those cases



where the university corporation is in an exceptionally



precarious position in respect of its endowment, where it is in



great need and has much to hope for in the way of pecuniary gain



through stooping to conventional prejudices, that are of no



scholastic value, but that are conceived to bind its potential



benefactors in a web of fatally fragile bigotry; or, again, where



the executive is in sensible danger of being superseded by an



administration imbued with (conceivably) yet lower and feebler



scholarly ideals.



    Now, it happens that there are notable instances of



universities where such a policy of obsequiously reputable



notoriety and aimless utilitarian management is pursued under



such circumstances of settled endowment and secure tenure as to



preclude all hazard of supersession on the part of the executive



and all chance of material gain from any accession of popular



renown or stagnant respectability. There is a small class of



American university corporations that are so placed, by the



peculiar circumstances of their endowment, as to be above the



apprehension of need, so long as they are content to live



anywhere nearly within the domain of learning; at the same time



that they have nothing to lose through alienating the affections



of the vulgar, and nothing to gain by deferring to the



sentimental infirmities of elderly well-to-do persons. This class



is not a numerous one; not large enough to set the pace for the



rest; but evidently also not numerous enough to go on their own



recognizances, and adopt a line of policy suited to their own



circumstances and not bound to the fashion set by the rest. Some



of the well known establishments of this class have already been



alluded to in another connection.



    Statistical display, spectacular stage properties,



vainglorious make-believe and obsequious concessions to worldly



wisdom, should seem to have no place in the counsels of these



schools; which should therefore hopefully be counted on to pursue



the quest of knowledge with that single mind which they profess.



Yet such is eminently, not to say pre-eminently, not the case.



Their policy in these matters commonly differs in no sensible



degree from that pursued by the needier establishments that are



engaged in a desperate race of obsequiousness, for funds to be



procured by favour of well-to-do donors, or through the support



of worldly-wise clergymen and politicians. Indeed, some of the



most pathetic clamour for popular renown, as well as instances of



the most profligate stooping to vulgar prejudice, are to be



credited to establishments of this, potentially independent,



class. The management, apparently, are too well imbued with the



commonplace preconceptions of worldly wisdom afloat among the



laity, to admit of their taking any action on their own



deliberate initiative or effectually taking thought of that



pursuit of learning that has been entrusted to their care. So,



perhaps through some puzzleheaded sense of decorum, they have



come to engage in this bootless conventional race for funds which



they have no slightest thought of obtaining, and for an increased



enrolment which they advisedly do not desire.



    In the light of these instances, one is constrained to



believe that the academic executive who has so been thrown up as



putative director of the pursuit of learning must go in for this



annexation of vocational schools, for amateurish "summer



sessions," for the appointment of schoolmasters instead of



scholars on the academic staff, for the safe-keeping and



propagation of genteel conventionalities at the cost of



scholarship, for devout and polite ceremonial, -- one is



constrained to believe that such a university executive goes in



for this policy of tawdry routine because he lacks ordinary



intelligence or because he lacks ordinary courage. His discretion



is overborne either by his own store of unreflecting prejudice,



or by fear of losing. personal prestige among the ignorant, even



though he has no substantial ground, personal or official, for so



yielding to current prejudice. Such appears to be the state of



the case in these instances, where the exigencies of university



politics afford no occasion for strategic compromise with the



worldly-wise; which pointedly suggests that the like threadbare



motives of unreflecting imitation and boyish make-believe may



also have unduly much to do with academic policy, even in that



common run of cases that might otherwise have best been explained



as an effect of shrewd strategy, designed to make terms with the



mischievous stupidity of an underbred laity.







    But any discussion of motives necessarily has an invidious



air, and so can not but be distasteful. Yet, since this executive



policy can be explained or understood only as the outcome of



those motives that appeal decisively to the discretionary



officials, it is necessary to pursue the inquiry a degree farther



at this point, even at the cost of such slight odium as may not



be avoided, and at the risk of a certain appearance of dispraise.



It is perhaps needless to say that this question of motivation is



not gone into here except as it may serve to exhibit the run of



the facts. The run of the facts is not intelligible except in the



light of their meaning as possible motives to the pursuit of that



policy of which they are the outcome.



    On the above considerations, it follows that the executive



heads of these competitive universities are a picked body of men,



endowed with a particular bent, such as will dispose them to be



guided by the run of motives indicated. This will imply that they



are, either by training or by native gift, men of a somewhat



peculiar frame of mind, -- peculiarly open to the appeal of



parade and ephemeral celebrity, and peculiarly facile in the



choice of means by which to achieve these gaudy distinctions;



peculiarly solicitous of appearances, and peculiarly heedless of



the substance of their performance. It is not that this



characterization would imply exceptionally great gifts, or



otherwise notable traits of character; they are little else than



an accentuation of the more commonplace frailties of commonplace



men. As a side light on this spiritual complexion of the typical



academic executive, it may be worth noting that much the same



characterization will apply without abatement to the class of



professional politicians, particularly to that large and



long-lived class of minor politicians who make a living by



keeping well in the public eye and avoiding blame.(4*)



    There is, indeed more than a superficial or accidental



resemblance between the typical academic executive and the



professional politician of the familiar and more vacant sort,



both as regards the qualifications requisite for entering on this



career and as regards the conditions of tenure. Among the genial



make-believe that goes to dignify the executive office is a



dutiful protest, indeed, a somewhat clamorous protest, of



conspicuous self-effacement on the part of the incumbent, to the



effect that the responsibilities of office have come upon him



unsought, if not unawares; which is related to the facts in much



the same manner and degree as the like holds true for the



manoeuvres of those wise politicians that "heed the call of duty"



and so find themselves "in the hands of their friends." In point



of fact, here as in political office-seeking, the most active



factor that goes to decide the selection of the eventual



incumbents of office is a tenacious and aggressive



self-selection. With due, but by no means large, allowance for



exceptions, the incumbents are chosen from among a self-selected



body of candidates, each of whom has, in the common run of cases,



been resolutely in pursuit of such an office for some appreciable



time, and has spent much time and endeavour on fitting himself



for its duties. Commonly it is only after the aspirant has



achieved a settled reputation for eligibility and a predilection



for the office that he will finally secure an appointment. The



number of aspirants, and of eligibles, considerably exceeds the



number of such executive offices, very much as is true for the



parallel case of aspirants for political office.



    As to the qualifications, in point of character and



attainments, that so go to make eligibility for the executive



office, it is necessary to recall what has been said in an



earlier chapter(5*) on the characteristics of those boards of



control with whom rests the choice in these matters of



appointment. These boards are made up of well-to-do businessmen,



with a penchant for popular notability. and the qualifications



necessary to be put in evidence by aspirants for executive office



are such as will convince such a board of their serviceability.



Among the indispensable general qualifications, therefore, will



be a "businesslike" facility in the management of affairs, an



engaging address and fluent command of language before a popular



audience, and what is called "optimism," -- a serene and voluble



loyalty to the current conventionalities and a conspicuously



profound conviction that all things are working out for good,



except for such untoward details as do not visibly conduce to the



vested advantage of the well-to-do businessmen under the



established law and order. To secure an appointment to executive



office it is not only necessary to be possessed of these



qualifications, and contrive to put them in evidence; the



aspirant must ordinarily also, to use a colloquialism, be willing



and able to "work his passage" by adroit negotiation and detail



engagements on points of policy, appointments and administration.



    The greater proportion of such aspirants for executive office



work their apprenticeship and manage their campaign of



office-seeking while engaged in some university employment. To



this end the most likely line of university employment is such as



will comprise a large share of administrative duties, as, e.g.,



the deanships that are latterly receiving much attention in this



behalf; while of the work of instruction the preference should be



given to such undergraduate class-work as will bring the aspirant



in wide contact with the less scholarly element of the student



body, and with those "student activities" that come favourably



under public observation; and more particularly should one go in



for the quasi-scholarly pursuits of "university extension"; which



will bring the candidate into favourable notice among the



quasi-literate leisure class; at the same time this employment



conduces greatly to assurance and a flow of popular speech.



    It is by no means here intended to convey the assumption that



appointments to executive office are currently made exclusively



from among aspiring candidates answering the description outlined



above, or that the administrative deanships that currently abound



in the universities are uniformly looked on by their incumbents



as in some sort a hopeful novitiate to the presidential dignity.



The exceptions under both of these general propositions would be



too numerous to be set aside as negligible, although scarcely



numerous enough or consequential enough entirely to vitiate these



propositions as a competent formulation of the typical line of



approach to the coveted office. The larger and more substantial



exception would, of course, be taken to the generalization as



touching the use of the deanships in preparation for the



presidency.



    The course of training and publicity afforded by the



deanships and extension lectures appears to be the most



promising, although it is not the only line of approach. So,



e.g., as has been remarked in an earlier passage, the exigencies



of academic administration will ordinarily lead to the formation



of an unofficially organized corps of counsellors and agents or



lieutenants, who serve as aids to the executive head. While these



aids, factors, and gentlemen-in-waiting are vested with no



official status proclaiming their relation to the executive



office or their share in its administration, it goes without



saying that their vicarious discretion and their special



prerogatives of access and advisement with the executive head do



not commonly remain hidden from their colleagues on the academic



staff, or from interested persons outside the university



corporation; nor, indeed, does it appear that they commonly



desire to remain unknown.



    In the same connection, as has also been remarked above, and



as is sufficiently notorious, among the large and imperative



duties of executive office is public discourse. This is required,



both as a measure of publicity at large and as a means of



divulging the ostensible aims, advantages and peculiar merits of



the given university and its chief. The volume of such public



discourse, as well as the incident attendance at many public and



ceremonial functions, is very considerable; so much so that in



the case of any university of reasonable size and spirit the



traffic in these premises is likely to exceed the powers of any



one man, even where, as is not infrequently the case, the



"executive" head is presently led to make this business of



stately parade and promulgation his chief employment. In effect,



much of this traffic will necessarily be delegated to such



representatives of the chief as may be trusted duly to observe



its spirit and intention; and the indicated bearers of these



vicarious dignities and responsibilities will necessarily be the



personal aids and counsellors of the chief; which throws them,



again, into public notice in a most propitious fashion.



    So also, by force of the same exigencies of parade and



discourse, the chief executive is frequently called away from



home on a more or less extended itinerary; and the burden of



dignity attached to the thief office is such as to require that



its ostensible duties be delegated to some competent lieutenant



during these extensive absences of the chief; and here, again,



this temporary discretion and dignity will most wisely and



fittingly be delegated to some member of the corps of personal



aids who stands in peculiarly close relations of sympathy and



usefulness to the chief. It has happened more than once that such



an habitual "acting head" has come in for the succession to the



executive office.



    It comes, therefore, to something like a general rule, that



the discipline which makes the typical captain of erudition, as



he is seen in the administration of executive office, will have



set in before his induction into office, not infrequently at an



appreciable interval before that event, and involving a



consequent, more or less protracted, term of novitiate, probation



and preliminary seasoning; and the aspirants so subjected to this



discipline of initiation are at the same time picked men, drawn



into the running chiefly by force of a facile conformity and a



self-selective predisposition for this official dignity.



    The resulting captain of erudition then falls under a certain



exacting discipline exercised by the situation in which the



exigencies of office place him. These exigencies are of divers



origin, and are systematically at variance among themselves. So



that the dominant note of his official life necessarily becomes



that of ambiguity. By tradition, -- indeed, by that tradition to



which the presidential office owes its existence, and except by



force of which there would apparently be no call to institute



SuCh an office at all, -- by tradition the president of the



university is the senior member of the faculty, its confidential



spokesman in official and corporate concerns, and the "moderator"



of its town meeting like deliberative assemblies. As chairman of



its meetings he is, by tradition, presumed to exercise no



peculiar control, beyond such guidance as the superior experience



of the senior member may be presumed to afford his colleagues. As



spokesman for the faculty he is, by tradition, presumed to be a



scholar of such erudition, breadth and maturity as may fairly



command something of filial respect and affection from his



associates in the corporation of learning; and it is by virtue of



these qualities of scholarly wisdom, which give him his place as



senior member of a corporation of scholars, that he is, by



tradition, competent to serve as their spokesman and to occupy



the chair in their deliberative assembly.



    Such is the tradition of the American College President, --



and, in so far, of the university president, -- as it comes down



from that earlier phase of academic history from which the office



derives its ostensible character, and to which it owes its hold



on life under the circumstances of the later growth of the



schools. And it will be noted that this office is distinctly



American; it has no counterpart elsewhere, and there appears to



be no felt need of such an office in other countries, where no



similar tradition of a college president has created a



presumptive need of a similar official in the universities, --



the reason being evidently that these universities in other lands



have not, in the typical case, grown out of an underlying



college.



    In the sentimental apprehension of the laity out of doors,



and in a degree even in the unreflecting esteem of men within the



academic precincts, the presidential office still carries



something of this traditionally preconceived scholarly character;



and it is this still surviving traditional preconception, which



confuses induction into the office with scholarly fitness for its



dignities, that still makes the office of the academic executive



available for those purposes of expansive publicity and



businesslike management that it has been made to serve. Except



for this uncritical esteem of the office and its incumbency, so



surviving out of an inglorious past, no great prestige could



attach to that traffic in spectacular solemnities, edifying



discourse and misdirected business control, that makes up the



substantial duties of the office as now conducted. It is



therefore of the utmost moment to keep up, or rather to magnify,



that appearance of scholarly competence and of intimate



solidarity with the corporation of learning that gives the



presidential office this prestige value. But since it is only for



purposes external, not to say extraneous, to the corporation of



learning that this prestige value is seriously worth while, it is



also only toward the outside that the make-believe of



presidential erudition and scholarly ideals need seriously be



kept up. For the common run of the incumbents today to pose



before their faculties as in any eminent degree conversant with



the run of contemporary science or scholarship, or as rising to



the average even of their own faculties in this respect, would be



as bootless as it is uncalled for. But the faculties, as is well



enough understood, need of course entertain no respect for their



executive head as a citizen of the republic of learning, so long



as they at all adequately appreciate his discretionary power of



use and abuse, as touches them and their fortunes and all the



ways, means and opportunities of academic work. By tradition, and



in the genial legendary lore that colours the proceedings of the



faculty-meeting, he is still the senior member of an assemblage



of scholarly gentlemen; but in point of executive fact he is



their employer, who does business with and by them on a



commercial footing. To the faculty, the presidential office is a



business proposition, and its incumbent is chiefly an object of



circumspection, to whom they owe a "hired-man's loyalty."



    It is toward the outside, in the face of the laity out of



doors, that the high fence -- "the eight-fold fence" -- of



scholarly pretension is to be kept up. Hence the indicated means



of its up-keep are such as will presumably hold the (transient)



respect and affection of this laity,quasi-scholarly homiletical



discourse, frequent, voluminous, edifying and optimistic;



ritualistic solemnities, diverting and vacant; spectacular



affectations of (counterfeit) scholastic usage in the way of



droll vestments, bizarre and archaic; parade of (make-believe)



gentility; encouragement and (surreptitious) subvention of



athletic contests; promulgation of (presumably ingenuous)



statistics touching the volume and character of the work done.



    It is only by keeping up these manifestations toward the



outside, and making them good in the esteem of the unlearned,



that the presidential office can be made to serve the ends of the



board of control and the ambitions of the incumbent; and this



large apparatus and traffic of make-believe, therefore, is the



first and most unremitting object of executive solicitude. It is



the "place whereon to stand" while moving the academic universe.



The uses to be made of the standing-place so achieved have



already been set out in some detail in earlier chapters. They



centre about three main considerations: Visible magnitude,



bureaucratic organization, and vocational training.







    As already noted in earlier passages, the boards of control



are bodies of businessmen in whose apprehension the methods



successfully employed in competitive business are suitable for



all purposes of administration; from which follows that the



academic head who is to serve as their general manager is vested,



in effect, with such discretionary powers as currently devolve on



the discretionary officials of business corporations; from which



follows, among other things, that the members of the faculty come



to take rank as employees of the concern, hired by and



responsible to the academic head.



    The first executive duty of the incumbent of office,



therefore, is to keep his faculty under control, so as to be able



unhampered to carry out the policy of magnitude and



secularization with a view to which the governing board has



invested him with his powers. This work of putting the faculty in



its place has by this time been carried out with sufficient



effect, so that its "advice and consent" may in all cases be



taken as a matter of course; and should a remnant of initiative



and scholarly aspiration show itself in any given concrete case



in such a way as to traverse the lines of policy pursued by the



executive, he can readily correct the difficulty by exercise of a



virtually plenary power of appointment, preferment and removal,



backed as this power is by a nearly indefeasible black-list. So



well is the academic black-list understood, indeed, and so



sensitive and trustworthy is the fearsome loyalty of the common



run among academic men, that very few among them will venture



openly to say a good word for any one of their colleagues who may



have fallen under the displeasure of some incumbent of executive



office. This work of intimidation and subornation may fairly be



said to have acquired the force of an institution, and to need no



current surveillance or effort.(6*)



    The subservience of the faculty, or of a working majority,



may safely be counted on. But the forms of advisement and



responsibility are still necessary to be observed; the president



is still, by tradition, the senior member of the faculty, and its



confidential spokesman. From which follows a certain, at least



pro forma, disingenuousness in the executive's coercive control



of academic policy, whereby the ostensible discretion and



responsibility comes to rest on the faculty, while the control



remains with the executive. But, after all, this particular run



of ambiguity and evasions has reached such settled forms and is



so well understood that it no longer implies an appreciable



strain on the executive's veracity or on his diplomatic skill. It



belongs under the category of legal fiction, rather than that of



effectual prevarication.



    So also as regards the businesslike, or bureaucratic,



organization and control of the administrative machinery, and its



utilization for vocational ends and statistical showing. All that



has been worked out in its general features, and calls, in any



concrete case, for nothing much beyond an adaptation of general



practices to the detail requirements of the special case. It



devolves, properly, on the clerical force, and especially on



those chiefs of clerical bureau called "deans," together with the



many committees-for-the-sifting-of-sawdust into which the faculty



of a well-administered university is organized. These committees



being, in effect if not in intention, designed chiefly to keep



the faculty talking while the bureaucratic machine goes on its



way under the guidance of the executive and his personal



counsellors and lieutenants. These matters, then, are also well



understood, standardized, and accepted, and no longer require a



vigilant personal surveillance from the side of the executive.



    As is well and seemly for any head of a great concern, these



matters of routine and current circumlocution are presently



delegated to the oversight of trusted subalterns, in a manner



analogous to the delegation of the somewhat parallel duties of



the caretakers of the material equipment. Both of these



hierarchical corps of subordinates are in a somewhat similar



case, in that their duties are of a mechanically standardized



nature, and in that it is incumbent on both alike to deal in a



dispassionate, not to say impersonal, way each with the



particular segment of apparatus and process entrusted to his



care; as is right and good for any official entrusted with given



details of bureaucratic routine.



    The exacting duties that remain personally incumbent on the



academic executive, and claiming his ordinary and continued



attention, therefore, are those of his own official prestige on



the one hand, and the selection, preferment, rejection and



proscription of members of the academic staff. These two lines of



executive duty are closely correlated; not only in that the staff



is necessarily to be selected with a view to their furthering the



prestige of their chief and his university, but also in that the



executive's experience in the course of this enterprise in



publicity goes far to shape his ideals of scholarly endeavour and



to establish his standards of expediency and efficiency in the



affairs of learning.



    By usage, guided, no doubt, by a shrewd sense of expediency



in the choice of means, it has, in the typical case, come to be



the settled policy of these incumbents of executive office to



seek the competitively requisite measure of public prestige



chiefly by way of public oratory. Now and again his academic



rank, backed by the slow-dying tradition that his office should



be filled by a man of scholarly capacity, will bring the



incumbent before some scientific body or other; where he commonly



avoids offence. But, as has been remarked above, it is the laity



that is to be impressed and kept propitiously in mind of the



executive and his establishment, and it is therefore the laity



that is to be conciliated with presidential addresses; it is also



to the laity that the typical academic executive is competent to



speak without stultification. Hence the many edifying addresses



before popular audiences, at commencements, inaugurations,



dedications, club meetings, church festivals, and the like. So



that an executive who aspires to do his whole duty in these



premises will become in some sort an itinerant dispensary of



salutary verbiage; and university presidents have so come to be



conventionally indispensable for the effusion of graceful speech



at all gatherings of the well-to-do for convivial deliberation on



the state of mankind at large.(7*)



   Throughout this elocutionary enterprise there runs the



rigorous prescription that the speaker must avoid offence, that



his utterances must be of a salutary order, since the purpose of



it all is such conciliation of goodwill as will procure at least



the passive good offices of those who are reached by the



presidential run of language. But, by and large, it is only



platitudes and racy anecdotes that may be counted on to estrange



none of the audiences before which it is worth while for the



captains of erudition to make their plea for sanity and renown.



Hence the peculiarly, not to say exuberantly, inane character of



this branch of oratory, coupled with an indefatigable optimism



and good-nature. This outcome is due neither to a lack of



application nor of reflection on the part of the speakers; it is,



indeed, a finished product of the homiletical art and makes up



something of a class of its own among the artistic achievements



of the race. At the same time it is a means to an end.(8*)







    However, the clay sticks to the sculptor's thumb, as the



meal-dust powders the miller's hair and the cobbler carries



sensible traces of the pitch that goes into his day's work, and



as the able-bodied seaman "walks with a rolling gait." So also



the university executive, who by pressure of competitive



enterprise comes to be all things to all audiences, will come



also to take on the colour of his own philandropic



pronouncements; to believe, more or less conveniently, in his own



blameless utterances. They necessarily commit him to a pro forma



observance of their tenor; they may, of course, be desired as



perfunctory conciliation, simply, but in carrying conviction to



the audience the speaker's eloquence unavoidably bends his own



convictions in some degree. And not only does the temper of the



audience sympathetically affect that of the speaker, as does also



his familiar contact with the same range of persons, such as goes



with and takes a chief place in this itinerant edification; but



there is also the opportunity which all this wide-ranging



itinerary of public addresses affords for feeling out the state



of popular sentiment, as to what ends the university is expected



to serve and how it is expected best to serve them. Particularly



do the solemn amenities of social intercourse associated with



this promulgation of lay sermons lend themselves felicitously to



such a purpose; and this contact with the public and its



spokesmen doubtless exercises a powerful control over the



policies pursued by these academic executives, in that it affords



them the readiest, and at the same time the most habitual,



indication as to what line of policy and what details of conduct



will meet with popular approval, and what will not.



    Since, then, it is necessarily the endeavour of the



competitive executives to meet the desires of their public as



best they can, consistently with the demands of magnitude and



clat imposed by their position as chiefs of these competitive



concerns, it becomes a question of some moment what the character



of this select public opinion may be, to which their



peregrinations expose them; and how far and with what limitations



the public opinion that so habitually impinges on their



sensibilities and shapes their canons of procedure may be taken



as reflecting the sentiments of the public at large, or of any



given class of the population.



    The public that so contributes to the habitual bent of the



academic executives is necessarily a select fraction of the



laity, of course, -- self-selected by virtue of membership in the



various clubs, churches and other like organizations under whose



auspices the edification and amenities in question are commonly



brought into bearing, or by virtue of voluntary attendance at



these occasions of quasi-culture and gentility. It is somewhat



exclusive fragment of the public, pecuniarily of a middling



grade, as is indeed also its case in other than the pecuniary



respect. Apart from the (very consequential) convivial gatherings



where businessmen will now and again come together and lend a



genial ear to these executive spokesmen of philandropism, it will



be found that at the audiences, and at their attendant



solemnities of hospitality, the assembly is made up of very much



the same elements as make up the effective constituency of the



moderately well-to-do churches.(9*) Neither the small minority of



the wholly idle rich, nor the great majority who work with their



hands, are present in appreciable force; particularly not the



latter, who are busy elsewhere; nor do the learned class come in



evidence in this connection, -- except, of course, the "scholars



by appointment," within whose official competency lie precisely



such occasions of public evidence.



    Doubtless, the largest, tone-giving and effective,



constituent in this self-selected public on whose temper the



university president typically leans, and from whose bent his



canons of circumspection are drawn, is the class of moderately



well-to-do and serious-minded women who have outlived the



distractions of maternity, and so have come to turn their



parental solicitude to the common good, conceived as a



sterilization of the proprieties. The controlling ideals of



efficiency and expediency in the affairs of the higher learning



accordingly, in so far as they are not a precipitate of



competitive business principles simply, will be chiefly of this



derivation. Not that the captains of erudition need intimately



harbour precisely those notions of scholarship which this



constituency would enjoin upon them, and for which they dutifully



speak in their conciliatory sermons before these audiences; but



just as happens in all competitive retail business that has to



deal with a large and critical constituency, so here, -- the



captains find themselves constrained in their management of the



affairs of learning to walk blamelessly in the sight of this



quasi-public spirited wing of the laity that has by force of



circumstances come to constitute the public, as seen in the



perspective of the itinerant philandropist.



    The executive and all his works and words must avoid blame



from any source from which criticism might conceivably affect the



traffic with which he is occupied,such is the first of those



politic principles that govern the conduct of competitive



business. The university must accordingly be managed with a first



view to a creditable rating in those extraneous respects,



touching which that select laity that make up the executive's



effective public are competent to hold convictions. The resulting



canons of management will be chiefly of the nature of tabus,



since blame is best avoided by a code of avoidance. and since the



forum in which these tabus are audited is a forum in which the



matronly negations of piety, propriety and genteel usage take



precedence of work, whether scholarly or otherwise, a misdirected



cowardice not infrequently comes to rule the counsels of the



captains of erudition, -- misdirected not only in the more



obvious sense that its guidance is disserviceable to the higher



learning, but also (what is more to the immediate point) in the



sense that it discredits the executive and his tactics in the



esteem of that workday public that does not habitually give



tongue over the cups at five-o'clock.(10*)



    It is perhaps unnecessary, as it would assuredly be



ungraceful, to pursue this quasi-personal inquiry into the



circumstances that so determine that habitual attitude of the



executive. The difficulties of such an ambiguous position should



be sufficiently evident, and the character of the demands which



this position makes on the incumbent should be similarly evident,



so far as regards conduciveness to clean and honest living within



the premises of this executive office. It may, however, not be



out of place to call to mind one or two significant, and perhaps



extenuating, traits among those conventions that go to make up



the situation. Unlike what occurs in the conduct of ordinary



business and in the professions, there has hitherto been worked



out no code of professional ethics for the guidance of men



employed in this vocation, -- with the sole exception of that



mandatory inter-presidential courtesy that binds all members of



the craft to a strict enforcement of the academic black-list, --



all of which leaves an exceptionally broad field for casuistry.



So that, unlike what happens in the business community at large,



no standardization has here determined the limits of legitimate



prevarication; nor can such a standardization and limit be worked



out so long as the executive is required, in effect, to function



as the discretionary employer of his academic staff and hold them



to account as agents for whom he is responsible, at the same time



that he must, in appearance, be their confidential spokesman and



their colleague in the corporation of learning. And it is



impossible to forego either of these requirements, since the



discretionary power of use and abuse is indispensable to the



businesslike conduct of the enterprise, while the appearance of



scholarly co-partnery with the staff is indispensable to that



prestige on which rests the continued exercise of this power. And



so also it has similarly proved unavoidable (perhaps as an issue



of human infirmity) that the executive be guided in effect by a



meretricious subservience to extra-scholastic conventions, all



the while that he must profess an unbiassed pursuit of "the



increase and diffusion of knowledge among men."







                                IV







    With all due endeavour to avoid the appearance of a study in



total depravity, the foregoing analysis has come, after all, to



converge on the growth and derivation of those peculiar



ambiguities and obliquities that give character to the typical



academic executive. Not that all academic executives, without



exception, are (in the historical present) to be found fully



abreast of that mature phase of the type that would so be



reflected by the exigencies of their office as outlined above.



Nor need it be believed or argued that no man may enter on these



duties of office but such as are specially fitted, by native gift



and previous training, for just such an enterprise in



meretricious notoriety as these official duties enjoin. The



exceptions to such a rule are not altogether rare, and the



incumbent may well have entered on the duties of office with



preconceptions and aims somewhat at variance with what its



discipline inculcates. But, it should be called to mind, the



training that makes a typical executive comes with the most



felicitous and indefeasible effect not in the predisposing



discipline of candidature but in the workday conduct of office.



And so consistent and unremitting is this drift of the duties of



office, overt and covert, that, humanly speaking, any one who



submits to its discipline through an appreciable period of years



must unavoidably come to conform to type. Men of unmanageably



refractory temperament, such as can not by habituation be indued



with the requisite deviation and self-sufficiency, will of



necessity presently be thrown out, as being incompetent for this



vocation. Instances of such rejection after trial will come to



mind, but such instances are, after all, not so frequent or so



striking as to throw doubt on the general rule. The discipline of



executive office will commonly shape the incumbent to its uses.



It should seem beyond reason to expect that a decade of exposure



to the exigencies of this high office will leave the incumbent



still amenable to the dictates of commonplace tolerance and



common honesty.



    As intimated above, men with ingrained scholarly ideals and a



consistent aim to serve the ends of learning will still



occasionally be drawn into the executive office by force of



circumstances -- particularly by force of the slow-dying



preconception that the preferences of the academic staff should



count for something in the choice of their senior member; and



this will happen in spite of the ubiquitous candidature of



aspirants who have prepared themselves for this enterprise by



sedulous training in all the arts of popularity and by a well



organized backing of influential "friends." The like happened



more frequently a quarter of a century ago, at the time when the



current situation was taking shape under the incipient incursion



of business principles into university policy. But it does not



appear that those incumbents who so enter on these duties, will



fare notably otherwise in the end than do the others whose



previous training has already bent them to the typical policy of



deviation, from the outset.



    An illustrative instance or two may well be to the point. And



the same illustrations will perhaps also serve to enforce the



view that anything like an effectual university -- a seminary of



the higher learning, as distinct from an assemblage of vocational



schools -- is not a practicable proposition in America under



current conditions. Such seems to be the conclusion vouched for



by the two most notable attempts of the kind during the past



quarter-century. The two instances in question should appear to



afford clear experimental evidence to that effect, though it is



always possible to allege that personal or local conditions may



so far have affected these experimental instances as still to



leave the case in doubt.



    In these two instances, in the Middle West and in the Far



West, the matter has been tried out under conditions as



favourable to the cause of learning as the American community may



hope to offer, barring only the possible inhibition due to an



untoward local colour of sentiment. Each of these two great



establishments has been favoured with an endowment of such



magnitude as would be adequate to the foundation of an effectual



university, sufficient to the single-minded pursuit of the higher



learning, with all the "modern appliances" requisite to



scientific and scholarly work, if only their resources had been



husbanded with a single mind to that end; and in either case the



terms of the endowment have been sufficiently tolerant to admit



such pursuit of knowledge without arrire pense. The directive



hands, too, under whose discretionary control each of these



establishments entered on its adventures and attained its



distinctive character, were men who, at one point or another in



their administration of academic policy, entertained a sincerely



conceived scholarly ambition to create a substantial university,



an institution of learning.(11*) And, in a general way, the two



attempts have equally failed of their avowed initial purpose.



    In the persons of their discretionary heads, the two



enterprises were from the outset animated with widely divergent



ideals and aspirations in matters of scholarship, and with



singularly dissimilar and distinctive traits of character,



resembling one another in little else than a sincere devotion to



the cause of scholarship and an unhampered discretion in their



autocratic management of affairs; but it is an illuminating



comment on the force of circumstances governing these matters,



that these two establishments have gone down to substantially the



same kind and degree of defeat, -- a defeat not extreme but



typical, both in kind and degree. In the one case, the more



notorious, the initial aim (well known to persons intimately in



touch with the relevant facts at the time) was the pursuit of



scholarship, somewhat blatant perhaps, but none the less sincere



and thoughtful; in the companion-piece it was in a like degree



the pursuit of scientific knowledge and serviceability, though,



it is true, unschooled and puzzle-headed to a degree. In both



enterprises alike the discretionary heads so placed in control



had been selected by individual businessmen of the untutored



sort, and were vested with plenary powers. Under pressure of



circumstances, in both cases alike, the policy of forceful



initiative and innovation, with which both alike entered on the



enterprise, presently yielded to the ubiquitous craving for



statistical magnitude and the consequent felt need of



conciliatory publicity; until presently the ulterior object of



both was lost in the shadow of these immediate and urgent



manoeuvres of expediency, and it became the rule of policy to



stick at nothing but appearances.



    So that both establishments have come substantially to



surrender the university ideal, through loss of effectual



initiative and courage, and so have found themselves running



substantially the same course of insidious compromise with



"vocational" aims, undergraduate methods, and the counsels of the



Philistines. The life-history of each, while differing widely in



detail of ways and methods, is after all macle up, for the



greater part, of futile extensions, expansions, annexations,



ramifications, affiliations and pronunciamentos, in matters that



are no more germane to the cause of learning than is the state of



the weather. In the one case, the chase after a sufficient



notoriety took the direction of a ravenous megalomania, the



busiest concern of which presently came to be how most



conspicuously to prolong a shout into polysyllables; and the



further fact that this clamorous raid on the sensibilities of the



gallery was presently, on a change of executive personnel,



succeeded by a genial surrender to time and tide, an aimless



gum-shod pusillanimity, has apparently changed the drift of



things in no very appreciable degree.(12*)



    In the companion-piece, the enterprise has been brought to



the like manner and degree of stultification under the simple



guidance of an hysterically meticulous deference to all else than



the main facts. In both cases alike the executive solicitude has



come to converge on a self-centred and irresponsible government



of intolerance, differing chiefly in the degree of its



efficiency. Of course, through all this drift of stultification



there has always remained -- decus et solamen -- something of an



amiably inefficient and optimistic solicitude for the advancement



of learning at large, in some unspecified manner and bearing,



some time, but not to interfere with the business in hand.



    It is not that either of these two great schools is to be



rated as useless for whatever each is good for, but only that



that pursuit of learning on which both set out in the beginning



has fallen into abeyance, by force of circumstances as they



impinge on the sensibilities of a discretionary executive. As



vocational schools and as establishments for the diffusion of



salutary advice on the state of mankind at large, both are



doubtless all that might be desired; particularly in respect of



their statistical showing. It is only that the affairs of the



higher learning have come definitively to take a subsidiary, or



putative, place. In these establishments; and to all appearance



irretrievably so, because both are now committed to so large and



exacting a volume of obligations and liabilities, legal and



customary, extraneous and alien to their legitimate interest,



that there is no longer a reasonable chance of their coming to



anything of serious import in the way of the higher learning,



even, conceivably, under the most enlightened management in the



calculable future. In their bootless chase after a blameless



publicity, both have sunk their endowment in conspicuous real



estate, vocational, technical and accessory schools, and the like



academic side-issues, to such an extent as to leave them without



means to pursue their legitimate end in any adequate manner, even



if they should harbour an effectual inclination to pursue



it.(13*)



    These remarks on the typical traits of the academic executive



have unavoidably taken the colour of personalities. That such is



the case should by no means be taken as intentionally reflecting



anything like dispraise on those persons who have this



(unavoidable) work of stultification in hand. Rather, it is



dispassionately to be gathered from the run of the facts as set



out above that those persons on whom these exigencies impinge



will, by force of habituation, necessarily come to take the bent



which these current conditions enforce, and without which this



work could not well be done; all on the supposition -- and it is



by no means an extravagant assumption -- that these persons so



exposed to these agencies of spiritual disintegration are by



native gift endowed with the commonplace traits of human nature,



no more and no less. It is the duties of the office, not a run of



infirmities peculiar to the incumbents of office, that make the



outcome. Very much like that of the medicine-man, the office is



one which will not abide a tolerant and ingenuous incumbent.(14*)







                                    V







    In all the above argument and exposition, touching the



executive office and its administrative duties, the point of the



discussion is, of course, not the personal characteristics of the



typical executive, nor even the spiritual fortunes of the persons



exposed to the wear and tear of executive office; although these



matters might well engage the attention of any one given to



moralizing. The point is, of course, that precarious situation in



which the university, considered as a corporation of the higher



learning, is placed under these current conditions, and the



manner in which these current conditions give rise to this



situation. Seen from the point of view of the higher learning,



and disregarding considerations extraneous to that interest, it



is evident that this run of events, and the conditions which



determine them, are wholly untoward, not to say disastrous.



    Now, this inquiry is nowise concerned to reform, deflect or



remedy this current drift of things academic away from the



ancient holding ground of the higher learning; partly because



such an enterprise in reform and rehabilitation lies beyond its



competence; and partly, again, because in all this current move



to displace the higher learning there may conceivably be other



ends involved, which may be worth while in some other bearing



that is alien to the higher learning but of graver consequence



for the fortunes of the race, -- urgent needs which can only be



served by so diverting effort and attention from this pursuit.



Yet, partly out of a reasonable deference to the current



prejudice that any mere negative criticism and citation of



grievances is nothing better than an unworthy experiment in



irritation; and more particularly as a means to a more adequate



appreciation of the rigorous difficulties inherent in this



current state and drift of things; it may not be out of place to



offer some consideration of remedial measures that have been



attempted or projected, or that may be conceived to promise a way



out.



    As is well known, divers and various remedial measures have



been advocated by critics of current university affairs, from



time to time; and it is equally evident on reflection that these



proposed remedial measures are with fair uniformity directed to



the treatment of symptoms, -- to relieve agitation and induce



insensibility. However, there is at least one line of



aggressively remedial action that is being tried, though not



avowedly as a measure to bring the universities into line with



their legitimate duties, but rather with a view to relieving them



of this work which they are no longer fit to take care of. It is



a move designed to shift the seat of the higher learning out of



the precincts of the schools. And the desperate case of the



universities, considered as seminaries of science and



scholarship, is perhaps more forcibly brought in evidence by what



is in this way taking place in the affairs of learning outside



the schools than by their visible failure to take care of their



own work. This evidence goes to say that the difficulties of the



academic situation are insurmountable; any rehabilitation of the



universities is not contemplated in this latterday movement. And



it is so coming to be recognized, in effect though tacitly, that



for all their professions of a single-minded addiction to the



pursuit of learning, the academic establishments, old and new,



are no longer competent to take the direction of affairs in this



domain.



    So it is that, with a sanguine hope born of academic defeat,



there have latterly been founded certain large establishments, of



the nature of retreats or shelters for the prosecution of



scientific and scholarly inquiry in some sort of academic



quarantine, detached from all academic affiliation and renouncing



all share in the work of instruction. In point of form the



movement is not altogether new. Foundations of a similar aim have



been had before. But the magnitude and comprehensive aims of the



new establishments are such as to take them out of the category



of auxiliaries and throw them into the lead. They are assuming to



take over the advance in science and scholarship, which has by



tradition belonged under the tutelage of the academic community.



This move looks like a desperate surrender of the university



ideal. The reason for it appears to be the proven inability of



the schools, under competitive management, to take care of the



pursuit of knowledge.



    Seen from the point of view of the higher learning, this new



departure, as well as the apparent need of it, is to be rated as



untoward; and it reflects gravely enough on the untoward



condition into which the rule of business principles is leading



the American schools. Such establishments of research are



capable, in any competent manner, of serving only one of the two



joint purposes necessary to be served by any effective seminary



of the higher learning; nor can they at all adequately serve this



one purpose to the best advantage when so disjoined from its



indispensable correlate. By and large, these new establishments



are good for research only, not for instruction; or at the best



they can serve this latter purpose only as a more or less



Surreptitious or supererogatory side interest. Should they, under



pressure of instant need, turn their forces to instruction as



well as to inquiry, they would incontinently find themselves



drifting into the same equivocal position as the universities,



and the dry-rot of business principles and competitive gentility



would presently consume their tissues after the same fashion.



    It is, to all appearance, impracticable and inadvisable to



let these institutions of research take over any appreciable



share of that work of scientific and scholarly instruction that



is slipping out of the palsied hands of the universities, so as



to include some consistent application to teaching within the



scope of their everyday work. And this cuts out of their



complement of ways and means one of the chief aids to an



effectual pursuit of scientific inquiry. Only in the most



exceptional, not to say erratic, cases will good, consistent,



sane and alert scientific work be carried forward through a



course of years by any scientist without students, without loss



or blunting of that intellectual initiative that makes the



creative scientist. The work that can be done well in the absence



of that stimulus and safe-guarding that comes of the give and



take between teacher and student is commonly such only as can



without deterioration be reduced to a mechanically systematized



task-work, -- that is to say, such as can, without loss or gain,



be carried on under the auspices of a businesslike academic



government.



    This, imperatively unavoidable, absence of provision for



systematic instruction in these new-found establishments of



research means also that they and the work which they have in



hand are not self-perpetuating, whether individually and in



detail or taken in the large; since their work breeds no



generation of successors to the current body of scientists on



which they draw. As the matter stands now, they depend for their



personnel on the past output of scholars and scientists from the



schools, and so they pick up and turn to account what there is



ready to hand in that way -- not infrequently men for whom the



universities find little use, as being refractory material not



altogether suitable for the academic purposes of notoriety. When



this academic source fails, as it presently must, with the



increasingly efficient application of business principles in the



universities, there should seem to be small recourse for



establishments of this class except to run into the sands of



intellectual quietism where the universities have gone before.



    In this connection it will be interesting to note, by way of



parenthesis, that even now a large proportion of the names that



appear among the staff of these institutions of research are not



American, and that even the American-born among them are



frequently not American-bred in respect of their scientific



training. For this work, recourse is necessarily had to the



output of men trained elsewhere than in the vocational and



athletic establishments of the American universities, or to that



tapering file of academic men who are still imbued with



traditions so alien to the current scheme of conventions as to



leave them not amenable to the dictates of business principles.



Meantime, that which is eating the heart out of the American



seminaries of the higher learning should in due course also work



out the like sterilization in the universities of Europe, as fast



and as far as these other countries also come fully into line



with the same pecuniary ideals that are making the outcome in



America. And evidence is not wholly wanting that the like



proclivity to pragmatic and popular traffic is already making the



way of the academic scientist or scholar difficult and



distasteful in the greater schools of the Old World. America is



by no means in a unique position in this matter, except only in



respect of the eminent degree in which this community is pervaded



by business principles, and its consequent faith in businesslike



methods, and its intolerance of any other than pecuniary



standards of value. It is only that this country is in the lead;



the other peoples of Christendom are following the same lead as



fast as their incumbrance of archaic usages and traditions will



admit; and the generality of their higher schools are already



beginning to show the effects of the same businesslike



aspirations, decoratively coloured with feudalistic archaisms of



patriotic buncombe.







    As will be seen from the above explication of details and



circumstances, such practicable measures as have hitherto been



offered as a corrective to this sterilization of the universities



by business principles, amount to a surrender of these



institutions to the enemies of learning, and a proposal to



replace them with an imperfect substitute. That it should so be



necessary to relinquish the universities, as a means to the



pursuit of knowledge, and to replace them with a second-best, is



due, as has also appeared from the above analysis, to the course



of policy (necessarily) pursued by the executive officers placed



in control of academic affairs; and the character of the policy



so pursued follows unavoidably from the dependence of the



executive on a businesslike governing board, backed by a



businesslike popular clamour, on the one hand, and from his being



(necessarily) vested, in effect, with arbitrary power of use and



abuse within the academic community, on the other hand. It



follows, therefore, also that no remedy or corrective can be



contrived that will have anything more than a transient



palliative effect, so long as these conditions that create the



difficulty are allowed to remain in force.



    All of which points unambiguously to the only line of



remedial measures that can be worth serious consideration; and at



the same time it carries the broad implication that in the



present state of popular sentiment, touching these matters of



control and administration, any effort that looks to reinstate



the universities as effectual seminaries of learning will



necessarily be nugatory; inasmuch as the popular sentiment runs



plainly to the effect that magnitude, arbitrary control, and



businesslike administration is the only sane rule to be followed



in any human enterprise. So that, while the measures called for



are simple, obvious, and effectual, they are also sure to be



impracticable, and for none but extraneous reasons.



    While it still remains true that the long-term common sense



judgment of civilized mankind places knowledge above business



traffic, as an end to be sought, yet workday habituation under



the stress of competitive business has induced a frame of mind



that will tolerate no other method of procedure, and no rule of



life that does not approve itself as a faithful travesty of



competitive enterprise. And since the quest of learning can not



be carried on by the methods or with the apparatus and incidents



of competitive business, it follows that the only remedial



measures that hold any promise of rehabilitation for the higher



learning in the universities can not be attempted in the present



state of public sentiment.



    All that is required is the abolition of the academic



executive and of the governing board. Anything short of this



heroic remedy is bound to fail, because the evils sought to be



remedied are inherent in these organs, and intrinsic to their



functioning.



    Even granting the possibility of making such a move, in the



face of popular prejudice, it will doubtless seem suicidal, on



first thought, to take so radical a departure; in that it would



be held to cripple the whole academic organization and subvert



the scheme of things academic, for good and all: -- which, by the



way, is precisely what would have to be aimed at, since it is the



present scheme and organization that unavoidably work the



mischief, and since, also (as touches the interest of the higher



learning), they work nothing but mischief.



    It should be plain, on reflection, to any one familiar with



academic matters that neither of these official bodies serves any



useful purpose in the university, in so far as bears in any way



on the pursuit of knowledge. They may conceivably both be useful



for some other purpose, foreign or alien to the quest of



learning; but within the lines of the university's legitimate



interest both are wholly detrimental, and very wastefully so.



They are needless, except to take care of needs and emergencies



to which their own presence gratuitously gives rise. In so far as



these needs and difficulties that require executive surveillance



are not simply and flagrantly factitious, -- as, e.g., the



onerous duties of publicity -- they are altogether such needs as



arise out of an excessive size and a gratuitously complex



administrative organization; both of which characteristics of the



American university are created by the governing boards and their



executive officers, for no better purpose than a vainglorious



self-complacency, and with no better justification than an



uncritical prepossession to the effect that large size, complex



organization, and authoritative control necessarily make for



efficiency; whereas, in point of fact, in the affairs of learning



these things unavoidably make for defeat.



    Objection to any such measure of abolition is not to be



grounded in their impracticability or their inefficiency, --



supposing only that they could be carried out in the face of the



prejudices of the ignorant and of the selfishly interested



parties; the obstacles to any such move lie simply in the popular



prejudice which puts implicit faith in large, complicated, and



formidable organizations, and in that appetite for popular



prestige that animates the class of persons from which the boards



and executives are drawn.



    This unreasoning faith in large and difficult combinations



has been induced in the modern community by its experience with



the large-scale organization of the mechanical industries, and



still more particularly by the convincing pecuniary efficiency of



large capital, authoritative control, and devious methods, in



modern business enterprise; and of this popular prejudice the



boards of control and their executive officers have at least



their full share, -- indeed they owe their place and power in



great part to their being animated with something more than an



equitable share of this popular prepossession. It is undeniable,



indeed it is a matter of course, that so long as the university



continues to be made up, as is now customary, of an aggregation



of divers and sundry schools, colleges, divisions, etc., each and



several of which are engaged in a more or less overt rivalry, due



to their being so aggregated into a meaningless coalition, -- so



long will something formidable in the way of a centralized and



arbitrary government be indispensable to the conduct of the



university's affairs; but it is likewise patent that none of the



several constituent schools, colleges, etc., are any the better



off, in respect of their work, for being so aggregated in such an



arbitrary collective organization. The duties of the executive --



aside from the calls of publicity and self-aggrandizement -- are



in the main administrative duties that have to do with the



interstitial adjustments of the composite establishment. These



resolve themselves into a co-ordinated standardization of the



several constituent schools and divisions, on a mechanically



specified routine and scale, which commonly does violence to the



efficient working of all these diverse and incommensurable



elements; with no gain at any point, excepting a gain in the



facility of control control for control's sake, at the best. Much



of the official apparatus and routine office-work is taken up



with this futile control. Beyond this, and requisite to the due



working of this control and standardization, there is the control



of the personnel and the checking-up of their task work; together



with the disciplining of such as do not sufficiently conform to



the resulting schedule of uniformity and mediocrity.



    These duties are, all and several, created by the imposition



of a central control, and in the absence of such control the need



of them would not arise. They are essentially extraneous to the



work on which each and several of the constituent schools are



engaged, and their only substantial effect on that work is to



force it into certain extraneous formalities of routine and



accountancy, such as to divert and retard the work in hand. So



also the control exercised more at large by the governing board;



except in so far as it is the mere mischief-making interference



of ignorant outsiders, it is likewise directed to the keeping of



a balance between units that need no balancing as against one



another; except for the need which so is gratuitously induced by



drawing these units into an incongruous coalition under the



control of such a board; whose duties of office in this way arise



wholly out of the creation of their office.



    The great and conspicuous effect of abolishing the academic



executive and the governing board would be, of course, that the



university organization as now known would incontinently fall to



pieces. The several constituent schools would fall apart, since



nothing holds them together except the strong hand of the present



central government. This would, of course, seem a monstrous and



painful outrage to all those persons who are infatuated with a



veneration of big thing; to whom a "great" -- that is to say



voluminous -- university is an object of pride and loyal



affection. This class of persons is a very large one, and they



are commonly not given to reJection on the merits of their



preconceived ideals of "greatness." So that the dissolution of



this "trust"-like university coalition would bitterly hurt their



feelings. So intolerable would the shock to this popular



sentiment presumably be, indeed, that no project of the kind can



have any reasonable chance of a hearing.



    Apart from such loss of "prestige value" in the eyes of those



whose pride centres on magnitude, the move in question would



involve no substantial loss. The chief direct and tangible effect



would be a considerable saving in "overhead charges," in that the



greater part of the present volume of administrative work would



fall away. The greater part -- say, three-fourths -- of the



present officers of administration, with their clerical staff,



would be lost; under the present system these are chiefly



occupied with the correlation and control of matters that need



correlation and control only with a view to centralized



management.



    The aggregate of forces engaged and the aggregate volume of



work done in the schools would suffer no sensible diminution.



Indeed, the contemplated change should bring a very appreciably



heightened efficiency of all the working units that are now tied



up in the university coalition. Each of these units would be free



to follow its own devices, within the lines imposed by the work



in hand, since none of them would then be required to walk in



lock-step with several others with which it had no more vital



articulation than the lock-step in question.



    Articulation and co-ordination is good and requisite where



and so far as it is intrinsic to the work in hand; but it all



comes to nothing better than systematized lag, leak and friction,



so soon as it is articulation and coordination in other terms and



for other ends than the performance of the work in hand. It is



also true, the coalition of these several school units into a



pseudo-aggregate under a centralized control gives a deceptive



appearance of a massive engine working to some common end; but,



again, mass movement comes to nothing better than inhibition and



misdirection when it involves a coalition of working units whose



work is necessarily to be done in severalty.



    Left to themselves the several schools would have to take



care each of its own affairs and guide its endeavours by the



exigencies of its own powers and purposes, with such regard to



inter-collegiate comity and courtesy as would be required by the



substantial relations then subsisting between them, by virtue of



their common employment in academic work.







    In what has just been said, it is not forgotten that the



burden of their own affairs would be thrown back on the



initiative and collective discretion of the several faculties, so





soon as the several schools had once escaped from the trust-like



coalition in which they are now held. As has abundantly appeared



in latterday practice, these faculties have in such matters



proved themselves notable chiefly for futile disputation; which



does not give much promise of competent self-direction on their



part, in case they were given a free hand. It is to be recalled,



however, that this latterday experience of confirmed incompetence



has been gathered under the overshadowing presence of a



surreptitiously and irresponsibly autocratic executive, vested



with power of use and abuse, and served by a corps of adroit



parliamentarians and lobbyists, ever at hand to divert the



faculty's action from any measure that might promise to have a



substantial effect. By force of circumstances, chief of which is



the executive office, the faculties have become deliberative



bodies charged with power to talk. Their serious attention has



been taken up with schemes for weighing imponderables and



correlating incommensurables, with such a degree of



verisimilitude as would keep the statistics and accountancy of



the collective administration in countenance, and still leave



some play in the joints of the system for the personal relation



of teacher and disciple. It is a nice problem in self-deception,



chiefly notable for an endless proliferation.



    At the same time it is well known -- too well known to



command particular attention -- that in current practice, and of



necessity, the actual effective organization of each of these



constituent school units devolves on the working staff, in so far



as regards the effectual work to be done. even to the selection



of its working members and the apportionment of the work. It is



all done "by authority" of course, and must all be arranged



discreetly, with an ulterior view to its sanction by the



executive and its due articulation with the scheme of publicity



at large; but in all these matters the executive habitually comes



into bearing only as a (powerful) extraneous and alien



interference, -- almost wholly inhibitory, in effect, even though



with a show of initiative and creative guidance. And this



inhibitory surveillance is exercised chiefly on grounds of



conciliatory notoriety towards the outside, rather than on



grounds that touch the efficiency of the staff for the work in



hand. Such efficiency is commonly not barred, it is believed, so



long as it does not hinder the executive's quest of the greater



glory. There is, in effect, an inhibitory veto power touching the



work and its ways and means.



    But even when taken at its best, and when relieved of the



inhibition and deflection worked by the executive, such an



academic body can doubtless be counted on to manage its



collective affairs somewhat clumsily and incompetently. There can



be no hope of trenchant policy and efficient control at their



hands; and, it should be added, there need be no great fear of



such an outcome. The result should, in so far, be nearly clear



gain, as against the current highly efficient management by an



executive. Relatively little administration or control would be



needed in the resulting small-scale units; except in so far as



they might carry over into the new rgime an appreciable burden



of extra-scholastic traffic in the way of athletics,



fraternities, student activities, and the like; and except so far



as regards those schools that might still continue to be



"gentlemen's colleges," devoted to the cultivation of the



irregularities of adolescence and to their transfusion with a



conventional elegance; these latter, being of the nature of penal



settlements, would necessarily require government by a firm hand.



That work of intimately personal contact and guidance, in a



community of intellectual enterprise, that makes up the substance



of efficient teaching, would, it might fairly be hoped, not be



seriously hindered by the ill-co-ordinated efforts of such an



academic assembly, even if its members had carried over a good



share of the mechanistic frame of mind induced by their



experience under the rgime of standardization and accountancy.



    Indeed, there might even be ground to hope that, on the



dissolution of the trust, the underlying academic units would



return to that ancient footing of small-scale parcelment and



personal communion between teacher and student that once made the



American college, with all its handicap of poverty, chauvinism



and denominational bias, one of the most effective agencies of



scholarship in Christendom.



    The hope -- or delusion -- would be that the staff in each of



the resulting disconnected units might be left to conduct its own



affairs, and that they would prove incapable of much concerted



action or detailed control. It should be plain that no other and



extraneous power, such as the executive or the governing boards,



is as competent -- or, indeed, competent in any degree -- to take



care of these matters, as are the staff who have the work to do.



All this is evident to any one who is at all conversant with the



run of academic affairs as currently conducted on the grand



scale; inasmuch as it is altogether a matter of course and of



common notoriety within the precincts, that this is precisely



what these constituent schools and units now have to do, each and



several; with the sole qualification that they now have to take



care of these matters under the inhibitory surveillance of the



executive and his extraneous interests, and under the exactions



of a super-imposed scheme of mechanical standardization and



accountancy that accounts for nothing but its superimposition. At



the same time the working force of the staff is hampered with a



load of dead timber imported into its body to administer a



routine of control and accountancy exacted by the executive's



need of a creditable publicity (15*)



    This highly conjectural tracing of consequences to follow



from this hypothetical dissolution of the trust, may as well be



pursued into a point or two of detail, as touches those units of



the university coalition that have an immediate interest in point



of scholarship, -- the Collegiate ("Arts") division and the



Graduate School. The former being left to its own devices and, it



might be hoped, being purified of executive megalomania, it



should seem probable that something of a reversion would take



effect, in the direction of that simpler scheme of scholarship



that prevailed in the days before the coming of electives. It was



in the introduction of electives, and presently of alternatives



and highly flexible curricula, that the move first set in which



carried the American college off its footing as a school of



probation and introduction to the scholarly life, and has left it



a job-lot of ostensibly conclusive short-cuts into the trades and



professions. It need not follow that the ancient curriculum would



be re-established, but it should seem reasonable that a move



would take effect in the direction of something like a modern



equivalent. The Graduate School, on the other hand, having lost



the drag of the collegiate division and the vocational schools,



should come into action as a shelter where the surviving remnant



of scholars and scientists might pursue their several lines of



adventure, in teaching and in inquiry, without disturbance to or



from the worldly-wise who clamour for the greater glory.







    Now, all this speculation as to what might happen has, of



course, little else than a speculative value. It is not intended,



seriously and as a practical measure, to propose the abolition of



the president's office, or of the governing board; nor is it



intended to intimate that the captain of erudition can be



dispensed with in fact. He is too dear to the commercialized



popular imagination, and he fits too convincingly into the



businessmen's preconceived scheme of things, to permit any such



sanguine hope of surcease from skilled malpractice and



malversation. All that is here intended to he said is nothing



more than the obiter dictum that, as seen from the point of view



of the higher learning, the academic executive and all his works



are anathema, and should be discontinued by the simple expedient



of wiping him off the slate; and that the governing board, in so



far as it presumes to exercise any other than vacantly



perfunctory duties, has the same value and should with advantage



be lost in the same shuffle.







NOTES:







1. "He has stifled all manly independence and individuality



wherever it has exhibited itself at college. All noble idealism,



and all the graces of poetry and art have been shrivelled by his



brutal and triumphant power. He has made mechanical efficiency



and administrative routine the goal of the university's



endeavour. The nobler ends of academic life will never be served



so long as this spokesman of materialism remains in power."



    History will relate that one of the eminent captains, through



an incumbency of more than a quarter of a century, in a



university of eminent wealth and volume, has followed a settled



policy of defeating any overt move looking to scientific or



scholarly inquiry on the part of any member of his faculty.



Should a man of scholarly proclivities by any chance sift through



the censorship exercised in virtue of the executive's appointing



power, as might happen, since the captain was himself not



qualified to pass a grounded opinion on any man's qualifications



in that respect; and should he then give evidence of continuing



to spend time and thought on matters of that nature, his burden



of administrative and class-room tasks would presently be



increased sufficiently to subdue his wayward bent; or, in an



incorrigible case, the offender against the rule of academic



sterility would eventually be retired by severance of his



connection with this seat of learning.



    In some sinister sense the case reflects credit on the



American academic community at large, in that, by the close of



this quarter-century of preventive regimen, the resulting



academic staff had become a byword of nugatory intrigue and



vacant pedantry.







2. So far has this predilection made its way in the counsels of



the "educators" that much of the current discussion of



desideranda in academic policy reads like controversial argument



on "efficiency engineering," -- an "efficiency engineer" is an



accountant competent to advise business concerns how best to



increase their saleable output per unit of cost. And there has,



indeed, been at least one tour of inspection of American



universities by such an "efficiency engineer," undertaken in the



service of an establishment founded with a view to academic



welfare and governed by a board of university presidents. The



report submitted by the inquiry in question duly conforms to the



customary lines of "scientific management."







3. "Education is the one kind of human enterprise that can not be



brought under the action of the economic law of supply and



demand. It can not be conducted on 'business principles.' There



is no 'demand' for education in the economic sense.... Society is



the only interest that can be said to demand it, and society must



supply its own demand. Those who found educational institutions



or promote educational enterprise put themselves in the place of



society and assume to speak and act for society, not for any



economic interest." -- Lester F. Ward, Pure Sociology, p. 575.







4. Indeed, the resemblance is visible. As among professional



politicians, so also as regards incumbents and aspirants for



academic office, it is not at all unusual, nor does it cause



surprise, to find such persons visibly affected with those



characteristic pathological marks that come of what is



conventionally called "high living" -- late hours, unseasonable



vigils, surfeit of victuals and drink, the fatigue of sedentary



ennui. A flabby habit of body, hypertrophy of the abdomen,



varicose veins, particularly of the facial tissues, a blear eye



and a colouration suggestive of bile and apoplexy, -- when this



unwholesome bulk is duly wrapped in a conventionally decorous



costume it is accepted rather as a mark of weight and



responsibility, and so serves to distinguish the pillars of



urbane society. Nor should it be imagined that these grave men of



affairs and discretion are in any peculiar degree prone to



excesses of the table or to nerve-shattering bouts of



dissipation. The exigencies of publicity, however, are, by



current use and wont, such as to enjoin not indulgence in such



excursions of sensual perversity, so much as a gentlemanly



conformity to a large routine of conspicuous convivialities.



"Indulgence" in ostensibly gluttonous bouts of this kind --



banquets, dinners, etc. -- is not so much a matter of taste as of



astute publicity, designed to keep the celebrants in repute among



a laity whose simplest and most assured award of esteem proceeds



on evidence of wasteful ability to pay. But the pathological



consequences, physical and otherwise, are of much the same nature



in either case.







5. See pp. 68-73, 79-81, above.







6. As bearing on this "hired-man's loyalty" of the academic staff



and the means of maintaining it, see, e.g., a paper by George



Cram Cook in the Forum for October, 1913, on "The Third American



Sex," especially pp. 450-455.







7. Unfortunately, the language wants a competent designation for



public-minded personages of this class; which comprises something



appreciably more than the homiletical university executives



alluded to above, and their understudies, while it is also not



strictly inclusive of all these executives. There is indeed a



fairly obvious contingent comes in from among those minor



politicians and clergymen who crave the benefit of an inoffensive



notoriety, and who are at the same time solicitous to keep their



fellow-men in mind of the unforgotten commonplaces. One will



necessarily have misgivings about putting forward a new technical



term for adoption into a vocabulary that is already top-heavy



with technical innovations. "Philandropist" has been suggested.



It is not a large innovation, and it has the merit of being



obviously self-explanatory. At the same time its phonetic



resemblance to an older term, already well accepted in the



language, should recommend it to the members of the craft whom it



is designed to signalize, and with whom phonetic considerations



are habitually allowed weight. The purists will doubtless find



"philandropist" a barbarism; but that is an infirmity that has



attached to many technical designations at their inception,



without permanently hindering their acceptance and



serviceability; it is also not wholly unfitting that the term



chosen should be of such a character.







8.      "The time has come, the walrus said,



        To talk of many things."







Within the last few years one of the more illustrious and fluent



of the captains of erudition hit upon the expedient of having a



trusted locum tenens appointed to take over the functions of the



home office for a term of years, while the captain himself "takes



the road" -- on an appreciably augmented salary -- to speak his



mind eloquently on many topics. The device can, however, scarcely



yet be said to have passed the experimental phase. This



illustrious exponent of philandropism commands an extraordinary



range of homily and is a raconteur of quite exceptional merit;



and a device that commends itself in this special case,



therefore, may or may not prove a feasible plan in general and



ordinary usage. But in any case it indicates a felt need of some



measure of relief, such as will enable the run of presidential



speech to gain a little something in amplitude and frequency.







9. So, e.g., a certain notably self-possessed and energetic



captain of erudition has been in the habit of repeating ("on the



spur of the moment") a homily on one of the staple Christian



virtues.







10. These resulting canons of blameless anility will react on the



character of the academic personnel in a two-fold way: negatively



and by indirection they work out in an (uncertain but effectual)



selective elimination of such persons as are worth while in point



of scholarship and initiative; while positively and by direct



incitement it results that the tribe of Lo Basswood has been



elected to fill the staff with vacancy.



    At the same time the case is not unknown, nor is it



altogether a chance occurrence, where such an executive with



plenary powers, driven to uncommonly fatuous lengths by this



calculus of expedient notoriety, and intent on putting a needed



patch on the seat of his honour, has endeavoured to save some



remnant of good-will among his academic acquaintance by



protesting, in strict and confidential privacy, that his course



of action taken in conformity with these canons was taken for the



sake of popular effect, and not because he did not know better.



apparently having by familiar use come to the persuasion that a



knave is more to be esteemed than a fool, and overlooking the



great ease with which he has been able to combine the two



characters.







11. In all fairness it should be noted, as a caution against



hasty conclusions, that in both of these cases this initial



scholarly intention has been questioned -- or denied -- by men



well informed as to the later state of things in either of the



two universities in question. And it may as well be admitted



without much reservation that the later state of things has



carried no broad hint of an initial phase in the life-history of



these schools, in which ideals of scholarship were given first



consideration. Yet it is to be taken as unequivocal fact that



such was the case, in both instances; this is known as an assured



matter of memory by men competent to speak from familiar



acquaintance with the relevant facts at the time. In both cases,



it is only in the outcome, only after the pressure of



circumstances has had time to act, that a rounded meretricious



policy has taken effect. What has misled hasty and late-come



observers in this matter is the relatively very brief --



inconspicuously brief -- time interval during which it was found



practicable to let the academic policy be guided primarily by



scholarly ideals.







12. As a commentary on the force of circumstances and the



academic value of the executive office, it is worth noting that,



in the case cited, an administration guided by a forceful,



ingenious and intrepid personality, initially imbued with



scholarly ideals of a sort, has run a course of scarcely



interrupted academic decay; while the succeeding reign of astute



vacuity and quietism as touches all matters of scholarship and



science has, on the whole, and to date, left the university in an



increasingly hopeful posture as a seminary of the higher



learning. All of which would appear to suggest a parallel with



the classic instance of King Stork and King Log, Indeed, at the



period of the succession alluded to, the case of these fabled



majesties was specifically called to mind by one and another of



the academic staff. It would appear that the academic staff will



take care of its ostensible work with better effect the less



effectually its members are interfered with and suborned by an



enterprising captain of erudition.







13. There is a word to add, as to the measure of success achieved



by these enterprises along their chosen lines of endeavour. Both



of the establishments spoken of are schools of some value in many



directions, and both have also achieved a large reputation among



the laity. Indeed, the captains under whose management the two



schools have perforce carried on their work, are commonly held in



considerable esteem as having achieved great things. There is no



desire here to understate the case; but it should be worth



noting, as bearing on the use and academic value of the



presidential office, that the disposal of very large means --



means of unexampled magnitude -- has gone to this achievement. A



consideration of these results, whether in point of scholarship



or of notoriety, as compared with the means which the captains



have disposed of, will leave one in doubt. It should seem



doubtful if the results could have been less excellent or less



striking, given the free disposal of an endowment of 20 or 30



millions, and upward, even under the undistinguished and



uneventful management of commonplace honesty and academic



traditions without the guidance of a "strong man." It is, indeed,



not easy to believe that less could have been achieved without



the captain's help. There is also evidence to hand that the loss



of the "strong man" has entailed no sensible loss either in the



efficiency or in the good repute of the academic establishment;



rather the reverse.







14. Within the precincts, it is not unusual to meet with a



harsher and more personal note of appraisal of what are rated as



the frailties of the executive. There are many expressions to be



met with, touching this matter, of a colloquial turn. These will



commonly have something of an underbred air, as may happen in



unguarded colloquial speech; but if it be kept in mind that their



personal incidence is duly to be read out of them, their tenor



may yet be instructive, and their scant elegance may be



over-looked for once, in view of that certain candour that is



scarcely to be had without a colloquial turn. They should serve



better than many elaborate phrases to throw into relief the kind



and measure of esteem accorded these mature incumbents of



executive office by the men who assist behind the scenes. So, in



bold but intelligible metaphor, one hears, "He is a large person



full of small potatoes," "The only white thing about him is his



liver," "Half-a-peck of pusillanimity," "A four-flusher."



Something after this kind is this aphoristic wisdom current in



the academic community, in so far as it runs safely above the



level of scurrility. In point of taste, it would be out of the



question to follow the same strain of discourteous expressions



into that larger volume of more outspoken appraisal that lies



below that level; and even what has so been sparingly cited in



illustration can, of course, not claim a sympathetic hearing as



being in any way a graceful presentment of the sense intended to



be conveyed in these figures of speech. Yet the apology may be



accepted, that it conveys this sense intelligibly even if not



elegantly.



    Indeed, a person widely conversant with current opinion and



its expression among the personnel of the staff, as touches the



character and academic value of a capable and businesslike



executive, might unguardedly come to the persuasion that the



typical academic head, under these latterday conditions. will be



a feebleminded rogue. Such is, doubtless, far from being the



actual valuation underlying these many artless expressions that



one meets with. And doubtless, the most that could be said would



be that, in point of orientation, the typical executive, qua



executive, tends to fall in with the lines so indicated; that the



exigencies of the executive office are of a kind that would



converge upon such an issue "in the long run" and "in the absence



of disturbing causes"; not that the effectual run of



circumstances will at all commonly permit a consummation of that



kind and degree.



    "Indeed... we may say as Dr Boteler said of strawberries.



'Doubtless God could have made a better berry, but doubtless God



never did.'"







15. It will be objected, and with much reason, that these



underlying "school units" that go to make up the composite



American university habitually see no great evil in so being



absorbed into the trust. They lend themselves readily, if not



eagerly, to schemes of coalition; they are in fact prone to draw



in under the aegis of the university corporation by "annexation,"



"affiliation." "absorption," etc. Any one who cares to take stock



of that matter and is in a position to know what is going on can



easily assure himself that the reasons which decide in such a



case are not advisedly accepted reasons intrinsic to the needs of



efficiency for the work in hand, but rather reasons of



competitive expediency, of competitive advantage and of prestige;



except in so far as it may all be -- as perhaps it commonly is --



mere unreflecting conformity to the current fashion. In this



connection it is to be remarked, however, that even if the current



 usage has no intrinsic advantage, as against another way of doing,



 failure to conform with the current way of doing will always entail



 a disadvantage.











                                 THE END

