







The High Price of Bullion



by David Ricardo



1810







The High Price of Bullion, a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank



Notes.



by David Ricardo



London: Printed for John Murray, 32, Fleet-Street; And Sold by



Every Other Bookseller in Town and Country



1810











Introduction







    The writer of the following pages has already submitted some



reflections to the attention of the public, on the subject of



paper-currency, through the medium of the Morning Chronicle. He



has thought proper to republish his sentiments on this question



in a form more calculated to bring it to fair discussion; and his



reasons for so doing, are, that he has seen, with the greatest



alarm, the progressive depreciation of the paper-currency. His



fears have been augmented by observing, that by a great part of



the public this depreciation is altogether denied, and that by



others, who admit the fact, it is imputed to any cause but that



which to him appears the real one. Before any remedy can be



successfully applied to an evil of such magnitude, it is



essential that there should be no doubt as to its cause. The



writer proposes, from the admitted principles of political



economy, to advance reasons, which, in his opinion, prove, that



the paper-currency of this county has long been, and now is, at a



considerable discount, proceeding from a superabundance in its



quantity, and not from any want of confidence in the Bank of



England, or from any doubts of their ability to fulfil their



engagements. He does this without reluctance, being fully



persuaded that the country is yet in possession of the means of



restoring the paper-currency to its professed value, viz. the



value of the coins, for the payment of which it purports to be a



pledge.



    He is aware that he can add but little to the arguments which



have been so ably urged by Lord King, and which ought long before



this to have carried conviction to every mind; but he trusts,



that as the evil has become more glaring, the public wil1 not



continue to view, without interest, a subject which yields to no



other in importance, and in which the general welfare is so



materially concerned.







Dec. 1, 1809.











High Price of Bullion, a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank Notes







    The precious metals employed for circulating the commodities



of the world, previously to the establishment of banks, have been



supposed by the most approved writers on political economy to



have been divided into certain proportions among the different



civilized nations of the earth, according to the state of their



commerce and wealth, and therefore according to the number and



frequency of the payments which they had to perform. While so



divided they preserved every where the same value, and as each



country had an equal necessity for the quantity actually in use,



there could be no temptation offered to either for their



importation or exportation.



    Gold and silver, like other commodities, have an intrinsic



value, which is not arbitrary, but is dependent on their



scarcity, the quantity of labour bestowed in procuring them, and



the value of the capital employed in the mines which produce



them.



    "The quality of utility, beauty, and scarcity," says Dr



Smith, "are the original foundation of the high price of those



metals, or of the great quantity of other goods for which they



can every where be exchanged. This value was antecedent to, and



independent of their being employed as coin, and was the quality



which fitted them for that employment."



    If the quantity of gold and silver in the world employed as



money were exceedingly small, or abundantly great, it would not



in the least affect the proportions in which they would be



divided among the different nations - the variation in their



quantity would have produced no other effect than to make the



commodities for which they were exchanged comparatively dear or



cheap. The smaller quantity of money would perform the functions



of a circulating medium, as well as the larger. Ten millions



would be as effectual for that purpose as one hundred millions.



Dr Smith observes, "that the most abundant mines of the precious



metals would add little to the wealth of the world. A produce of



which the value is principally derived from its scarcity is



necessarily degraded by its abundance."



    If in the progress towards wealth, one nation advanced more



rapidly than the others, that nation would require and obtain a



greater proportion of the money of the world. Its commerce, its



commodities, and its payments, would increase, and the general



currency of the world would be divided according to the new



proportions. All countries therefore would contribute their share



to this effectual demand.



    In the same manner if any nation wasted part of its wealth,



or lost part of its trade, it could not retain the same quantity



of circulating medium which it before possessed. A part would be



exported, and divided among the other nations till the usual



proportions were re-established.



    While the relative situation of counties continued unaltered,



they might have abundant commerce with each other, but their



exports and imports would on the whole be equal. England might



possibly import more goods from, than she would export to,



France, but she would in consequence export more to some other



country, and France would import more from that country; so that



the exports and imports of all countries would balance each



other; bills of exchange would make the necessary payments, but



no money would pass, because it would have the same value in all



countries.



    If a mine of gold were discovered in either of these



countries, the currency of that country would be lowered in value



in consequence of the increased quantity of the precious metals



brought into circulation, and would therefore no longer be of the



same value as that of other countries. Gold and silver, whether



in coin or in bullion, obeying the law which regulates all other



commodities, would immediately become articles of exportation;



they would leave the county where they were cheap, for those



countries where they were dear, and would continue to do so, as



long as the mine should prove productive, and till the proportion



existing between capital and money in each country before the



discovery of the mine, were again established, and gold and



silver restored every where to one value. In return for the gold



exported, commodities would be imported; and though what is



usually termed the balance of trade would be against the country



exporting money or bullion, it would be evident that she was



carrying on a most advantageous trade, exporting that which was



no way useful to her, for commodities which might be employed in



the extension of her manufactures, and the increase of her



wealth.



    If instead of a mine being discovered in any country, a bank



were established, such as the Bank of England, with the power of



issuing its notes for a circulating medium; after a large amount



had been issued either by way of loan to merchants, or by



advances to government, thereby adding considerably to the sum of



the currency, the same effect would follow as in the case of the



mine. The circulating medium would be lowered in value, and goods



would experience a proportionate rise. The equilibrium between



that and other nations would only be restored by the exportation



of part of the coin.



    The establishment of the bank and the consequent issue of its



notes therefore, as well as the discovery of the mine, operate as



an inducement to the exportation either of bullion or of coin,



and are beneficial only in as far as that object may be



accomplished. The bank substitutes a currency of no value for one



most costly, and enables us to turn the precious metals (which,



though a very necessary part of our capital, yield no revenue,)



into a capital which will yield one. Dr A. Smith compares the



advantages attending the establishment of a bank to those which



would be obtained by converting our highways into pastures and



corn-fields, and procuring a road through the air. The highways,



like the coin, are highly useful, but neither yield any revenue.



Some people might be alarmed at the specie leaving the country,



and might consider that as a disadvantageous trade which required



us to part with it; indeed the law so considers it by its



enactments against the exportation of specie; but a very little



reflection will convince us that it is our choice, and not our



necessity, that sends it abroad; and that it is highly beneficial



to us to exchange that commodity which is superfluous, for others



which may be made productive.



    The exportation of the specie may at all times be safely left



to the discretion of individuals; it will not be exported more



than any other commodity, unless its exportation should be



advantageous to the county. If it be advantageous to export it,



no laws can effectually prevent its exportation. Happily in this



case, as well as in most others in commerce where there is free



competition, the interests of the individual and that of the



community are never at variance.



    Were it possible to carry the law against melting or



exporting of coin into strict execution, at the same time that



the exportation of gold bullion was freely allowed, no advantage



could accrue from it, but great injury must arise to those who



might have to pay, possibly, two ounces or more of coined gold



for one of uncoined gold. This would be a real depreciation of



our currency, raising the prices of all other commodities in the



same proportion as it increased that of gold bullion. The owner



of money would in this case suffer an injury equal to what a



proprietor of corn would suffer, were a law to be passed



prohibiting him from selling his corn for more than half its



market value. The law against the exportation of the coin has



this tendency, but is so easily evaded, that gold in bullion has



always been nearly of the same value as gold in coin.



    Thus then it appears that the currency of one country can



never for any length of time be much more valuable, as far as



equal quantities of the precious metals are concerned, than that



of another; that excess of currency is but a relative term; that



if the circulation of England were ten millions, that of France



five millions, that of Holland four millions, etc. etc. whilst



they kept their proportions, though the currency of each country



were doubled or trebled, neither country would be conscious of an



excess of currency. The prices of commodities would every where



rise, on account of the increase of currency, but there would be



no exportation of money from either. But if these proportions be



destroyed by England alone doubling her currency, while that of



France, Holland, etc. etc. continued as before, we should then be



conscious of an excess in our currency, and for the same reason



the other countries would feel a deficiency in theirs, and part



of our excess would be exported till the proportions of ten,



five, four, etc. were again established.



    If in France an ounce of gold were more valuable than in



England, and would therefore in France purchase more of any



commodity common to both countries, gold would immediately quit



England for such purpose, and we should send gold in preference



to any thing else, because it would be the cheapest exchangeable



commodity in the English market; for if gold be dearer in France



than in England, goods must be cheaper; we should not therefore



send them from the dear to the cheap market, but, on the



contrary, they would come from the cheap to the dear market, and



would be exchanged for our gold.



    The Bank might continue to issue their notes, and the specie



be exported with advantage to the country, while their notes were



payable in specie on demand, because they could never issue more



notes than the value of the coin which would have circulated had



there been no bank.(1*)





    If they attempted to exceed this amount, the excess would be



immediately returned to them for specie; because our currency,



being thereby diminished in value, could be advantageously



exported, and could not be retained in our circulation. These are



the means, as I have already explained, by which our currency



endeavours to equalize itself with the currencies of other



counties. As soon as this equality was attained, all advantage



arising from exportation would cease; but if the Bank assuming,



that because a given quantity of circulating medium had been



necessary last year, therefore the same quantity must be



necessary this, or for any other reason, continued to re-issue



the returned notes, the stimulus which a redundant currency first



gave to the exportation of the coin would be again renewed with



similar effects; gold would be again demanded, the exchange would



become unfavourable, and gold bullion would rise, in a small



degree, above its mint price, because it is legal to export



bullion, but illegal to export the coin, and the difference would



be about equal to the fair compensation for the risk.



    In this manner if the Bank persisted in returning their notes



into circulation, every guinea might be drawn out of their



coffers.



    If to supply the deficiency of their stock of gold they were



to purchase gold bullion at the advanced price, and have it



coined into guineas, this would not remedy the evil, guineas



would be still demanded, but instead of being exported would be



melted and sold to the Bank as bullion at the advanced price.



"The operations of the Bank," observed Dr Smith, alluding to an



analogous case, "were upon this account somewhat like the web of



Penelope, the work that was done in the day was undone in the



night." The same sentiment is expressed by Mr Thornton: -



"Finding the guineas in their coffers to lessen every day, they



must naturally be supposed to be desirous of replacing them by



all effectual and not extravagantly expensive means. They will be



disposed, to a certain degree, to buy gold, though at a losing



price, and to coin it into new guineas; but they will have to do



this at the very moment when many are privately melting what is



coined. The one party will be melting and selling while the other



is buying and coining. And each of these two contending



businesses will now be carried on, not on account of an actual



exportation of each melted guinea to Hamburgh, but the operation



or at least a great part of it will be confined to London; the



coiners and the melters living on the same spot, and giving



constant employment to each other.



    "The Bank," continues Mr Thornton, "if we suppose it, as we



now do, to carry on this sort of contest with the melters, is



obviously waging a very unequal war; and even though it should



not be tired early, it will be likely to be tired sooner than its



adversaries."



    The Bank would be obliged therefore ultimately to adopt the



only remedy in their power to put a stop to the demand for



guineas. They would withdraw part of their notes from



circulation, till they should have increased the value of the



remainder to that of gold bullion, and consequently to the value



of the currencies of other countries. All advantage from the



exportation of gold bullion would then cease, and there would be



no temptation to exchange bank-notes for guineas.



    In this view of the subject, then, it appears, that the



temptation to export money in exchange for goods, or what is



termed an unfavourable balance of trade, never arises but from a



redundant currency. But Mr Thornton, who has considered this



subject very much at large, supposes that a very unfavourable



balance of trade may be occasioned to this country by a bad



harvest, and the consequent importation of corn; and that there



may be at the same time an unwillingness in the country, to which



we are indebted, to receive our goods in payment; the balance due



to the foreign country must therefore be paid out of that part of



our currency, consisting of coin, and that hence arises the



demand for gold bullion and its increased price. He considers the



Bank as affording considerable accommodation to the merchants, by



supplying with their notes the void occasioned by the exportation



of the specie.



    As it is acknowledged by Mr Thornton, in many parts of his



work, that the price of gold bullion is rated in gold coin; and



as it is also acknowledged by him, that the law against melting



gold coin into bullion and exporting it is easily evaded, it



follows, that no demand for gold bullion, arising from this or



any other cause, can raise the money price of that commodity. The



error of this reasoning proceeds from not distinguishing between



an increase in the value of gold, and an increase in its money



price.



    If there were a great demand for corn its money price would



advance; because, in comparing corn with money, we in fact



compare it with another commodity; and for the same reason, when



there is a great demand for gold its corn price will increase;



but in neither case will a bushel of corn be worth more than a



bushel of corn, or an ounce of gold more than an ounce of gold.



An ounce of gold bullion could not, whatever the demand might be,



whilst its price was rated in gold coin, be of more value than an



ounce of coined gold, or 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d.



    If this argument should not be considered as conclusive, I



should urge, that a void in the currency, as here supposed, can



only be occasioned by the annihilation or limitation of paper



currency, and then it would speedily be filled by importations of



bullion, which its increased value, in consequence of the



diminution of circulating medium, would infallibly attract to the



advantageous market. However great the scarcity of corn might be,



the exportation of money would be limited by its increasing



scarcity. Money is in such general demand, and in the present



state of civilization is so essential to commercial transactions,



that it can never be exported to excess; even in a war such as



the present, when our enemy endeavours to interdict all commerce



with us, the value which the currency would bear, from its



increasing scarcity, would prevent the exportation of it from



being carried so far as to occasion a void in the circulation.



    Mr Thornton has not explained to us, why any unwillingness



should exist in the foreign country to receive our goods in



exchange for their corn; and it would be necessary for him to



show, that if such an unwillingness were to exist, we should



agree to indulge it so far as to consent to part with our coin.



    If we consent to give coin in exchange for goods, it must be



from choice, not necessity. We should not import more goods than



we export, unless we had a redundancy of currency, which it



therefore suits us to make a part of our exports. The exportation



of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not the effect,



but the cause of an unfavourable balance; we should not export



it, if we did not send it to a better market, or if we had any



commodity which we could export more profitably. It is a salutary



remedy for a redundant currency; and as I have already



endeavoured to prove, that redundancy or excess is only a



relative term, it follows, that the demand for it abroad arises



only from the comparative deficiency of the currency of the



importing country, which there causes its superior value.



    It resolves itself entirely into a question of interest. If



the sellers of the corn to England, to the amount I will suppose



of a million, could import goods which cost a million in England,



but would produce, when sold abroad, more than if the million had



been sent in money, goods would be preferred; if otherwise, money



would be demanded.



    It is only after a comparison of the value in their markets



and in our own, of gold and other commodities, and because gold



is cheaper in the London market than in theirs, that foreigners



prefer gold in exchange for their corn. If we diminish the



quantity of currency, we give an additional value to it: this



will induce them to alter their election, and prefer the



commodities. If I owed a debt in Hamburgh of 100 l. I should



endeavour to find out the cheapest mode of paying it. If I send



money, the expence attending its transportation being I will



suppose 5 l. to discharge my debt will cost me 105 l. If I



purchase cloth here, which, with the expences attending its



exportation, will cost me 106 l. and which will, in Hamburgh,



sell for 100 l. it is evidently more to my advantage to send the



money. If the purchase and expences of sending hardware to pay my



debt, will take 107 l. I should prefer sending cloth to hardware,



but I would send neither in preference to money, because money



would be the cheapest exportable commodity in the London market.



The same reasons would operate with the exporter of the corn, if



the transaction were on his own account. But if the Bank,



"fearful for the safety of their establishment," and knowing that



the requisite number of guineas would be withdrawn from their



coffers at the mint price, should think it necessary to diminish



the amount of their notes in circulation, the proportion between



the value of the money, of the cloth, and of the hardware, would



no longer be as 105, 106, and 107; but the money would become the



most valuable of the three, and therefore would be less



advantageously employed in discharging the foreign debts.



    If, which is a much stronger case, we agreed to pay a subsidy



to a foreign power, money would not be exported whilst there were



any goods which could more cheaply discharge the payment. The



interest of individuals would render the exportation of the money



unnecessary.(2*)



    Thus then specie will be sent abroad to discharge a debt only



when it is superabundant; only when it is the cheapest exportable



commodity. If the Bank were at such a time paying their notes in



specie, gold would be demanded for that purpose. It would be



obtained there at its mint price, whereas its price as bullion



would be something above its value as coin, because bullion



could, and coin could not, be legally exported.



    It is evident, then, that a depreciation of the circulating



medium is the necessary consequence of its redundance; and that



in the common state of the national currency this depreciation is



counteracted by the exportation of the precious metals. (3*)



    Such, then, appear to me to be the laws that regulate the



distribution of the precious metals throughout the world, and



which cause and limit their circulation from one county to



another, by regulating their value in each. But before I proceed



to examine on these principles the main object of my enquiry, it



is necessary that I should shew what is the standard measure of



value in this country, and of which, therefore, our paper



currency ought to be the representative, because it can only be



by a comparison to this standard that its regularity, or its



depreciation, may be estimated.



    No permanent (4*) measure of value can be said to exist in



any nation while the circulating medium consists of two metals,



because they are constantly subject to vary in value with respect



to each other. However exact the conductors of the mint may be,



in proportioning the relative value of gold to silver in the



coins, at the time when they fix the ratio, they cannot prevent



one of these metals from rising, while the other remains



stationary, or falls in value. Whenever this happens, one of the



coins will be melted to be sold for the other. Mr Locke, Lord



Liverpool, and many other writers, have ably considered this



subject, and have all agreed, that the only remedy for the evils



in the currency proceeding from this source, is the making one of



the metals only the standard measure of value. Mr Locke



considered silver as the most proper metal for this purpose, and



proposed that gold coins should be left to find their own value,



and pass for a greater or lesser number of shillings, as the



market price of gold might vary with respect to silver.



    Lord Liverpool, on the contrary, maintained that gold was not



only the most proper metal for a general measure of value in this



country, but that, by the common consent of the people, it had



become so, was so considered by foreigners, and that it was best



suited to the increased commerce and wealth of England.



    He, therefore, proposed, that gold coin only should be a



legal tender for sums exceeding one guinea, and silver coins for



sums not exceeding that amount. As the law now stands, gold coin



is a legal tender for all sums; but it was enacted in the year



1774, "That no tender in payment of money made in the silver coin



of this realm, of any sum exceeding the sum of twenty-five pounds



at any one time, shall be reputed in law, or allowed to be legal



tender within Great-Britain or Ireland, for more than according



to its value by weight, after the rate of 5s. 2d. for each ounce



of silver." The same regulation was revived in 1798, and is now



in force.



    For many reasons given by Lord Liverpool, it appears proved



beyond dispute, that gold coin has been for near a century the



principal measure of value, but this is, I think, to be



attributed to the inaccurate determination of the mint



proportions. Gold has been valued too high; no silver, therefore,



can remain in circulation which is of its standard weight.



    If a new regulation were to take place, and silver to be



valued too high, or (which is the same thing) if the market



proportions between the prices of gold and silver were to become



greater than those of the mint, gold would then disappear, and



silver become the standard currency.



    This may require further explanation. The relative value of



gold and silver in the coins is as 15 9/124 to 1. An ounce of



gold which is coined into 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. of gold coin, is



worth, according to the mint regulation, 15 9/124 ounces of



silver,because that weight of silver is also coined into 3 l.



17s. 10 1/2d. of silver coin. Whilst the relative value of gold



to silver is in the market under 15 to 1, which it has been for a



great number of years till lately, gold coin would necessarily be



the standard measure of value, because neither the Bank, nor 3



any individual, would send 15 9/124 ozs. of silver to the mint to



be coined into 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. when they could sell that



quantity o* silver in the market for more than 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d.



in gold coin, and this they could do by the supposition, that



less than 15 ounces of silver would purchase an ounce of gold.



    But if the relative value of gold to silver be more than the



mint proportion of 15 9/124 to 1, no gold would then be sent to



the mint to be coined, because as either of the metals are a



legal tender to any amount, the possessor of an ounce of gold



would not send it to the mint to be coined into 3 l. 17s. 10



1/2d. of gold coin, whilst he could sell it, which he could do in



such case, for more than 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. of silver coin. Not



only would not gold be carried to the mint to be coined, but the



illicit trader would melt the gold coin, and sell it as bullion



for more than its nominal value in the silver coin. Thus then



gold would disappear from circulation, and silver coin become the



standard measure of value. As gold has lately experienced a



considerable rise compared with silver, (an ounce of standard



gold, which, on an average of many years, was of equal value to



14 3/4 ozs. of standard silver, being now in the market of the



same value as 15 1/2 oz.) this would be the case now were the



Bank Restriction-bill repealed, and the coinage of silver freely



allowed at the mint, in the same manner as that of gold; but in



an act of parliament of 39 Geo. III is the following clause: --







"Whereas inconvenience may arise from any coinage of silver until



such regulations may be formed as shall appear necessary; and



whereas from the present low price of silver bullion, owing to



temporary circumstances, a small quantity of silver bullion has



been brought to the mint to be coined, and there is reason to



suppose that a still further quantity may be brought; and it is



therefore necessary to suspend the coining of silver for the



present; be it therefore enacted, That from and after the passing



of this act, no silver bullion shall be coined at the mint, nor



shall any silver coin that may have been coined there be



delivered, any law to the contrary notwithstanding."







    This law is now in force. It would appear, therefore, to have



been the intention of the legislature to establish gold as the



standard of currency in this country. Whilst this law is in



force, silver coin must be confined to small payments only, the



quantity in circulation being barely sufficient for that purpose.



It might be for the interest of a debtor to pay his large debts



in silver coin if he could get silver bullion coined into money;



but being prevented by the above law from doing so, he is



necessarily obliged to discharge his debt with gold coin, which



he could obtain at the mint with gold bullion to any amount.



Whilst this law is in force, gold must always continue to be the



standard of currency.



    Were the market value of an ounce of gold to become equal to



thirty ounces of silver, gold would nevertheless be the measure



of value, whilst this prohibition continued in force. It would be



of no avail, that the possessor of 30 ounces of silver should



know that he once could have discharged a debt of 3 l. 17s. 10



1/2d. by procuring 15 9/124 ounces of silver to be coined at the



mint, as he would in this case have no other means of discharging



his debt but by selling his 30 oz. of silver at the market value,



that is to say, for one ounce of gold, or 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. of



gold coin.



    The public has sustained, at different times, very serious



loss from the depreciation of the circulating medium, arising



from the unlawful practice of clipping the coins.



    In proportion as they become debased, so the prices of every



commodity for which they are exchangeable rise in nominal value,



not excepting gold and silver bullion: accordingly we find, that



before the re-coinage in the reign of King William the Third, the



silver currency had become so degraded, that an ounce of silver,



which ought to be contained in sixty-two pence, sold for



seventy-seven pence; and a guinea, which was valued at the mint



at twenty shillings, passed in all contracts for thirty



shillings. This evil was then remedied by the recoinage. Similar



effects followed from the debasement of the gold currency, which



were again corrected in 1774 by the same means.



    Our gold coins have, since 1774, continued nearly at their



standard purity; but our silver currency has again become



debased. By an assay at the mint in 1798, it appears that our



shillings were found to be twenty-four per cent, and our



sixpences thirty-eight per cent. under their mint value; and I am



informed, that by a late experiment they were found considerably



more deficient. They do not, therefore, contain as much pure



silver as they did in the reign of King William. This debasement,



however, did not operate previously to 1798, as on the former



occasion. At that time both gold and silver bullion rose in



proportion to the debasement of the silver coin. All foreign



exchanges were against us full twenty per cent., and many of them



still more. But although the debasement of the silver coin had



continued for many years, it had neither, previously to 1798,



raised the price of gold nor silver, nor had it produced any



effect on the exchanges. This is a convincing proof, that gold



coin was, during that period, considered as the standard measure



of value. Any debasement of the gold coin would then have



produced the same effects on the prices of gold and silver



bullion, and on the foreign exchanges, which were formerly caused



by the debasement of the silver coins (5*).



    While the currency of different countries consists of the



precious metals, or of a paper money which is at all times



exchangeable for them; and while the metallic currency is not



debased by wearing, or clipping, a comparison of the weight, and



degree of fineness of their coins, will enable us to ascertain



their pit of exchange. Thus the par of exchange between Holland



and England is stated to be about eleven florins, because the



pure silver contained in eleven florins is equal to the pure



silver contained in twenty standard shillings.



    This par is not, nor can it be, absolutely fixed; because,



gold coin being the standard of commerce in England, and silver



coin in Holland, a pound sterling, or 20/21 of a guinea, may at



different times be more or less valuable than twenty standard



shillings, and therefore more or less valuable than its



equivalent of eleven florins. Estimating the par either by silver



or by gold will be sufficiently exact for our purpose.



    If I owe a debt in Holland; by knowing the par of exchange, I



also know the quantity of our money which will be necessity to



discharge it.



    If my debt amount to 1100 florins, and gold have not varied



in value, 100 l. in our pure gold coin will purchase as much



Dutch currency as is necessary to pay my debt. By exporting the



100 l. therefore in coin, or (which is the same thing) paying a



bullion merchant the 100 l. in coin, and allowing him the



expences attending its transportation, such as freight,



insurance, and his profit, he will sell me a bill which will



discharge my debt; at the same time he will export the bullion,



to enable his correspondent to pay the bill when it shall become



due.



    These expences then are the utmost limits of an unfavourable



exchange. However great my debt may be, though it equalled the



largest subsidy ever given by this county to an ally; while I



could pay the bullion-merchant in coin of standard value, he



would be glad to export it, and to sell me bills. But if I pay



him for his bill in a debased coin, or in a depreciated paper



money, he will not be willing to sell me his bill at this rate;



because if the coin be debased, it does not contain the quantity



of pure gold or silver which ought to be contained in 100 l., and



he must therefore export an additional number of such debased



pieces of money, to enable him to pay my debt of 100 l., or its



equivalent, 1100 florins. If I pay him in paper money; as he



cannot send it abroad, he will consider whether it will purchase



as much gold or silver bullion as is contained in the coin for



which it is a substitute; if it will do this, paper will be as



acceptable to him as coin; but if it will not, he will expect a



further premium for his bill, equal to the depreciation of the



paper.



    While the circulating medium consists, therefore, of coin



undebased, or of paper-money immediately exchangeable for



undebased coin, the exchange can never be more above, or more



below, par, than the expences attending the transportation of the



precious metals. But when it consists of a depreciated



paper-money, it necessarily will fall according to the degree of



the depreciation.



    The exchange will, therefore, be a tolerably accurate



criterion by which we may judge of the debasement of the



currency, proceeding either from a clipped coinage, or a



depreciated paper-money.



    It is observed by Sir James Stuart, "That if the foot measure



was altered at once over all England, by adding to it, or taking



from it, any proportional part of its standard length, the



alteration would be best discovered, by comparing the new foot



with that of Paris, or of any other country, which had suffered



no alteration.



    "Just so, if the pound sterling, which is the English unit,



shall be found any how changed; and if the variation it has met



with be difficult to ascertain, because of a complication of



circumstances; the best way to discover it will be to compare the



former and the present value of it, with the money of other



nations which has suffered no variation. This the exchange will



perform with the greatest exactness." The Edinburgh reviewers, in



speaking of Lord King's pamphlet, observe, that "it does not



follow because our imports always consist partly of bullion, that



the balance of trade is therefore permanently in our favour.



Bullion," they say, "is a commodity, for which, as for every



other, there is a varying demand; and which, exactly like any



other, may enter the catalogue either of imports or exports; and



this exportation or importation of bullion will not affect the



course of exchange in a different way from the exportation or



importation of any other commodities."



    No person ever exports or imports bullion without first



considering the rate of exchange. It is by the rate of exchange



that he discovers the relative value of bullion in the two



countries between which it is estimated. It is therefore



consulted by the bullion-merchant in the same manner as the



price-current is by other merchants, before they determine on the



exportation or importation of other commodities. If eleven



florins in Holland contain an equal quantity of pure silver as



twenty standard shillings, silver bullion, equal in weight to



twenty standard shillings, can never be exported from London to



Amsterdam whilst the exchange is at par, or unfavourable to



Holland. Some expence and risk must attend its exportation, and



the very term par expresses that a quantity of silver bullion,



equal to that weight and purity, is to be obtained in Holland by



the purchase of a bill of exchange, free of all expence. Who



would send bullion to Holland at an expence of three or four per



cent. when, by the purchase of a bill at par, he in fact obtains



an order for the delivery to his correspondent in Holland of the



same weight of bullion which he was about to export?



    It would be as reasonable to contend, that when the price of



corn is higher in England than on the Continent, corn would be



sent, notwithstanding all the charges on its exportation, to be



sold in the cheaper market.



    Having already noticed the disorders to which a metallic



currency is exposed, I will proceed to consider those which,



though not caused by the debased state of either the gold or



silver coins, are nevertheless more serious in their ultimate



consequences.



    Our circulating medium is almost wholly composed of paper,



and it behoves us to guard against the depreciation of the paper



currency with at least as much vigilance as against that of the



coins.



    This we have neglected to do.



    Parliament, by restricting the Bank from paying in specie,



have enabled the conductors of that concern to increase or



decrease at pleasure the quantity and amount of their notes; and



the previously existing checks against an over-issue having been



thereby removed, those conductors have acquired the power of



increasing or decreasing the value of the paper currency.



    In tracing the present evils to their source, and proving



their existence by an appeal to the two unerring tests I have



before mentioned, namely, the rate of exchange and the price of



bullion, I shall avail myself of the account given by Mr Thornton



of the conduct of the Bank before the restriction, to shew how



clearly they acted on the principle which he has expressly



acknowledged, viz. that the value of their notes is dependent on



their amount, and that they ascertained the variation in their



value by the tests I have just referred to.



    Mr Thornton tells us, "That if at any time the exchanges of



the country became so unfavourable as to produce a material



excess of the market above the mint price of gold, the directors



of the Bank, as appears by the evidence of some of their body,



given to parliament, were disposed to resort to a reduction of



their paper, as a means of diminishing or removing the excess,



and of thus providing for the security of their establishment.



They moreover have at all times," he says, "been accustomed to



observe some limit as to the quantity of their notes for the same



prudential reasons. " And in another place: " When the price



which our coin will fetch in foreign countries is such as to



tempt it out of the kingdom, the directors of the Bank naturally



diminish, in some degree, the quantity of their paper through an



anxiety for the safety of their establishment. By diminishing



their paper, they raise its value; and in rising its value, they



raise also the value in England of the current coin which is



exchanged for it. Thus the value of our gold coin conforms itself



to the value of the current paper, and the current paper is



rendered by the Bank-directors, of that value which it is



necessary that it should bear in order to prevent large



exportations;-a value sometimes rising a little above, and



sometimes falling a little below, the price which our coin bears



abroad."



    The necessity which the Bank felt itself under to guard the



safety of its establishment, therefore, always prevented, before



the restriction from paying in specie, a too lavish issue of



paper money.



    Thus we find that, for a period of twenty-three years



previously to the suspension of cash payments in 1797, the



average price of gold bullion was 3 l. 17s. 7 3/4d. per oz. about



2 3/4d. under the mint price; and for sixteen years previously to



1774, it never was much above 4 l. per oz. It should be



remembered that during these sixteen years our gold coin was



debased by wearing, and it is therefore probable that 4 l. of



such debased money did not weigh as much as the ounce of gold for



which it was exchanged.



    Dr A. Smith considers every permanent excess of the market



above the mint price of gold, as referrible to the state of the



coins. While the coin was of its standard weight and purity, the



market price of gold bullion, he thought, could not greatly



exceed the mint price.



    Mr Thornton contends that this cannot be the only cause. "We



have," he says, "lately experienced fluctuations in our



exchanges, and correspondent variations in the market, compared



with the mint price of gold, amounting to no less than eight or



ten per cent; the state of our coinage continuing in all respects



the same." Mr Thornton should have reflected that at the time he



wrote, specie could not be demanded at the Bank in exchange for



notes; that this was a cause for the depreciation of the currency



which Dr Smith could never have anticipated. If Mr Thornton had



proved that there had been a fluctuation of ten per cent. in the



price of gold, while the Bank paid their notes in specie, and the



coin was undebased, he would then have convicted Dr Smith of "



having treated this important subject in a defective and



unsatisfactory manner." (6*)



    But as all checks against the over-issues of the Bank are now



removed by the act of parliament, which restricts them from



paying their notes in specie, they are no longer bound by "fears



for the safety of their establishment," to limit the quantity of



their notes to that sum which shall keep them of the same value



as the coin which they represent. Accordingly we find that gold



bullion has risen from 3 l. 17s. 7 3/4d. the average price



previously 1 to 1797, to 4 l. 10s. and has been lately as high as



4 l. 13s. per oz.



    We may therefore fairly conclude that this difference in the



relative value, or, in other words, that this depreciation in the



actual value of bank-notes has been caused by the too abundant



quantity which the Bank has sent into circulation. The same cause



which has produced a difference of from fifteen to twenty per



cent. in bank-notes when compared with gold bullion, may increase



it to fifty per cent. There can be no limit to the depreciation



which may arise from a constantly increasing quantity of paper.



The stimulus which a redundant currency gives to the exportation



of the coin has acquired new force, but cannot, as formerly,



relieve itself. We have paper money only in circulation, which is



necessarily confined to ourselves. Every increase in its quantity



degrades it below the value of gold and silver bullion, below the



value of the currencies of other counties.



    The effect is the same as that which would have been produced



from clipping our coins.



    If one-fifth were taken off from every guinea, the market



price of gold bullion would rise one-fifth above the mint price.



Forty-four guineas and a half (the number of guineas weighing a



pound, and therefore called the mint price), would no longer



weigh a pound, therefore a fifth more than that quantity, or



about 56 l. would be the price of a pound of gold, and the



difference between the market and the mint price, between 56 l.



and 46 l. 14s. 6d. would measure the depreciation.



    If such debased coin were to continue to be called by the



name of guineas, and if the value of gold bullion and all other



commodities were rated in the debased coin, a guinea fresh from



the mint would be said to be worth 1 l. 5s. and that sum would be



given for it by the illicit trader; but it would not be the value



of the new guinea which had increased, but that of the debased



guineas which had fallen. This would immediately be evident, if a



proclamation were issued, prohibiting the debased guineas from



being current but by weight at the mint price of 3 l. 17s. 10



1/2d.; this would be constituting the new and heavy guineas, the



standard measure of value, in lieu of the clipped and debased



guineas. The latter would then pass at their true value, and be



called 17 or 18 shilling-pieces. So if a proclamation to the same



effect were now enforced, banknotes would not be less current,



but would pass only for the value of the gold bullion which they



would purchase. A guinea would then no longer be said to be worth



1 l. 4s. but a pound note would be current only for 16 or 17



shillings. At present gold coin is only a commodity, and



bank-notes are the standard measure of value, but in that case



gold coin would be that measure, and bank-notes would be the



marketable commodity.



    " It is," says Mr Thornton, " the maintenance of our general



exchanges, or, in other words, it is the agreement of the mint



price with the bullion price of gold, which seems to be the true



proof that the circulating paper is not depreciated." When the



motive for exporting gold occurs, while the Bank do not pay in



specie, and gold cannot therefore be obtained at its mint price,



the small quantity that can be procured will be collected for



exportation, and bank-notes will be sold at a discount for gold



in proportion to their excess. In saying however that gold is at



a high price, we are mistaken; it is not gold, it is paper which



has changed its value. Compare an ounce of gold, or 3 l. 17s. 10



1/2d. to commodities, it bears the same proportion to them which



it has before done; and if it do not, it is referrible to



increased taxation, or to some of those causes which are so



constantly operating on its value. But if we compare the



substitute of an ounce of gold, 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. in banknotes,



with commodities, we shall then discover the depreciation of the



bank-notes. In every market of the world I am obliged to part



with 4 l. 10s. in bank-notes to purchase the same quantity of



commodities which I can obtain for the gold that is in 3 l. 17s.



10 1/2d. of coin.



    It is often asserted, that a guinea is worth at Hamburgh 26



or 28 shillings; but we should be very much deceived if we should



therefore conclude that a guinea could be sold at Hamburgh for as



much silver as is contained in 26 or 28 shillings. Before the



alteration in the relative value of gold and silver, a guinea



would not sell at Hamburgh for as much silver coin as is



contained in 21 standard shillings; it will at the present market



price sell for a sum of silver currency, which, if imported and



carried to our mint to be coined, will produce in our standard



silver coin 21s. 5d. (7*)



    It is nevertheless true, that the same quantity of silver



will, at Hamburgh, purchase a bill payable in London, in



banknotes, for 26 or 28 shillings. Can there be a more



satisfactory proof of the depreciation of our circulating medium?



    It is said, that, if the Restriction-bill were not in force,



every guinea would leave the country.(8*)



    This is, no doubt, true; but if the Bank were to diminish the



quantity of their notes until they had increased their value



fifteen per cent., the restriction might be safely removed, as



there would then be no temptation to export specie. However long



it may be deferred, however great may be the discount on their



notes, the Bank can never resume their payments in specie, until



they first reduce the amount of their notes in circulation to



these limits.



    The law is allowed by all writers on political economy to be



a useless barrier against the exportation of guineas: it is so



easily evaded, that it is doubted whether it has had the effect



of keeping a single guinea more in England than there would have



been without such law. Mr Locke, Sir J. Stuart, Dr A. Smith, Lord



Liverpool, and Mr Thornton, all agree on this subject. The latter



gentleman observes, "That the state of the British law



unquestionably serves to discourage and limit, though not



effectually to hinder, that exportation of guineas which is



encouraged by an unfavourable balance of trade, and perhaps



scarcely lessens it when the profit on exportation becomes very



great." Yet after every guinea that can in the present state of



things be procured by the illicit trader has been melted and



exported, he will hesitate before he openly buys guineas with



bank-notes at a premium, because, though considerable profit may



attend such speculation, he will thereby render himself an object



of suspicion. He may be watched, and prevented from effecting his



object. As the penalties of the law are severe, and the



temptation to informers great, secrecy is essential to his



operations. When guineas can be procured by merely sending a



bank-note for them to the Bank, the law will be easily evaded;



but when it is necessary to collect them openly and from a widely



diffused circulation, consisting almost wholly of paper, the



advantage attending it must be very considerable before any one



will encounter the risk of being detected.



    When we reflect that above sixty millions sterling have been



coined into guineas during his present Majesty's reign, we may



form some idea of the extent to which the exportation of gold



must have been carried. - But repeal the law against the



exportation of guineas, permit them to be openly sent out of the



county, and what can prevent an ounce of standard gold in guineas



from selling at as good a price for bank-notes, as an ounce of



Portugueze gold coin, or standard gold in bars, when it is known



to be equal to them in fineness? And if an ounce of standard gold



in guineas would sell in the market, as standard bars do now, at



4 l. 10s. per oz., or as they have lately done at 4l. 13s. per



oz., what shopkeeper would sell his goods at the same price



either for gold or bank-notes indifferently? If the price of a



coat were 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. or an ounce of gold, and if at the



same time an ounce of gold would sell for 4 l. 13s., is it



conceivable that it would be a matter of indifference to the



tailor whether he were paid in gold or in bank-notes?



    It is only because a guinea will not purchase more than a



pound-note and a shilling, that many hesitate to allow that



bank-notes are at a discount. The Edinburgh Review supports the



same opinion; but if my reasoning be correct, I have shewn such



objections to be groundless.



    Mr Thornton has told us that an unfavourable trade will



account for an unfavourable exchange; but we have already seen



that an unfavourable trade, if such be an accurate term, is



limited in its effects on the exchange. That limit is probably



four or five per cent. This will not account for a depreciation



of fifteen or twenty per cent. Moreover Mr Thornton has told us,



and I entirely agree with him, "That it may be laid down as a



general truth, that the commercial exports and imports of a state



naturally proportion themselves in some degree to each other, and



that the balance of trade therefore cannot continue for a very



long time to be either highly favourable or highly unfavourable



to a county." Now the low exchange, so far from being temporary,



existed before Mr Thornton wrote in 1802, and has since been



progressively increasing, and is now from fifteen to twenty per



cent. against us. Mr Thornton must therefore, according to his



own principles, attribute it to some more permanent cause than an



unfavourable balance of trade, and will, I doubt not, whatever



his opinion may formerly have been, now agree that it is to be



accounted for only by the depreciation of the circulating medium.



    It can, I think, no longer be disputed that bank-notes are at



a discount. While the price of gold bullion is 4 l. 10s. per oz.,



or in other words, while any man will consent to give that which



professes to be an obligation to pay nearly an ounce, and a sixth



of an ounce of gold, for an ounce, it cannot be contended that 4



l. 10s. in notes and 4 l. 10s. in gold coin are of the same



value.



    An ounce of gold is coined into 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d.; by



possessing that sum therefore I have an ounce of gold, and would



not give 4 l. 10s. in gold coin, or notes which I could



immediately exchange for 4 l. 10s., for an ounce of gold.



    It is contrary to common sense to suppose that such could be



the market value, unless the price were estimated in a



depreciated medium.



    If the price of gold were estimated in silver indeed, the



price might rise to 4 l., 5 l., or 10 l. an ounce, and it would,



of itself, be no proof of the depreciation of paper currency, but



of an alteration in the relative value of gold and silver. I



have, however, I think proved, that silver is not the standard



measure of value, and therefore not the medium in which the value



of gold is estimated. But if it were; as an ounce of gold is only



worth in the market 15 1/2 oz. of silver, and as 15 1/2 ounces of



silver is precisely equal in weight, and is therefore coined into



80 shillings, an ounce of gold ought not to sell for more than 4



l.



    Those then who maintain that silver is the measure of value



cannot prove that any demand for gold which may have taken place,



from whatever cause it may have proceeded, can have raised its



price above 4l. per oz. All above that price must, on their own



principles, be called a depreciation in the value of bank-notes.



It therefore follows, that if bank-notes be the representative of



silver coin, then an ounce of gold, selling as it now does for 4



l. 10s. sells for an amount of notes which represent 17 1/2



ounces of silver, whereas in the bullion market it can only be



exchanged for 15 1/2 ounces. Fifteen ounces and a half of silver



bullion are therefore of equal value with an engagement of the



Bank to pay to bearer seventeen ounces and a half.



    The market price of silver is at the present time 5s. 9 1/2d.



per oz. estimated in bank-notes, the mint price being only 5s.



2d., consequently the standard silver in 100 l. is worth more



than 112 l. in bank-notes.



    But bank-notes, it may be said, are the representatives of



our debased silver coin, and not of our standard silver. This is



not true, because the law which I have already quoted declares



silver to be a legal tender for sums only not exceeding 25 l.



except by weight. If the Bank insisted on paying the holder of a



bank-note of 1000 l. in silver coin, they would be bound either



to give him standard silver of full weight, or debased silver of



an equal value, with the exception of 25 l. which they might pay



him in debased coin. But the 1000 l. so consisting of 975 l. pure



money, and 25 l. debased, is worth more than 1112 l. at the



present market value of silver bullion.



    It is said that the amount of bank-notes has not increased in



a greater proportion than the augmentation of our trade required,



and therefore cannot be excessive. This assertion would be



difficult to prove, and if true, no argument but what is delusive



could be founded on it. In the first place, the daily



improvements which we are making in the art of economizing the



use of circulating medium, by improved methods of banking, would



render the same amount of notes excessive now, which were



necessary for the same state of commerce at a former period.



Secondly, there is a constant competition between the Bank of



England and the country-banks to establish their notes, to the



exclusion of those of their rivals, in every district where the



country banks are established.



    As the latter have more than doubled in number within very



few years, is it not probable that their activity may have been



crowned with success, in displacing with their own notes many of



those of the Bank of England?



    If this have happened, the same amount of Bank of England



notes would now be excessive; which, with a less extended



commerce, was before barely sufficient to keep our currency on a



level with that of other counties. No just conclusion can



therefore be drawn from the actual amount of bank-notes in



circulation, though the fact, if examined, would, I have no



doubt, be found to be, that the increase in the amount of



banknotes, and the high price of gold, have usually accompanied



each other.



    It is doubted, whether two or three millions of Bank-notes



(the sum which the Bank is supposed to have added to the



circulation, over and above the amount which it will easily



bear,) could have had such effects as are ascribed to them; but



it should be recollected, that the Bank regulate the amount of



the circulation of all the country banks, and it is probable,



that if the Bank increase their issues three millions, they



enable the country banks to add more than three millions to the



general circulation of England.



    The money of a particular county is divided amongst its



different provinces by the same rules as the money of the world



is divided amongst the different nations of which it is composed.



Each district will retain in its circulation such a proportionate



share of the currency of the country, as its trade, and



consequently its payments, may require, compared to the trade of



the whole; and no increase can take place in the circulating



medium of one district, without being generally diffused, or



calling forth a proportionable quantity in every other district.



It is this which keeps a country bank note always of the same



value as a Bank of England note. If in London, where Bank of



England notes only are current, one million be added to the



amount in circulation, the currency will become cheaper there



than elsewhere, or goods will become dearer. Goods will,



therefore, be sent from the country to the London market, to be



sold at the high prices, or which is much more probable, the



country banks will take advantage of the relative deficiency in



the country currency, and increase the amount of their notes in



the same proportion as the Bank of England had done; prices would



then be generally, and not partially affected.



    In the same manner, if Bank of England notes be diminished



one million, the comparative value of the currency of London will



be increased, and the prices of goods diminished. A Bank of



England note will then be more valuable than a country bank note,



because it will be wanted to purchase goods in the cheap market;



and as the country banks are obliged to give Bank of England



notes for their own when demanded, they would be called upon for



them till the quantity of country paper should be reduced to the



same proportion which it before bore to the London paper,



producing a corresponding fall in the prices of all goods for



which it was exchangeable.



    The country banks could never increase the amount of their



notes, unless to fill up a relative deficiency in the country



currency, caused by the increased issues of the Bank of



England.(9*) If they attempted it, the same check which compelled



the Bank of England to withdraw part of their notes from



circulation when they used to pay them on demand in specie, would



oblige the country banks to adopt the same course. Their notes



would, on account of the increased quantity, be rendered of less



value than the Bank of England notes, in the same manner as Bank



of England notes were rendered of less value than the guineas



which they represented. They would therefore be exchanged for



Bank of England notes until they were of the same value.



    The Bank of England is the great regulator of the country



paper. When they increase or decrease the amount of their notes,



the country banks do the same; and in no case can country banks



add to the general circulation, unless the Bank of England shall



have previously increased the amount of their notes.



    It is contended, that the rate of interest, and not the price



of gold or silver bullion, is the criterion by which we may, that



if it were always judge of the abundance of paper-money too



abundant, interest would fall, and if not sufficiently so,



interest would rise. It can, I think, be made manifest, that the



rate of interest is not regulated by the abundance or scarcity of



money, but by the abundance or scarcity of that part of capital,



not consisting of money.



    "Money," observes Dr A. Smith, "the great wheel of



circulation, the great instrument of commerce, like all other



instruments of trade, though it makes a part, and a very valuable



part of the capital, makes no part of the revenue of the society



to which it belongs; and though the metal pieces of which it is



composed, in the course of their annual circulation, distribute



to every man the revenue which properly belongs to him, they make



themselves no part of that revenue.



    "When we compute the quantity of industry which the



circulating capital of any society can employ, we must always



have regard to those parts of it only which consist in



provisions, materials, and finished work: the other, which



consists in money, and which serves only to circulate those



three, must always be deducted. In order to put industry into



motion, three things are requisite: - materials to work upon,



tools to work with, and the wages or recompense for the sake of



which the work is done. Money is neither a material to work upon,



nor a tool to work with; and though the wages of the workman are



commonly paid to him in money, his real revenue, like that of all



other men, consists not in money, but in money's worth; not in



the metal pieces, but what can be got for them."



    And in other parts of his work, it is maintained, that the



discovery of the mines in America, which so greatly increased the



quantity of money, did not lessen the interest for the use of it:



the rate of interest being regulated by the profits on the



employment of capital, and not by the number or quality of the



pieces of metal, which are used to circulate its produce.



    Mr Hume has supported the same opinion. The value of the



circulating medium of every country bears some proportion to the



value of the commodities which it circulates. In some countries



this proportion is much greater than in others, and varies, on



some occasions, in the same country. It depends upon the rapidity



of circulation, upon the degree of confidence and credit existing



between traders, and above all, on the judicious operations of



banking. In England so many means of economizing the use of



circulating medium have been adopted, that its value, compared



with the value of the commodities which it circulates, is



probably (during a period of confidence (10*)) reduced to as



small a proportion as is practicable.



    What that proportion may be has been variously estimated. No



increase or decrease of its quantity, whether consisting of gold,



silver, or paper-money, can increase or decrease its value above



or below this proportion. If the mines cease to supply the annual



consumption of the precious metals, money will become more



valuable, and a smaller quantity will be employed as a



circulating medium. The diminution in the quantity will be



proportioned to the increase of its value. In like manner, if new



mines be discovered, the value of the precious metals will be



reduced, and an increased quantity used in the circulation; so



that in either case the relative value of money, to the



commodities which it circulates, will continue as before.



    If, whilst the Bank paid their notes on demand in specie,



they were to increase their quantity, they would produce little



permanent effect on the value of the currency, because nearly an



equal quantity of the coin would be withdrawn from circulation



and exported.



    If the Bank were restricted from paying their notes in



specie, and all the coin had been exported, any excess of their



notes would depreciate the value of the circulating medium in



proportion to the excess. If twenty millions had been the



circulation of England before the restriction, and four millions



were added to it, the twenty-four millions would be of no more



value than the twenty were before, provided commodities had



remained the same, and there had been no corresponding



exportation of coins; and if the Bank were successively to



increase it to fifty, or a hundred millions, the increased



quantity would be all absorbed in the circulation of England, but



would be, in all cases, depreciated to the value of the twenty



millions.



    I do not dispute, that if the Bank were to bring a large



additional sum of notes into the market, and offer them on loan,



but that they would for a time affect the rate of interest. The



same effects would follow from the discovery of a hidden treasure



of gold or silver coin. If the amount were large, the Bank, or



the owner of the treasure, might not be able to lend the notes or



the money at four, nor perhaps, above three per cent.; but having



done so, neither the notes, nor the money, would be retained



unemployed by the borrowers; they would be sent into every



market, and would every where raise the prices of commodities,



till they were absorbed in the general circulation. It is only



during the interval of the issues of the Bank, and their effect



on prices, that we should be sensible of an abundance of money,



interest would, during that interval, be under its natural level;



but as soon as the additional sum of notes or of money became



absorbed in the general circulation, the rate of interest would



be as high, and new loans would be demanded with as much



eagerness as before the additional issues.



    The circulation can never be over-full. If it be one of gold



and silver, any increase in its quantity will be spread over the



world. If it be one of paper, it will diffuse itself only in the



country where it is issued. Its effects on prices will then be



only local and nominal, as a compensation by means of the



exchange will be made to foreign purchasers.



    To suppose that any increased issues of the Bank can have the



effect of permanently lowering the rate of interest, and



satisfying the demands of all borrowers, so that there will be



none to apply for new loans, or that a productive gold or silver



mine can have such an effect, is to attribute a power to the



circulating medium which it can never possess. Banks would, if



this were possible, become powerful engines indeed. By creating



paper money, and lending it at three or two per cent. under the



present market rate of interest, the Bank would reduce the



profits on trade in the same proportion; and if they were



sufficiently patriotic to lend their notes at an interest no



higher than necessary to pay the expences of their establishment,





profits would be still further reduced; no nation, but by similar



means, could enter into competition with us, we should engross



the trade of the world. To what absurdities would not such a



theory lead us! Profits can only be lowered by a competition of



capitals not consisting of circulating medium. As the increase of



Bank-notes does not add to this species of capital, as it neither



increases our exportable commodities, our machinery, or our raw



materials, it cannot add to our profits nor lower interest. (11*)



    When any one borrows money for the purpose of entering into



trade, he borrows it as a medium by which he can possess himself



of " materials, provisions, etc." to carry on that trade; and it



can be of little consequence to him, provided he obtain the



quantity of materials, etc. necessary, whether he be obliged to



borrow a thousand, or ten thousand pieces of money. If he borrow



ten thousand, the produce of his manufacture will be ten times



the nominal value of what it would have been, had one thousand



been sufficient for the same purpose. The capital actually



employed in the county is necessarily limited to the amount of



the "materials, provisions, etc." and might be made equally



productive, though not with equal facility, if trade were carried



on wholly by barter. The successive possessors of the circulating



medium have the command over this capital: but however abundant



may be the quantity of money or of bank-notes; though it may



increase the nominal prices of commodities; though it may



distribute the productive capital in different proportions;



though the Bank, by increasing the quantity of their notes, may



enable A to carry on part of the business formerly engrossed by B



and C, nothing will be added to the real revenue and wealth of



the country. B and C may be injured, and A and the Bank may be



gainers, but they will gain exactly what B and C lose. There will



be a violent and an unjust transfer of property, but no benefit



whatever will be gained by the community.



    For these reasons I am of opinion that the funds are not



indebted for their high price to the depreciation of our



currency. Their price must be regulated by the general rate of



interest given for money. If before the depreciation I gave



thirty years' purchase for land, and twenty-five for an annuity



in the stocks, I can after the depreciation give a larger sum for



the purchase of land, without giving more years' purchase,



because the produce of the land will sell for a greater nominal



value in consequence of the depreciation; but as the annuity in



the funds is paid in the depreciated medium, there can be no



reason why I should give a greater nominal value for it after



than before the depreciation.



    If guineas were degraded by clipping to half their present



value, every commodity as well as land would rise to double its



present nominal value; but as the interest of the stocks would be



paid in the degraded guineas, they would, on that account,



experience no rise.



    The remedy which I propose for all the evils in our currency,



is that the Bank should gradually decrease the amount of their



notes in circulation until they shall have rendered the reminder



of equal value with the coins which they represent, or, in other



words, till the prices of gold and silver bullion shall be



brought down to their mint price. I am well aware that the total



failure of paper credit would be attended with the most



disastrous consequences to the trade and commerce of the county,



and even its sudden limitation would occasion so much ruin and



distress, that it would be highly inexpedient to have recourse to



it as the means of restoring our currency to its just and



equitable value.



    If the Bank were possessed of more guineas than they had



notes in circulation, they could not, without great injury to the



country, pay their notes in specie, while the price of gold



bullion continued greatly above the mint price, and the foreign



exchanges unfavourable to us. The excess of our currency would be



exchanged for guineas at the Bank and exported, and would be



suddenly withdrawn from circulation. Before therefore they can



safely pay in specie, the excess of notes must be gradually



withdrawn from circulation. If gradually done, little



inconvenience would be felt; so that the principle were fairly



admitted, it would be for future consideration whether the object



should be accomplished in one year or in five. I am fully



persuaded that we shall never restore our currency to its



equitable state, but by this preliminary step, or by the total



overthrow of our paper credit.



    If the Bank directors had kept the amount of their notes



within reasonable bounds; if they had acted up to the principle



which they have avowed to have been that which regulated their



issues when they were obliged to pay their notes in specie,



namely, to limit their notes to that amount which should prevent



the excess of the market above the mint price of gold, we should



not have been now exposed to all the evils of a depreciated, and



perpetually varying currency.



    Though the Bank derive considerable advantage from the



present system, though the price of their capital stock has



nearly doubled since 1797, and their dividends have



proportionally increased, I am ready to admit with Mr Thornton,



that the directors, as monied men, sustain losses in common with



others by a depreciation of the currency, much more serious to



them than any advantages which they may reap from it as



proprietors of Bank stock. I do therefore acquit them of being



influenced by interested motives, but their mistakes, if they are



such, are in their effects quite as pernicious to the community.



    The extraordinary powers with which they are entrusted enable



them to regulate at their pleasure the price at which those who



are possessed of a particular kind of property, called money,



shall dispose of it. The Bank directors have imposed upon these



holders of money all the evils of a maximum. To-day it is their



pleasure that 4 l. 10s. shall pass for 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d.,



to-morrow they may degrade 4 l. 15s. to the same value, and in



another year 10 l. may not be worth more. By what an insecure



tenure is property consisting of money or annuities paid in money



held! What security has the public creditor that the interest on



the public debt, which is now paid in a medium depreciated



fifteen per cent, may not hereafter be paid in one degraded fifty



per cent? The injury to private creditors is not less serious. A



debt contracted in 1797 may now be paid with eighty-five per



cent. of its amount, and who shall say that the depreciation will



go no further?



    The following observations of Dr Smith on this subject are so



important, that I cannot but recommend them to the serious



attention of all thinking men.



    "The raising the denomination of the coin has been the most



usual expedient by which a real public bankruptcy has been



disguised under the appearance of a pretended payment. If a



sixpence, for example, should either by act of parliament or



royal proclamation be raised to the denomination of a shilling,



and twenty sixpences to that of a pound sterling, the person who



under the old denomination had borrowed twenty shillings, or near



four ounces of silver, would, under the new, pay with twenty



sixpences, or with something less than two ounces. A national



debt of about a hundred and twenty millions, nearly the capital



of the funded debt of Great Britain, might in this manner be paid



with about sixty-four millions of our present money. It would



indeed be a pretended payment only, and the creditors of the



public would be defrauded of ten shillings in the pound of what



was due to them. The calamity too would extend much further than



to the creditors of the public, and those of every private person



would suffer a proportionable loss; and this without any



advantage, but in most cases with a great additional loss, to the



creditors of the public. If the creditors of the public indeed



were generally much in debt to other people, they might in some



measure compensate their loss by paying their creditors in the



same coin in which the public had paid them. But in most



countries the creditors of the public are the greater part of



them wealthy people, who stand more in the relation of creditors



than in that of debtors towards the rest of their



fellow-citizens. A pretended payment of this kind, therefore,



instead of alleviating, aggravates in most cases the loss of the



creditors of the public; and without any advantage to the public,



extends the calamity to a great number of other innocent people.



It occasions a general and most pernicious subversion of the



fortunes of private people; enriching in most cases the idle and



profuse debtor at the expence of the industrious and frugal



creditor, and transporting a great part of the national capital



from the hands which are likely to increase and improve it, to



those which are likely to dissipate and destroy it. When it



becomes necessary for a state to declare itself bankrupt, in the



same manner as when it becomes necessary for an individual to do



so, a fair, open, and avowed bankruptcy is always the measure



which is both least dishonourable to the debtor, and least



hurtful to the creditor. The honour of a state is surely very



poorly provided for, when in order to cover the disgrace of a



real bankruptcy, it has recourse to a juggling trick of this



kind, so easily seen through, and at the same time so extremely



pernicious."



    These observations of Dr Smith on a debased money are equally



applicable to a depreciated paper currency. He has enumerated but



a few of the disastrous consequences which attend the debasement



of the circulating medium, but he has sufficiently warned us



against trying such dangerous experiments. It will be a



circumstance ever to be lamented, if this great country, having



before its eyes the consequences of a forced paper circulation in



America and France, should persevere in a system pregnant with so



much disaster. Let us hope that she will be more wise. It is said



indeed that the cases are dissimilar: that the Bank of England is



independent of government. If this were true, the evils of a



superabundant circulation would not be less felt; but it may be



questioned whether a Bank lending many millions more to



government than its capital and savings can be called independent



of that government.



    When the order of council for suspending the cash payments



became necessary in 1797, the run upon the Bank was, in my



opinion, caused by political alarm alone, and not by a



superabundant, or a deficient quantity (as some have supposed) of



their notes in circulation.(12*)



    This is a danger to which the Bank, from the nature of its



institution, is at all times liable. No prudence on the part of



the directors could perhaps have averted it: but if their loans



to government had been more limited; if the same amount of notes



had been issued to the public through the medium of discounts;



they would have been able, in all probability, to have continued



their payments till the alarm had subsided. At any rate, as the



debtors to the Bank would have been obliged to discharge their



debts in the space of sixty days, that being the longest period



for which any bill discounted by the Bank has to run, the



directors would in that time, if necessary, have been enabled to



redeem every note in circulation. It was then owing to the too



intimate connection between the Bank and government that the



restriction became necessary; it is to that cause too that we owe



its continuance.



    To prevent the evil consequences which may attend the



perseverance in this system, we must keep our eyes steadily fixed



on the repeal of the Restriction-bill.



    The only legitimate security which the public can possess



against the indiscretion of the Bank is to oblige them to pay



their notes on demand in specie; and this can only be effected by



diminishing the amount of bank-notes in circulation till the



nominal price of gold be lowered to the mint price.



    Here I will conclude; happy if my feeble efforts should



awaken the public attention to a due consideration of the state



of our circulating medium. I am well aware that I have not added



to the stock of information with which the public has been



enlightened by many able writers on the same important subject. I



have had no such ambition. My aim has been to introduce a calm



and dispassionate enquiry into a question of great importance to



the state, and the neglect of which may be attended with



consequences which every friend of his country would deplore.







NOTES:







1. They might, strictly speaking, rather exceed that quantity,



because as the Bank would add to the currency of the world,



England would retain its share of the increase.







2. This is strongly corroborated, by the statement of Mr Rose, in



the House of Commons, that our exports exceeded our imports by (I



believe) sixteen millions. In return for those exports no bullion



could have been imported, because it is well known, that the



price of bullion having been during the whole year higher abroad



than in this country, a large quantity of our gold coin has been



exported. To the value of the balance of exports, therefore, must



be added the value of the bullion exported. A part of the amount



may be due to us from foreign nations, but the reminder must be



precisely equal to our foreign expenditure, consisting of



subsidies to our allies, and the maintenance of our fleets and



armies on foreign stations.







3. It has been observed, in a work of great and deserved repute,



the Edinburgh Review, that an increase in the paper currency will



only occasion a rise in the paper or currency price of



commodities, but will not cause an increase in their bullion



price.



    This would be true at a time when the currency consisted



wholly of paper not convertible into specie, but not while specie



formed any part of the circulation. In the latter case the effect



of an increased issue of paper would be to throw out of



circulation an equal amount of specie; but this could not be done



without adding to the quantity of bullion in the market, and



thereby lowering its value, or in other words, increasing the



bullion price of commodities. It is only in consequence of this



fall in the value of the metallic currency, and of bullion, that



the temptation to export them arises; and the penalties on



melting the coin is the sole cause of a small difference between



the value of the coin and of bullion, or a small excess of the



market above the mint price. But exporting of bullion is



synonymous with an unfavourable balance of trade. From whatever



cause an exportation of bullion, in exchange for commodities, may



proceed, it is called (I think very incorrectly) an unfavourable



balance of trade.



    When the circulation consists wholly of paper, any increase



in its quantity will raise the money price of bullion without



lowering its value, in the same manner, and in the same



proportion, as it will raise the prices of other commodities, and



for the same reason will lower the foreign exchanges; but this



will only be a nominal, not a real fall, and will not occasion



the exportation of bullion, because the real value of bullion



will not be diminished, as there will be no increase to the



quantity in the market.







4. Strictly speaking, there can be no permanent measure of value.



A measure of value should itself be invariable; but this is not



the case with either gold or silver, they being subject to



fluctuations as well as other commodities. Experience has indeed



taught us, that though the variations in the value of gold or



silver may be considerable, on a comparison of distant periods,



yet for short spaces of time their value is tolerably fixed. It



is this property, among their other excellencies, which fits them





better than any other commodity for the uses of money. Either



gold or silver may therefore, in the point of view in which we



are considering them, be called a measure of value.







5. When the gold coin was debased, previously to the re-coinage



in 1774, gold and silver bullion rose above their mint prices,



and fell immediately on the gold coin attaining its present



perfection. The exchanges were, owing to the same causes, from



being unfavourable rendered favourable.







6. An excess in the market above the mint price of gold or silver



bullion, may, whilst the coins of both metals are legal tender,



and there is no prohibition against the coinage of either metal,



be caused by a variation in the relative value of those metals;



but an excess of the market above the mint price prodding from



this cause will be at once perceived by its affecting only the



price of one of the metals. Thus gold would be at or below, while



silver was above, its mint price, or silver at or below its mint



price, whilst gold was above.



    In the latter end of 1795, when the Bank had considerably



more notes in circulation than either the preceding or the



subsequent year, when their embarrassments had already commenced,



when they appear to have resigned all prudence in the management



of their concerns, and to have constituted Mr Pitt sole director,



the price of gold bullion did for a short time rise to 4 l. 3s.



or 4 l. 4s. per oz.; but the directors were not without their



fears for the consequences. In a remonstrance sent by them to Mr



Pitt, dated October 1795, after stating, "that the demand for



gold not appearing likely soon to cease," and "that it had



excited great apprehension in the court of directors," they



observe, "The present price of gold being 4 l. 3s. to 4 l. 4s.



[It is difficult to determine on what authority the directors



made this assertion, as by a return lately made to parliament it



appears that during the year 1795 they did not purchase gold



bullion at a price higher than 3 l. 17s. 6d.] per ounce, and our



guineas being to be purchased at 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d., clearly



demonstrates the grounds of our fears; it being only necessary to



state those facts to the Chancellor of the Exchequer " It is



remarkable that no price of gold above the mint price is quoted



during the whole year in Wetenhall's list. In December it is



there marked 3 l. 17s. 6d.







7. The relative value of gold and silver is on the Continent



nearly the same as in London.







8. It must be meant that every guinea in the Bank would leave the



country, the temptation of fifteen per cent is amply sufficient



to send those out which can be collected from the circulation.







9. They might, on some occasion, displace Bank of England notes,



but that consideration does not affect the question which we are



not discussing.







10. In the following observations, I wish it to be understood, as



supposing always the same degree of confidence and credit to



exist.







11. I have already allowed that the Bank, as far as they enable



us to turn our coin into "materials, provisions, etc." have



produced a national benefit, as they have thereby increased the



quantity of productive capital; but I am here speaking of an



excess of their notes, of that quantity which adds to our



circulation without effecting any corresponding exportation of



coin, and which, therefore, degrades the notes below the value of



the bullion contained in the coin which they represent.







12. At that period the price of gold kept steadily under its mint



price.







APPENDIX







    The public having called for a new edition of this pamphlet,



I avail myself of the occasion to consider the observations which



the Edinburgh Reviewers, in the last number of their publication,



have done me the honour to make on some of the passages contained



in it. I am induced to do this from the conviction that



discussion on every point connected with this important subject



will hasten the remedy against the existing abuse, and will tend



to secure us against the risk of its recurrence in future.



    In the article on the depreciation of money, the Reviewers



observe, "The great fault of Mr Ricardo's performance is the



partial view which he takes of the causes which operate upon the



course of exchange. He attibutes," they say, "a favourable or an



unfavourable exchange exclusively to a redundant or deficient



currency, and overlooks the varying desires and wants of



different societies, as an original cause of a temporary excess



of imports above exports, or exports above imports." They then



comment on the passage in which I have maintained, that a bad



harvest will not occasion the export of money , unless money is



relatively cheap in the exporting country, and conclude their



observations by giving it as their decided opinion, that the



exportation of money in the supposed case of a bad harvest, "is



not occasioned by its cheapness. It is not, as Mr. Ricardo



endeavours to persuade us, the cause of the unfavourable balance,



instead of the effect. It is not merely a salutary remedy for a



redundant currency: but it is owing precisely to the cause



mentioned by Mr Thornton - the unwillingness of the creditor



nation to receive a great additional quantity of goods not wanted



for immediate consumption, without being bribed to it by



excessive cheapness; and its willingness to receive bullion - the



currency of the commercial world - without any such bribe. It is



unquestionably true, as stated by Mr Ricardo, that no nation will



pay a debt in the precious metals, if it can do it cheaper by



commodities; but the prices of commodities are liable to great



depressions from a glut in the market; whereas the precious



metals, on account of their having been constituted by the



universal consent of society, the general medium of exchange, and



instument of commerce, will pay a debt of the largest amount at



its nominal estimation, according to the quantity of bullion



contained in the respective currencies of the counties in



question, and, whatever variations between the quantity of



currency and commodities may be stated to take place subsequent



to the commencement of these transactions, it cannot be for a



moment doubted that the cause of them is to be found in the wants



and desires of one of the two nations, and not in any original



redundancy or deficiency of currency in either of them."



    They agree with me," that no nation will pay a debt in the



precious metals, if it can do it cheaper by commodities, but the



prices of commodities," they say, "are liable to great



depressions from a glut in the market.'" of course they must mean



in the foreign market, and then the words express the opinion



which they are endeavouring to controvert, viz. that when goods



cannot be sent out so advantageously as money, money will be



exported, - which is another way of saying that money will never



be exported, unless it is relatively redundant with commodities,



as compared with other counties. Yet immediately after they



contend, that the exportation of the "precious metals is the



effect of a balance of trade, originating in causes which may



exist without any relation whatever to redundancy or deficiency



of currency." These opinions appear to me directly contradictory.



If however the precious metals can be exported from a country in



exchange for commodities, although they should be as dear in the



exporting as in the importing country, what are the effects which



will follow from such improvident exportation?



    "A comparative deficiency in one country, and redundancy in



the other," say the Reviewers, p. 343. "and this state of things



could not fail to have a speedy effect in changing the direction



of the balance of payments, and in restoring that equilibrium of



the precious metals, which had been for a time disturbed by the



naturally unequal wants and necessities of the counties which



tade with each other." Now it would have been well if the



Reviewers had told us at what point this re-action would



commence, - as at the first view it appears that the same law



which will permit money to be exported from a country, when it is



no cheaper than in the importing country, may also allow it to be



exported when it is actually dearer. It is self-interest which



regulates all the speculations of trade, and where that can be



clearly and satisfactorily ascertined, we should not know where



to stop if we admitted any other rule of action. They should have



explained to us therefore, why, if the demand for the commodity



imported should continue, the country importing might not be



entirely exhausted of its coin and bullion. What is under such



circumstances to check the exportation of the currency? The



Reviewers say, because "a country with a diminished quantity of



bullion would evidently soon be limited in its powers of paying



with the precious metals." Why soon? Is it not admitted "that



excess and deficiency of currency are only relative terms; that



the circulation of a county can never be superabundant," (and



therefore can never be deficient,) "except in relation to other



countries." Does it not follow from these admissions, that if the



balance of trade may become unfavourable to a country, though its



currency be not relatively superabundant, that there is no check



against the exportation of its coin, whilst any amount of money



remains in circulation; as the diminished sum, (by acquiring a



new value,) will as readily and as effectually make the required



payments as the larger sum did before? A succession of bad



harvests might, on this principle, drin a country of its money,



whatever might be its amount, although it consisted exclusively



of the precious metals. The observation that its diminished value



in the importing county, and its increasing value in the



exporting country, would make it revert again to the old channel,



does not answer the objection. When will this happen? and in



exchange for what will it be returned? The answer is obvious -



for commodities. The ultimate result then of all this exportation



and importation of money, is that one county will have imported



one commodity in exchange for another, and the coin and bullion



will in both countries have regined their natural level. Is it to



be contended that these results would not be foreseen, and the



expence and trouble attending these needless operations



effectually prevented, in a country where capital is abundant,



where every possible economy in tade is practised, and where



competition is pushed to its utmost limits? Is it conceivable



that money should be sent abroad for the purpose merely of



rendering it dear in this country and cheap in another, and by



such means to ensure its return to us?



    It is particularly worthy of observation that so deep-rooted



is the prejudice which considers coin and bullion as things



essentially differing in all their operations from other



commodities, that writers greatly enlightened upon the general



truth of political economy seldom fail, after having requested



their readers to consider money and bullion merely as commodities



subject to "the same general principle of supply and demand which



are unquestionably the foundation on which the whole



superstucture of political economy is built;" to forget this



recommendation themselves, and to argue upon the subject of



money, and the laws which regulate its export and import, as



quite distinct and different from those which regulate the export



and import of other commodities. Thus the Reviewers, if they had



been speaking of coffee or of sugar, would have denied the



possibility of those articles being exported from England to the



continent, unless they were dearer there than here. It would have



been in vain to have urged to them, that our harvest had been



bad, and that we were in want of corn; they would confidently and



undeniably have proved that to whatever degree the scarcity of



corn might have existed, it would not have been possible for



England to send, or for France (for example) to be willing to



receive, coffee or sugar in return for corn, whilst coffee or



sugar cost more money in England than in France. What! they would



have said, do you believe it possible for us to send a parcel of



coffee to France to sell there for 100 l. when that coffee cost



here 105 l. - when by sending 100 l. of the 105 l. we should



equally discharge the debt contracted for the imported corn? And,



I say, do you believe it possible that we shall agree to send, or



France agree to receive (if the transaction is on her account)



100 l. in money, when 95 l. invested in coffee and exported will



be equally valuable as the 100 l. when it arrives in France? But



coffee is not wanted in France, there is a glut of it; - allowed,



but money is wanted still less, and the proof is, that a hundred



pounds worth of coffee will sell for more than a hundred pounds



worth of money. The only proof which we can possess of the



relative cheapness of money in two places, is by comparing it



with commodities. Commodities measure the value of money in the



same manner as money measures the value of commodities. If then



commodities will purchase more money in England than in France,



we may justly say that money is cheaper in England, and that it



is exported to find its level, not to destroy it. After comparing



the relative value of coffee, sugar, ivory, indigo, and all other



exportable commodities in the two markets, if I persist in



sending money, what further proof can be required of money being



actually the cheapest of all these commodities in the English



market, in relation to the foreign markets, and therefore the



most profitable to be exported? What further evidence is



necessary of the relative redundance and cheapness of money



between France and England, than that in France it will purchase



more corn, more indigo, more coffee, more sugar, more of every



exportable commodity than in England?



    I may, indeed, be told that the Reviewer's supposition is not



that coffee, sugar, indigo, ivory, etc. etc. are cheaper than



money, but that these commodities and money are equally cheap in



both countries, that is to say, that one hundred pounds sent in



money, or invested in coffee, sugar, indigo, ivory, etc. etc.



will be of equal value in France. If the value of all these



commodities were so nicely poised, what would determine an



exporter to send the one in preference to the other, in exchange



for corn; in relation to which they are all cheaper in England?



If he sends money, and thereby destroys the natural level, we are



told by the Reviewers that money would on account of its



increasing quantity in France, and its decreasing quantity in



England, become cheaper in France than in England, and would be



re-imported in exchange for goods till the level were restored.



But would not the same effects take place if coffee or any of the



other commodities were exported, whilst they were equally



valuable in relation to money in both countries? Would not the



equilibrium between supply and demand be destroyed, and would not



the diminished value of coffee, etc. in consequence of their



increased quantity in France, and their increased value in



England, from their diminished quantity, produce their



re-importation into England? Any of these commodities might be



exported without producing much inconvenience from their enhanced



price; whereas money, which circulates all other commodities, and



the increase or diminution of which, even in a moderate



proportion, raises or falls prices in an extravagant degree,



could not be exported without the most serious consequences. Here



then we see the defective principle of the Reviewers. On my



system, however, there would be no difficulty in determining the



mode in which, in a case so extremely improbable, as that of an



equal value in both countries, for all commodities, money



included, and corn alone excepted, the returns would be made so



as to preserve the relative amount and the relative value of



their respective currencies.



    If the circulating medium of England consisted wholly of the



precious metals, and were a fiftieth part of the value of the



commodities which it circulated, the whole amount of money which



would under the circumstances supposed be exported in exchange



for corn, would be a fiftieth part of the value of such corn: for



the rest we should export commodities, and thus would the



proportion between money and commodities be equally preserved in



both countries. England, in consequence of a bad harvest, would



come under the case mentioned at page [53] of this work, of a



country having been deprived of a part of its commodities, and



therefore requiring a diminished amount of circulating medium.



The currency which was before equal to her payments would now



become superabundant and relatively cheap, in the proportion of



one fiftieth part of her diminished production; the exportation



of this sum, therefore, would restore the value of her currency



to the value of the currencies of other countries. Thus it



appears to be satisfactorily proved that a bad harvest operates



on the exchange in no other way than by causing the currency



which was before at its just level to become redundant, and thus



is the principle that an unfavourable exchange may always be



traced to a relatively redundant currency most fully exemplified.



    If we can suppose that after an unfavourable harvest, when



England has occasion for an unusual importation of corn, another



nation is possessed of a superabundance of that article, "but has



no wants for any commodity whatever," it would unquestionably



follow that such nation would not export its corn in exchange for



commodities: but neither would it export corn for money, as that



is a commodity which no nation ever wants absolutely, but



relatively, as is expressly admitted by the Reviewers. The case



is, however, impossible, because a nation possessed of every



commodity necessary for the consumption and enjoyment of all its



inhabitants who have wherewithal to purchase them, will not let



the corn which it has over and above what it can consume rot in



its granaries. Whilst the desire of accumulation is not



extinguished in the breast of man, he will be desirous to realise



the excess of his productions, above his own consumption, into



the form of capital. This he can only do by employing, himself,



or by loans to others, enabling them to employ, an additional



number of labourers, as it is by labour only that revenue is



realized into capital. If his revenue be corn, he will be



disposed to exchange it for fuel, meat, butter, cheese, and other



commodities in which the wages of labour are usually expended,



or, which is the same thing, he will sell his corn for money, pay



the wages of his labourers in money, and thereby create a demand



for those commodities which may be obtained from other countries



in exchange for the superfluous corn. Thus will be reproduced to



him articles more valuable, which he may again employ in the same



manner, adding to his own riches, and augmenting the wealth and



resources of his country.



    No mistake can be greater than to suppose that a nation can



ever be without wants for commodities of some sort. It may



possess too much of one or more commodities for which it may not



find a market at home. It may have more sugar, coffee, tallow,



than it can either consume or dispose of, but no county ever



possessed a general glut of all commodities. It is evidently



impossible. If a county possesses every thing necessary for the



maintenance and comfort of man, and these articles be divided in



the proportions in which they are usually consumed, they are



sure, however abundant, to find a market to take them off. It



follows therefore, that whilst a county is in possession of a



commodity for which there is no demand at home, it will be



desirous of exchanging it for other commodities in the proportion



in which they are consumed.



    No nation grows corn, or any other commodity, with a view to



realise its value in money, (the case supposed, or involved in



the case supposed, by the Reviewers), as this would be the most



unprofitable object to which the labour of man could be devoted.



Money is precisely that article which till it is re-exchanged



never adds to the wealth of a county: accordingly we find, that



to increase its amount is never the voluntary act of any county



any more than it is that of any individual. Money is forced upon



them only in consequence of the relatively less value which it



possesses in those counties with which they have intercourse.



    Whilst a country employs the precious metals for money, and



has no mines of its own, it is a conceivable case that it may



greatly augment the amount of the productions of its land and



labour without adding to its wealth, because at the same time



those counties which are in possessIon of the mines may possibly



have obtained so enormous a supply of the precious metals as to



have forced an increase of currency on the industious county,



equal in value to the whole of its increased productions. But by



so doing the augmented currency, added to that which was before



employed, will be of no more real value than the original amount



of currency. Thus then will this industrious nation become



tributary to those nations which are in possession of the mines,



and will carry on a trade in which it gains nothing and loses



every thing.



    That the exchange is in a constant state of fluctuation with



all counties I am not disposed to deny, but it does not generally



vary to those limits at which remittances can be more



advantageously made by means of bullion than by the purchase of



bills. Whilst this is the case, it cannot be disputed that



imports are balanced by exports. The varying demands of all



countries may be supplied, and the exchanges of all deviate in



some degree from par, if the currency of any one of them is



either redundant or deficient, as compared with the rest. Suppose



England to send goods to Holland, and not to find there any



commodities which suit the English market; or, which is the same



thing, suppose that we can purchase those commodities cheaper in



France. In this case we confine our operation to the sale of



goods in Holland, and the purchase of other goods in France. The



currency of England is not disturbed by either transaction, as we



shall pay France by a bill on Holland, and there will neither be



an excess of imports nor of exports. The exchange may, however,



be favourable to us with Holland, and unfavourable with France;



and will be so, if the account be not balanced by the importation



into France of goods from Holland, or from some country indebted



to Holland. If there be no such importation, it can arise only



from a relative redundancy of the circulation of Holland, as



compared with that of France, and in payment of the bill it will



suit both those counties that bullion should be transmitted. If



the balance be settled by the transmission of goods, the exchange



between all the three countries will be at par. If by bullion,



the exchange between Holland and England will be as much above



par, as that between France and England will be below the par,



and the difference will be equal to the expenses attending the



passage of bullion from Holland to France. It will make no



difference in the result, if every nation of the world were



concerned in the transaction. England having bought goods from



France and sold goods to Holland, France might have purchased to



the same amount from Italy; Italy may have done the same from



Russia, Russia from Germany, and Germany within 100,000 l. of the



same amount from Holland; Germany might require this amount of



bullion either to supply a deficient currency, or for the



fabrication of plate. All these various tansactions would be



settled by bills of exchange, with the exception of the 100,000



l. which would be either transmitted from an existing redundancy



of coin or bullion in Holland, or it would be collected by



Holland from the different currencies of Europe. It is not



contended, as the Reviewers infer, "that a bad harvest, or the



necessity of paying a subsidy in one county, should be



immediately and invariably accompanied by an unusual demand for



muslins, hardware, and colonial produce," as the same effects



would be produced if the country paying the subsidy, or suffering



from a bad harvest, were to import less of other commodities than



it had before been accustomed to do.



    The Reviewers observe, page 345, "The same kind of error



which we have here noticed pervades other parts of Mr Ricardo's



pamphlet, particularly the opening of his subject. He seems to



think that when once the precious metals have been divided among



the different countries of the earth, according to their relative



wealth and commerce, that each having an equal necessity for the



quantity actually in use, no temptation would be offered for



their importation or exportation, till either a new mine or a new



bank was opened; or till some marked change had taken place in



their relative prosperity." And afterwards at page 361, "We have



already adverted to the error (confined, however, principally to



Mr Ricardo, and from which the Report is entirely free) of



denying the existence of a balance of trade or of payments not



connected with some original redundancy or deficiency of



currency." "But there is another point in which almost all the



writers on this side of the question concur, where,



notwithstanding, we cannot agree with them, and feel more



inclined to the mercantile view of the subject. Though they



acknowledge that bullion occasionally passes from one county to



another from causes connected with the exchange, yet they



represent these transactions as quite inconsiderable in degree.



Mr Huskisson observes 'that the operations in the trade of



bullion originate almost entirely in the fresh supplies which are



yearly poured in from the mines of the New World, and are chiefly



confined to the distribution of those supplies through the



different parts of Europe. If this supply were to cease



altogether, the dealings in gold and silver, as objects of



foreign trade, would be very few, and those of short duration.'"



    "Mr Ricardo, in his reply to Mr Bosanquet, refers to this



passage with particular approbation." Now I am at a loss to



discover in what this opinion of Mr Huskisson differs from that



which I had before given, and on which the Reviewers had been



commenting.



    The passages are in substance precisely the same, and must



stand or fall together. If "we acknowledge that bullion



occasionally passes from one county to another, from causes



connected with the exchange," we do not acknowledge that it would



so pass till the exchange had fallen to such limits as would make



the exportation of bullion profitable, and I am of opinion that



if it should so fall, it is in consequence of the cheapness and



redundance of currency, which "would originate almost entirely in



the fresh supplies which are yearly poured in from the mines of



the New World." This, then, is not another point in which the



Reviewers differ with me, but the same.



    If "it is well known that most states, in their usual



relations of commercial intercourse, have an almost constantly



favourable exchange with some countries, and an almost constantly



unfavourable one with the others," to what cause can it be



ascribed but to that mentioned by Mr Huskisson? "The fresh



supplies of bullion which are yewly poured in, (and in newly the



same direction) from the mines of the New World." Dr A. Smith



does not seem to have been sufficiently aware of the powerful and



uniform effects which this stream of bullion had on the foreign



exchanges, and he was inclined much to overrate the uses of



bullion in carrying on the various roundabout foreign tades which



a county finds it necessary to engage in. In the ewly and rude



transactions of commerce between nations, as in the early and



rude transactions between individuals, there is little economy in



the use of money and bullion; it is only in consequence of



civilization and refinement that paper is made to perform the



same office between the commonwealth of nations, as it so



advantageously performs between individuals of the same country.



The Reviewers do not appear to me to be sufficiently aware of the



extent to which the principle of economy in the use of the



precious metals is extended between nations, indeed they do not



seem to acknowledge its force even when confined to a single



nation, as from a passage in page 346, their readers would be



induced to suppose their opinion to be, that there are frequent



transfers of currency between the distant provinces of the same



country, for they tell us that "there have been and ever will be



a quantity of the precious metals in use destined to perform the



same part with regard to the different nations connected with



each other by commerce, which the currency of a particular



country performs with regard to its distant provinces." Now what



part does the currency of a country perform with regard to the



distant provinces?



    I am well persuaded that in all the multiplicity of



commercial transactions which take place between the distant



provinces of this kingdom, the currency performs a very inferior



part, imports being almost always balanced by exports*, and the



proof is, that the local currency of the provinces (and they have



no other) is seldom circulated at any considerable distance from



the place where it is issued.



    It appears to me that the Reviewers were induced to admit the



erroneous doctrine of the merchants, that money might be exported



in exchange for commodities, although money were no cheaper in



the exporting country, because they could in no other way account



for the rise of the exchange having, on some occasions,



accompanied the increased amount of Bank notes, as stated by Mr



Pearse, the late deputy-governor and now governor of the Bank, in



a paper delivered by him to the Bullion Committee. They say,



"according to this view of the subject, it certainly is not easy



to explain an improving exchange under an obviously increasing



issue of notes: an event that not unfrequently happens, and was



much insisted upon by the deputy-governor of the Bank, as a proof



that our foreign exchanges had no connexion with the state of our



currency."



    These are circumstances, however, which are not absolutely



irreconcileable. Mr Pearse, as well as the Edinburgh Reviewer,



appears to have wholly mistaken the principle advanced by those



who are desirous of the repeal of the restriction bill. They do



not contend, as they are understood to do, that the increase of



bank notes will permanently lower the exchange, but that such an



effect will proceed from a redundant currency. It remains,



therefore, to be considered whether an increase of bank notes is



necessarily, at all times, accompanied with a permanently



increased currency, as if I can make it appear that it is not,



there will be no difficulty in accounting for a rise in the



exchange, with an increased amount of bank-notes.



    It will be readily admitted, that whilst there is any great



portion of coin in circulation, every increase of bank-notes,



though it will for a short time lower the value of the whole



currency, paper as well as gold, yet that such depression will



not be permanent, because the redundant and cheap currency will



lower the exchange and will occasion the exportation of a portion



of the coin, which will cease as soon as the remainder of the



currency shall have regained its value, and restored the exchange



to par. The increase of small notes, then, will ultimately be a



substitution of one currency for another, of a paper for a



metallic currency, and will not operate in the same way as an



actual and permanent increase of circulation*. We are not,



however, without a criterion by which we may determine the



relative amount of currency at different periods, as



distinguished from bank-notes, on which though we cannot



infallibly rely, it will probably be a sufficiently accurate test



to determine the question which we are now discussing. This



criterion is the amount of notes of 5l. and upwards in



circulation, which we may reasonably calculate always bear some



tolerably regular proportion to the whole circulation. Thus, if



since 1797 the bank-notes of this description have increased from



twelve to sixteen millions, we may infer that the whole



circulation has increased one-third, if the districts in which



bank-notes circulate have neither been enlarged nor contracted.



The notes under 5l. will be issued in proportion as the metallic



currency is withdrawn from circulation, and will be further



augmented, if there be also an augmentation of notes of a higher



denomination.



    If I am correct in this view of the subject, that the



increase in the amount of our currency is to be inferred from the



increased amount of bank-notes of 5 l. and upwards, and can by no



means be proved by an increase of 1 l. and 2 l. notes which have



been substituted in the place of the exported or hoarded guineas,



I must wholly reject the calculations of Mr Pearse, because they



are made on the supposition that every increase of this



description of notes is an increase of currency to that amount.



When it is considered that in 1797 there were no notes of 1 l.



and 2 l. in circulation, but that their place was wholly filled



with guineas; and that since that period there have been no less



than seven millions issued, partly to supply the place of our



exported and hoarded guineas, and partly to keep up the



proportion between the circulation for the larger and for the



smaller payments, we shall observe to what errors such reasoning



may lead. I can consider the paper in question of no authority



whatever as opposed to the opinion which I have ventured to give,



namely, that an unfavourable balance of trade, and a consequently



low exchange, may in all cases be traced to a relatively



redundant and cheap currency. * But if the reasoning of Mr Pearse



were not incorrect as his facts are, he is no way warranted in



the conclusions which he has drawn from them.



    Mr Pearse states the increase of bank-notes from January,



1808, to Christmas, 1809, to have been from 17 1/2 to 18



millions, or 500,000 l., the exchange with Hamburgh during the



same period having fallen from 34s. 9g. to 28s. 6g. an increase



in the amount of notes of less than three per cent, and a fall in



the exchange of more than eighteen per cent. But from whence did



Mr Pearse obtain this information, of 18 millions of bank-notes



only being in circulation at Christmas in 1809? After looking at



every return, with which I have been able to meet, of the amount



of bank-notes in circulation at the end of 1809, I cannot but



conclude that Mr Pearse's statement is incorrect. Mr Mushet in



his tables gives four returns of bank-notes in the year. In the



last, for the year 1809, he has stated the amount of bank-notes



in circulation







 at                                19,742,998



 In the Appendix to the Bullion Report, and in returns lately



made to the House of Commons, the amount of bank-notes in



circulation appears to have been on December 12, 1809         



19,727,520







 On the 1st January, 1810           2,669,320



 On the 7th January, 1810          19,528,030











    For many months previously to December it was not lower. When



I first discovered this inaccuracy I thought Mr Pearse might have



omitted the bank post bills in both estimates, although they did



not in December, 1809, exceed 880,880 l.; but on looking at the



return of bank-notes in circulation, including bank post bills,



in January, 1808, I find Mr Pearse has stated it larger than I



can any where find it: indeed his estimate exceeds the return



made by the Bank for the 1st of January, 1808, by nearly 900,000



l., so that from the 1st of January, 1808, to the 12th of



December, 1809, the increase was from 16,619,240 to 19,727,520, a



difference of more than three millions, instead of 500,000, as



stated by Mr Pearse, and of two millions if Mr Pearse's statement



for any time in January, 1808, be correct.



    Mr Pearse's statement too, that from January 1803, to the end



of 1807, the amount of bank-notes had increased from 16 and a



half to eighteen millions, an increase of a million and a half



appears to me to exceed the fact by half a million. The increase



of notes of 5 l. and upwards, including bank post bills, did not,



during that period, exceed 150,000 l. It is material that these



errors should be pointed out, that those who may, in spite of



what I have urged, agree in principle with Mr Pearse, may see



that the facts of the case do not warrant the conclusions which



that gentleman has drawn from them, and, indeed, that all



calculations founded on the particular amount of banknotes for a



day, or for a week, when the general average has been for some



time before, or some time after, greater or less, will be of



little avail in overturning a theory which has every other proof



of its tuth. Such I consider the theory which asserts that the



unlimited multiplication of a currency which is referrible to no



fixed standard may and must produce a permanent depression of the



exchange, estimated with a country whose currency is founded on



such standard.



    Having considered the weight which ought to be attached to Mr



Pearse's paper, I beg the reader's attention to the table which I



have drawn out from the statements in tbe Bullion Report, and



from the papers which have since been presented to the House of



Commons. I request him to compare the amount of the circulation



of the larger notes with the variations in the exchange, and I



trust he will find no difficulty in reconciling the principle



maintained by me with the actual facts of the case, particularly



if he considers that the operations of an increased currency are



not instantaneous, but require some interval of time to produce



their full effect, - that a rise or fal1 in the price of silver,



as compared with gold, alters the relative value of the



currencies of England and Hamburgh, and therefore makes the



currency of one or other relatively redundant and cheap;-that the



same effect is produced, as I have already stated, by an abundant



or deficient harvest, either in this country or in those



countries with which we trade, or by any other addition or



diminution to their real wealth, which by altering the relative



proportion between commodities and money alters the value of the



circulating medium. With these corrections, I have no fear but



that it will be found that Mr Pearse's objections may be refuted



without having recourse to the abandonment of a principle, which,



if yielded, will establish the mercantile theory of exchange, and



may be made to account for a drain of circulating medium, so



great, that it can only be counteracted by locking up our money



in the bank, and absolving the directors from the obligation of



paying their notes in specie.







Mr Pearse's statement, as presented to the Bullion Committee:







            Total of Bank Notes, Millions; Rate of Hambro'



Exchange







17th February, 1797; 8 1/2; 35s 6g



Rose Gradually in 1797 and 1798 to; 13; 38s 0g



March 1799; 13 1/2; 37s 7g



After this period, great commercial distress, large importation



of corn, heavy subsidies, and the Hambro' Exchange continued



falling, and on the 2d January, 1801 wasas low as; -- ; 29s 8g



Between the end of the year 1799 to the end of 1802, an increased



quantity of 1 l. and 2 l. notes were issued, swelling the sum



total to all notes to; 13 1/2 to 16 1/2; Fluctuation from 33s 3g



to 29s 8g



From January, 1803, to the end of 1807; 16 1/2 to 18; Fluctuation



from 32s 10g to 35s 10g



From January, 1808, to Christmas 1809; 17 1/2 to 18; Fall from



34s 9g to 28s 6g







The rate of the Hambro' Exchange is taken from Lloyd's list.







I have omitted as much of Mr Pearse's paper as regarded the



amount of bank notes in circulation before the restriction on



bank payments, because whilst the public possessed the power of



obtaining specie for their notes, the exchange could not put be



momentarily lowered by the amount of the bank issues.











    The average amount of bank notes from the year 1797 to 1809



inclusive, in the following table, is copied from the Report of



the Bullion Committee. The rates of exchange are extracted from a



list presented by the mint to parliament. There have been three



returns made to parliament by the Bank, of the amount of their



notes in circulation in the year 1810; the first for the 7th and



12th of each month; the second a weekly return from the 19th



January, 1810, to 28th December; and the third also a weekly



account from the 3d March to 29th December, 1810. The average



amount of notes above 5 l. including bank post bills, according



to the first account is







                *15,706,226 of notes under 5 l.  *6,560,674



 Second...       16,192,110                       6,758,895



 Third...        16,358,230                       6,614,721







              3) 48,256,566                      19,934,290







 General average 16,085,522                       6,644,763







    In the years marked thus * the value of silver as compared



with gold exceeded the mint valuation,-this was the case



particularly in the year 1801, when less than 14 oz. of silver



could purchase an ounce of gold, - the mint valuation is as 1 to



15.07; the present market value is as 1 to 16 nearly.







Average amount of Bank of England Notes in circulation in each of



the following years:







Notes of 5 l. and upwards, including Bank Post Bills; Notes under



5 l.; Total; Highest rate of Exchange with Hamburgh; Lowest rate



of Exchange with Hamburgh







1798; *11,527,250; *1,807,502; *13,334,752; 38.2 Jan.; 37.4 Dec.



1799;  12,408,522;  1,653,805;  14,062,327; 37.7 Jan.; 31.6 Oct.



1800;  13,598,666;  2,243,266;  15,841,932; 32.5 May; 31.0 Feb.



1801;  13,454,367;  2,715,182;  16,169,594; 31.8 Oct.; 29.8 Jan.



1802;  13,917,977;  3,136,477;  17,054,454; 34.0 Dec.; 32.0 Feb.



1803;  12,983,477;  3,864,045;  16,847,511; 35.0 Dec.; 34.0 Jan.



1804;  12,621,348;  4,723,672;  17,345,020; 36.0 Dec.; 34.8 Feb.



1805;  12,697,352;  4,544,580;  17,241,932; 35.8 March; 32.8 Feb.



1806;  12,844,170;  4,291,230;  17,135,400; 34.8 Dec.; 33.3 Jan.



1807;  13,221,988;  4,183,013;  17,405,001; 34.1 March; 34.2



Sept.



1808;  13,402,160;  4,132,420;  17,534,580; 35.3 July; 32.4 Dec.



1809;  14,133,615;  4,868,275;  19,001,890; 31.3 Jan.; 28.6 Nov.



1810;  16,085,522;  6,644,763;  22,730,285; 31.2 June; 28.6 Dec.



1811;                                     ; 26.6 Jan.; 24.0 March







The Bank have made a return of the amount of their notes for



eighteen days in this present year 1811. The average amount of



notes of 5 l. and upwards in circulation for those eighteen days,



including bank post bills, is *16,286,950



And of those under 5 l. *7,260,575



Total   *23,547,525











    "If," say the Reviewers, "considerable portions of the



currency were taken from the idle, and those who live upon fixed



incomes, and transferred to farmers, manufacturers, and



merchants, - the proportion between capital and revenue would be



greatly altered to the advantage of capital; and in a short time



the produce of the country would be greatly augmented." It is no



doubt true " that it is not the quantity" of circulating medium



which adds to the national wealth, "but the different



distribution of it." If, therefore, we could be fully assured



that the effects of the abundance, and the consequent



depreciation of the currency, would diminish the powers of



consumption in the idle and unproductive class, whilst it



increased the number of the industrious and productive class, the



effect would undoubtedly be to augment the national wealth, as it



would realize into capital that which was before expended as



revenue. But the question is, will it so operate? Will not a



thousand pounds saved by the stockholder from his income and lent



to the farmer, be equally productive as if it had been saved by



the farmer himself? The Reviewers observe, "On every fresh issue



of notes, not only is the quantity of the circulating medium



increased, but the distribution of the whole mass is altered. A



large proportion falls into the hands of those who consume and



produce, and a smaller proportion into the hands of those who



only consume." But is this necessarily so? They appear to take it



for granted, that those who live on fixed incomes must consume



the whole of their income, and that no part of it can be saved



and annually added to capital. But this is very far from being



the true state of the case, and I would ask, Do not the



stockholders give as great a stimulus to the growth of the



national wealth by saving half their incomes and investing it in



the stocks, thereby liberating a capital which will ultimately be



employed by those who consume and produce, as would be done if



their incomes were depreciated 50 per cent by the issues of



bank-notes, and the power of saving were in consequence entirely



taken from them, although the Bank should lend to an industrious



man an amount of notes equal in value to the diminished income of



the stockholder? The difference, and the only difference appears



to me to be this, that in the one case the interest on the money



lent would be paid to the real owner of the property, in the



other it would ultimately be paid in the shape ofincreased



dividends or bonuses to the bank proprietors, who had been



enabled unjustly to possess themselves of it. If the creditor of



the Bank employed his loan in less profitable speculations than



the employer of the savings of the stockholders would have done,



there would result a real loss to the country; so that a



depreciation of currency may, as far as it is considered as a



stimulus to production, be beneficial or otherwise.



    I see no reason why it should diminish the idle, and add to



the productive class of society. At any rate the evil is certain.



It must be accompanied with a degree of injustice to individuals



which requires only to be understood to excite the censure and



indignation of all those who are not wholly insensible to every



honourable feeling.



    With the sentiments of the remainder of the article I most



cordially agree, and trust the efforts of the Reviewers will



powerfully contribute to overturn the mass of error and prejudice



which pervades the public mind on this most important subject.



    It is often objected to the recommendation of the Bullion



Committee, namely that the Bank should be required to pay their



notes in specie in twO years, that, if adopted, the Bank would be



exposed to considerable difficulty in providing themselves with



the requisite amount of bullion for such purpose; and it cannot



be denied, that before the Restriction Bill can be repealed, the



Bank would be in prudence bound to make ample provision for every



demand which might by possibility be made on them. It is observed



by the Bullion Committee, that the average amount of Bank notes



in circulation, including Bank Post Bills, in the year 1809, was



19 millions. During the same period the average price of gold was



4 l. 10s. exceeding its mint price by nearly 17 per cent, and



proving a depreciation of the currency of nearly 15 per cent. A



diminution therefore of 15 per cent in the amount of the Bank



circulation in 1809, should, on the principles of the Committee,



raise it to par, and reduce the market price of gold to 3 l. 17s.



10 1/2d.; and till such reduction take place, there would be



imminent danger to the Bank as well as to the public, that the



Restriction Bill should cease to operate. Now, admitting (which



we are far from doing) the truth of your principles, say the



advocates for the Bank, admitting that after such a reduction in



the amount of Bank notes, the value of the reminder would be so



rised, that it would not be the interest of any person to demand



specie at the Bank in exchange for notes, because no profit could



be made by the exportation of bullion; what security would the



Bank have that caprice or ill-will might not render the practice



general of discontinuing the use of small notes altogether, and



demanding guineas of the Bank in lieu of them? Not only then must



the Bank reduce their circulation 15 per cent. on their issues of



19 millions, - not only must they provide bullion for 4 millions



of 1 l. and 2 l. notes which would remain in circulation, but



they must also furnish themselves with the means of meeting the



demands which may be made on them to pay the small notes of all



the country banks in the kingdom, - and all this within the short



period of two years. It must be confessed, that whether these



apprehensions are likely or not likely to be realized, the Bank



could not but make some provision for the worst that might



happen; and though it is a situation in which their own



indiscretion has involved them, it would be desirable, if



possible, to protect them against the consequences of it.



    If the same benefits to the public,-the same security against



the depreciation of the currency, can be obtained by more gentle



means, it is to be hoped that all parties, who agree in



principle, will concur in the expediency of adopting them. Let



the Bank of England be required by Parliament to pay (if



demanded) all notes above 2ol.-and no other, at their option,



either in specie, in gold standard bars, or in foreign coin



(allowance being made for the difference in its purity) at the



English mint value of gold bullion, viz. 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. per



oz., such payments to commence at the period recommended by the



Committee.



    This privilege of paying their notes as above described might



be extended to the Bank for three or four years after such



payments commenced, and if found advantageous, might be continued



as a permanent measure. Under such a system the currency could



never be depreciated below its standard price, as an ounce of



gold and 3 l. 17s. 10 1/2d. would be uniformly of the same value.



By such regulations we should effectually prevent the amount of



small notes necessary for the smaller payments from being



withdrawn from circulation, as no one who did not possess to the



amount of 20 l. at least of such small notes could exchange them



at the Bank, and even then bullion, and not specie, could be



obtained for them. Guineas might indeed be procured at the Mint



for such bullion, but not till after the delay of some weeks or



months, the loss of interest for which time would be considered



as an actual expence; an expence which no one would incur, whilst



the small notes could purchase as much of every commodity as the



guineas which they represented. Another advantage attending the



establishment of this plan would be to prevent the useless



labour, which, under our system previously to 1797, was so



unprofitably expended on the coinage of guineas, which on every



occasion of an unfavourable exchange (we will not enquire by what



caused) were consigned to the melting pot, and in spite of all



prohibitions exported as bullion. It is agreed by all parties



that such prohibitions were ineffectual, and that whatever



obstacles were opposed to the exportation of the coin they were



with facility evaded.



    An unfavourable exchange can ultimately be corrected only by



an exportation of goods, - by the transmission of bullion,or by a



reduction in the amount of the paper circulaiion. The facility



therefore with which bullion would be obtined at the Bank cannot



be urged as an objection to this plan, because an equal degree of



facility actually existed before 1797, and must exist under any



system of Bank payments. Neither ought it to be urged, because it



is now no longer questioned by all those who have given the



subject of currency much of their consideration, that not only is



the law against the exportation of bullion, whether in coin or in



any other form, ineffectual, but that it is also impolitic and



unjust; injurious to ourselves only, and advantageous to the rest



of the world.



    The plan here proposed appears to me to unite all the



advantages of every system of banking which has been hitherto



adopted in Europe. It is in some of its features similar to the



banks of deposit of Amsterdam and Hamburgh. In those



establishments bullion is always to be purchased from the Bank at



a fixed invariable price. The same thing is proposed for the Bank



of England; but in the foreign banks of deposit, they have



actually in their coffers, as much bullion, as there are credits



for bank money in their books; accordingly there is an inactive



capital as great as the whole amount of the commercial



circulation. In our Bank, however, there would be an amount of



bank money, under the name of bank-notes, as great as the demands



of commerce could require, at the same time there would not be



more inactive capital in the bank coffers than that fund which



the Bank should think it necessary to keep in bullion, to answer



those demands which might occasionally be made on them. It should



always be remembered too, that the Bank would be enabled by



contracting their issues of paper to diminish such demands at



pleasure. In imitation of the Bank of Hamburgh, who purchase



silver at a fixed price, it would be necessary for the Bank to



fix a price very little below the mint price, at which they would



at all times purchase, with their notes, such gold bullion as



might be offered to them.



    The perfection of banking is to enable a country by means of



a paper currency (always retaining its standard value) to carry



on its circulation with the least possible quantity of coin or



bullion. This is what this plan would effect. And with a silver



coinage, on just principles, we should possess the most



economical and the most invariable currency in the world. The



variations in the price of bullion, whatever demand there might



be for it on the continent, or whatever supply might be poured in



from the mines in America, would be confined within the prices at



which the Bank bought bullion, and the mint price at which they



sold it. The amount of the circulation would be adjusted to the



wants of commerce with the greatest precision; and if the Bank



were for a moment so indiscreet as to overcharge the circulation,



the check which the public would possess would speedily admonish



them of their error. As for the country Banks, they must, as now,



pay their notes when demanded in Bank of England notes. This



would be a sufficient security against the possibility of their



being able too much to augment the paper circulation. There would



be no temptation to melt the coin, and consequently the labour



which has been so uselessly bestowed by one party in recoining



what another party found it their interest to melt into bullion,



would be effectually saved. The currency could neither be clipped



nor deteriorated, and would possess a value as invariable as gold



itself, the great object which the Dutch had in view, and which



they most successfully accomplished by a system very like that



which is here recommended.











The End