<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <TITLE>index</TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>&nbsp;</FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>The National System of Political Economy</FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT SIZE=-1>&nbsp;</FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>by Frederich List</FONT></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>&nbsp;</FONT></B></CENTER>



<HR WIDTH="100%">

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="List1.txt">Book&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</A></FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="List2.txt">Book&nbsp;&nbsp; 2</A></FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="List3.txt">Book&nbsp;&nbsp; 3</A></FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1>&nbsp;</FONT>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="List4.txt">Book&nbsp;&nbsp; 4</A></FONT></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>



<HR WIDTH="100%">

</BODY>

</HTML>













Fourth Book







The Politics











Chapter 33







The Insular Supremacy and the Continental Powers -- North America



and France











    In all ages there have been cities or countries which have been



pre-eminent above all others in industry, commerce, and navigation;



but a supremacy such as that which exists in our days, the world



has never before witnessed. In all ages, nations and powers have



striven to attain to the dominion of the world, but hitherto not



one of them has erected its power on so broad a foundation. How



vain do the efforts of those appear to us who have striven to found



their universal dominion on military power, compared with the



attempt of England to raise her entire territory into one immense



manufacturing, commercial, and maritime city, and to become among



the countries and kingdoms of the earth, that which a great city is



in relation to its surrounding territory. to comprise within



herself all industries, arts, and sciences; all great commerce and



wealth; all navigation and naval power -- a world's metropolis



which supplies all nations with manufactured goods, and supplies



herself in exchange from every nation with those raw materials and



agricultural products of a useful or acceptable kind, which each



other nation is fitted by nature to yield to her -- a



treasure-house of all great capital -- a banking establishment for



all nations, which controls the circulating medium of the whole



world, and by loans and the receipt of interest on them makes all



the peoples of the earth her tributaries. Let us, however, do



justice to this Power and to her efforts. The world has not been



hindered in its progress, but immensely aided in it, by England.



She has become an example and a pattern to all nations -- in



internal and in foreign policy, as well as in great inventions and



enterprises of every kind; in perfecting industrial processes and



means of transport, as well as in the discovery and bringing into



cultivation uncultivated lands, especially in the acquisition of



the natural riches of tropical countries, and in the civilisation



of barbarous races or of such as have retrograded into barbarism.



Who can tell how far behind the world might yet remain if no



England had ever existed? And if she now ceased to exist, who can



estimate how far the human race might retrograde? Let us then



congratulate ourselves on the immense progress of that nation, and



wish her prosperity for all future time. But ought we on that



account also to wish that she may erect a universal dominion on the



ruins of the other nationalities? Nothing but unfathomable



cosmopolitanism or shopkeepers' narrow-mindedness can give an



assenting answer to that question. In our previous chapters we have



pointed out the results of such denationalisation, and shown that



the culture and civilisation of the human race can only be brought



about by placing many nations in similar positions of civilisation,



wealth, and power; that just as England herself has raised herself



from a condition of barbarism to her present high position, so the



same path lies open for other nations to follow: and that at this



time more than one nation is qualified to strive to attain the



highest degree of civilisation, wealth, and power. Let us now state



summarily the maxims of State policy by means of which England has



attained her present greatness. They may be briefly stated thus:



    Always to favour the importation of productive power,(1*) in



preference to the importation of goods.



    Carefully to cherish and to protect the development of the



productive power.



    To import only raw materials and agricultural products, and to



export nothing but manufactured goods.



    To direct any surplus of productive power to colonisation, and



to the subjection of barbarous nations.



    To reserve exclusively to the mother country the supply of the



colonies and subject countries with manufactured goods, but in



return to receive on preferential terms their raw materials and



especially their colonial produce.



    To devote especial care to the coast navigation; to the trade.



Between the mother country and the colonies; to encourage



seafisheries by means of bounties; and to take as active a part as



possible in international navigation.



    By these means to found a naval supremacy, and by means of it



to extend foreign commerce, and continually to increase her



colonial possessions.



    To grant freedom in trade with the colonies and in navigation



only so far as she can gain more by it than she loses.



    To grant reciprocal navigation privileges only if the advantage



is on the side of England, or if foreign nations can by that means



be restrained from introducing restrictions on navigation in their



own favour.



    To grant concessions to foreign independent nations in respect



of the import of agricultural products, only in case concessions in



respect of her own manufactured products can be gained thereby.



    In cases where such concessions cannot be obtained by treaty,



to attain the object of them by means of contraband trade.



    To make wars and to contract alliances with exclusive regard to



her manufacturing, commercial, maritime, and colonial interests. To



gain by these alike from friends and foes: from the latter by



interrupting their commerce at sea; from the former by ruining



their manufactures through subsidies which are paid in the shape of



English manufactured goods.



    These maxims were in former times plainly professed by all



English ministers and parliamentary speakers. The ministers of



George I in 1721 openly declared, on the occasion of the



prohibition of the importation of the manufactures of India, that



it was clear that a nation could only become wealthy and powerful



if she imported raw materials and exported manufactured goods. Even



in the times of Lords Chatham and North, they did not hesitate to



declare in open Parliament that it ought not to be permitted that



even a single horse-shoe nail should be manufactured in North



America. In Adam Smith's time, a new maxim was for the first time



added to those which we have above stated, namely, to conceal the



true policy of England under the cosmopolitical expressions and



arguments which Adam Smith had discovered, in order to induce



foreign nations not to imitate that policy.



    It is a very common clever device that when anyone has attained



the summit of greatness, he kicks away the ladder by which he has



climbed up, in order to deprive others of the means of climbing up



after him. In this lies the secret of the cosmopolitical doctrine



of Adam Smith, and of the cosmopolitical tendencies of his great



contemporary William Pitt, and of all his successors in the British



Government administrations.



    Any nation which by means of protective duties and restrictions



on navigation has raised her manufacturing power and her navigation



to such a degree of development that no other nation can sustain



free competition with her, can do nothing wiser than to throw away



these ladders of her greatness, to preach to other nations the



benefits of free trade, and to declare in penitent tones that she



has hitherto wandered in the paths of error, and has now for the



first time succeeded in discovering the truth.



    William Pitt was the first English statesman who clearly



perceived in what way the cosmopolitical theory of Adam Smith could



be properly made use of, and not in vain did he himself carry about



a copy of the work on the Wealth of Nations. His speech in 1786,



which was addressed neither to Parliament nor to the nation, but



clearly to the ears of the statesmen of France, who were destitute



of all experience and political insight, and solely intended to



influence the latter in favour of the Eden Treaty, is an excellent



specimen of Smith's style of reasoning. By nature he said France



was adapted for agriculture and the production of wine, as England



was thus adapted to manufacturing production. These nations ought



to act towards one another just as two great merchants would do who



carry on different branches of trade and who reciprocally enrich



one another by the exchange of goods.(2*) Not a word here of the



old maxim of England, that a nation can only attain to the highest



degree of wealth and power in her foreign trade by the exchange of



manufactured products against agricultural products and raw



materials. This maxim was then, and has remained since, an English



State secret; it was never again openly professed, but was all the



more persistently followed. If, however, England since William



Pitt's time had really cast away the protective system as a useless



crutch, she would now occupy a much higher position than she does,



and she would have got much nearer to her object, which is to



monopolise the manufacturing power of the whole world. The



favourable moment for attaining this object was clearly just after



the restoration of the general peace. Hatred of Napoleon's



Continental system had secured a reception among all nations of the



Continent of the doctrines of the cosmopolitical theory. Russia,



the entire North of Europe, Germany, the Spanish peninsula, and the



United States of North America would have considered themselves



fortunate in exchanging their agricultural produce and raw



materials for English manufactured goods. France herself would



perhaps have found it possible, in consideration of some decided



concessions in respect of her wine and silk manufactures, to depart



from her prohibitive system.



    Then also the time had arrived when, as Priestley said of the



English navigation laws, it would be just as wise to repeal the



English protective system as it had formerly been to introduce it.



    The result of such a policy would have been that all the



surplus raw materials and agricultural produce from the two



hemispheres would have flowed over to England, and all the world



would have clothed themselves with English fabrics. All would have



tended to increase the wealth and the power of England. Under such



circumstances the Americans or the Russians would hardly have taken



it into their heads in the course of the present century to



introduce a protective system, or the Germans to establish a



customs union. People would have come to the determination with



difficulty to sacrifice the advantages of the present moment to the



hopes of a distant future.



    But Providence has taken care that trees should not grow quite



up to the sky. Lord Castlereagh gave over the commercial policy of



England into the hands of the landed aristocracy, and these killed



the hen which had laid the golden eggs. Had they permitted the



English manufactures to monopolise the markets of all nations,



Great Britain would have occupied the position in respect to the



world which a manufacturing town does in respect to the open



country; the whole territory of the island of England would have



been covered with houses and manufactories, or devoted to pleasure



gardens, vegetable gardens, and orchards; to the production of milk



and of meat, or of the cultivation of market produce, and generally



to such cultivation as only can be carried on in the neighbourhood



of great cities. The production of these things would have become



much more lucrative for English agriculture than the production of



corn, and consequently after a time the English landed aristocracy



would have obtained much higher rents than by the exclusion of



foreign grain from the home market. Only, the landed aristocracy



having only their present interests in view, preferred by means of



the corn laws to maintain their rents at the high rate to which



they had been raised by the involuntary exclusion of foreign raw



materials and grain from the English market which had been



occasioned by the war; and thus they compelled the nations of the



Continent to seek to promote their own welfare by another method



than by the free exchange of agricultural produce for English



manufactures, viz. By the method of establishing a manufacturing



power of their own. The English restrictive laws thus operated



quite in the same way as Napoleon's Continental system had done,



only their operation was somewhat slower.



    When Canning and Huskisson came into office, the landed



aristocracy had already tasted too much of the forbidden fruit for



it to be possible to induce them by reasons of common sense to



renounce what they had enjoyed. These statesmen found themselves in



the difficult position of solving an impossible problem -- a



position in which the English ministry still finds itself. They had



at one and the same time to convince the Continental nations of the



advantages of free trade, and also maintain the restrictions on the



import of foreign agricultural produce for the benefit of the



English landed aristocracy. Hence it was impossible that their



system could be developed in such a manner that justice could be



done to the hopes of the advocates of free trade on both



continents. With all their liberality with philanthropical and



cosmopolitical phrases which they uttered in general discussions



respecting the commercial systems of England and other countries,



they nevertheless did not think it inconsistent, whenever the



question arose of the alteration of any particular English duties,



to base their arguments on the principle of protection.



    Huskisson certainly reduced the duties on several articles, but



he never omitted to take care that at that lower scale of duty the



home manufactories were still sufficiently protected. He thus



followed pretty much the rules of the Dutch water administration.



Wherever the water on the outside rises high, these wise



authorities erect high dykes; wherever it rises less, they only



build lower dykes. After such a fashion the reform of the English



commercial policy which was announced with so much pomp reduced



itself to a piece of mere politico-economical jugglery. Some



persons have adduced the lowering of the English duty on silk goods



as a piece of English liberality, without duly considering that



England by that means only sought to discourage contraband trade in



these articles to the benefit of her finances and without injury to



her own silk manufactories, which object it has also by that means



perfectly attained. But if a protective duty of 50 to 70 per cent



(which at this day foreign silk manufacturers have to pay in



England, including the extra duty(3*)) is to be accepted as a proof



of liberality most nations may claim that they have rather preceded



the English in that respect than followed them.



    As the demonstrations of Canning and Huskisson were specially



intended to produce an effect in France and North America, it will



not be uninteresting to call to mind in what way it was that they



suffered shipwreck in both countries. Just as formerly in the year



1786, so also on this occasion, the English received great support



from the theorists, and the liberal party in France, carried away



by the grand idea of universal freedom of trade and by Say's



superficial arguments, and from feelings of opposition towards a



detested Government and supported by the maritime towns, the wine



growers, and the silk manufacturers, the liberal party clamorously



demanded, as they had done in the year 1786, extension of the trade



with England as the one true method of promoting the national



welfare.



    For whatever faults people may lay to the charge of the



Restoration, it rendered an undeniable service to France, a service



which posterity will not dispute; it did not allow itself to be



misled into a false step as respects commercial policy either by



the stratagems of the English or by the outcry of the liberals. Mr



Canning laid this business so much to heart that he himself made a



journey to Paris in order to convince Monsieur Villèle of the



excellence of his measures, and to induce him to imitate them. M.



Villèle was, however, much too practical not to see completely



through this stratagem; he is said to have replied to Mr Canning,



'If England in the far advanced position of her industry permits



greater foreign competition than formerly, that policy corresponds



to England's own well-understood interests. But at this time it is



to the well-understood interests of France that she should secure



to her manufactories which have not as yet attained perfect



development, that protection which is at present indispensable to



them for that object. But whenever the moment shall have arrived



when French manufacturing industry can be better promoted by



permitting foreign competition than by restricting it, then he (M.



Villèle) would not delay to derive advantage from following the



example of Mr Canning.'



    Annoyed by this conclusive answer, Canning boasted in open



Parliament after his return, how he had hung a millstone on the



neck of the French Government by means of the Spanish intervention,



from which it follows that the cosmopolitan sentiments and the



European liberalism of Mr Canning were not spoken quite so much in



earnest as the good liberals on the Continent might have chosen to



believe. For how could Mr Canning, if the cause of liberalism on



the Continent had interested him in the least, have sacrificed the



liberal constitution of Spain to the French intervention owing to



the mere desire to hang a millstone round the neck of the French



Government? The truth is, that Mr Canning was every inch an



Englishman, and he only permitted himself to entertain



philanthropical or cosmopolitical sentiments, when they could prove



serviceable to him in strengthening and still further extending the



industry and commercial supremacy of England, or in throwing dust



into the eyes of England's rivals in industry and commerce.



    In fact, no great sagacity was needed on the part of M. Villèle



to perceive the snare which had been laid for him by Mr Canning. In



the experience of neighbouring Germany, who after the abolition of



the Continental system had continually retrograded farther and



farther in respect of her industry, M. Villèle possessed a striking



proof of the true value of the principle of commercial freedom as



it was understood in England. Also France was prospering too well



under the system which she had adopted since 1815, for her to be



willing to attempt, like the dog in the fable, to let go the



substance and snap at the shadow. Men of the deepest insight into



the condition of industry, such as Chaptal and Charles Dupin, had



expressed themselves on the results of this system in the most



unequivocal manner.



    Chaptal's work on French industry is nothing less than a



defence of the French commercial policy, and an exposition of its



results as a whole and in every particular. The tendency of this



work is expressed in the following quotation from it. 'Instead of



losing ourselves in the labyrinth of metaphysical abstractions, we



maintain above all that which exists, and seek above all to make it



perfect. Good customs legislation is the bulwark of manufacturing



industry. It increases or lessens import duties according to



circumstances; it compensates the disadvantages of higher wages of



labour and of higher prices of fuel; it protects arts and



industries in their cradle until they at length become strong



enough to bear foreign competition; it creates the industrial



independence of France and enriches the nation through labour,



which, as I have already often remarked, is the chief source of



wealth.'(4*)



    Charles Dupin had, in his work 'On the Productive Powers of



France, and on the Progress of French Industry from 1814 to 1847,'



thrown such a clear light on the results of the commercial policy



which France had followed since the Restoration, that it was



impossible that a French minister could think of sacrificing this



work of half a century, which had cost such sacrifices, which was



so rich in fruits, and so full of promise for the future, merely



for the attractions of a Methuen Treaty.



    The American tariff for the year 1828 was a natural and



necessary result of the English commercial system, which shut out



from the English frontiers the North American timber, grain, meal,



and other agricultural products, and only permitted raw cotton to



be received by England in exchange for her manufactured goods. On



this system the trade with England only tended to promote the



agricultural labour of the American slaves, while on the other



hand, the freest, most enlightened, and most powerful States of the



Union found themselves entirely arrested in their economical



progress, and thus reduced to dispose of their annual surplus of



population and capital by emigration to the waste lands of the



West. Mr Huskisson understood this position of affairs very well.



It was notorious that the English ambassador in Washington had more



than once correctly informed him of the inevitable consequence of



the English policy. If Mr Huskisson had really been the man that



people in other countries supposed him to be, he would have made



use of the publication of the American tariff as a valuable



opportunity for making the English aristocracy comprehend the folly



of their corn laws, and the necessity of abolishing them. But what



did Mr Huskisson do? He fell into a passion with the Americans (or



at least affected to do so), and in his excitement he made



allegations -- the incorrectness of which was well known to every



American planter -- and permitted himself to use threats which made



him ridiculous. Mr Huskisson said the exports of England to the



United States amounted to only about the sixth part of all the



exports of England, while the exports of the United States to



England constituted more than half of all their exports. From this



he sought to prove that the Americans were more in the power of the



English than the latter were in that of the former; and that the



English had much less reason to fear interruptions of trade through



war, cessation of intercourse, and so forth, than the Americans



had. If one looks merely at the totals of the value of the imports



and exports, Huskisson's argument appears sufficiently plausible;



but if one considers the nature of the reciprocal imports and



exports, it will then appear incomprehensible how Mr Huskisson



could make use of an argument which proves the exact opposite of



that which he desired to prove. All or by far the greater part of



the exports of the United States to England consisted of raw



materials, whose value is increased tenfold by the English, and



which they cannot dispense with, and also could not at once obtain



from other countries, at any rate not in sufficient quantity, while



on the other hand all the imports of the North Americans from



England consisted of articles which they could either manufacture



for themselves or procure just as easily from other nations. If we



now consider what would be the operation of an interruption of



commerce between the two nations according to the theory of values,



it will appear as if it must operate to the disadvantage of the



Americans; whereas if we judge of it according to the theory of the



productive powers, it must occasion incalculable injury to the



English. For by it two-thirds of all the English cotton



manufactories would come to a standstill and fall into ruin.



England would lose as by magic a productive source of wealth, the



annual value of which far exceeds the value of her entire exports,



and the results of such a loss on the peace, wealth, credit,



commerce, and power of England would be incalculable. What,



however, would be the consequences of such a state of things for



the North Americans? Compelled to manufacture for themselves those



goods which they had hitherto obtained from England, they would in



the course of a few years gain what the English had lost. No doubt



such a measure must occasion a conflict for life and death, as



formerly the navigation laws did between England and Holland. But



probably it would also end in the same way as formerly did the



conflict in the English Channel. It is unnecessary here to follow



out the consequences of a rivalry which, as it appears to us, must



sooner or later, from the very nature of things, come to a rupture.



What we have said suffices to show clearly the futility and danger



of Huskisson's argument, and to demonstrate how unwisely England



acted in compelling the North Americans (by means of her corn laws)



to manufacture for themselves, and how wise it would have been of



Mr Huskisson had he, instead of trifling with the question by such



futile and hazardous arguments, laboured to remove out of the way



the causes which led to the adoption of the American tariff of



1828.



    In order to prove to the North Americans how advantageous to



them the trade of England was, Mr Huskisson pointed out the



extraordinary increase in the English importations of cotton, but



the Americans also knew how to estimate this argument at its true



value. For the production of cotton in America had for more than



ten years previously so greatly exceeded the consumption of, and



the demand for, this article from year to year, that its prices had



fallen in almost the same ratio in which the export had increased;



as may be seen from the fact that in the year 1816 the Americans



had obtained for 80,000,000 pounds of cotton 24,000,000 dollars,



while in the year 1826 for 204,000,000 pounds of cotton they only



obtained 25,000,000 dollars.



    Finally, Mr Huskisson threatened the North Americans with the



organisation of a wholesale contraband trade by way of Canada. It



is true that under existing circumstances an American protective



system can be endangered by nothing so seriously as by the means



indicated by Mr Huskisson. But what follows from that? Is it that



the Americans are to lay their system at the feet of the English



Parliament, and await in humility whatever the latter may be



pleased to determine from year to year respecting their national



industry? How absurd! The only consequence would be that the



Americans would annex Canada and include it in their Union, or else



assist it to attain independence as soon as ever the Canadian



smuggling trade became unendurable. Must we not, however, deem the



degree of folly absolutely excessive if a nation which has already



attained industrial and commercial supremacy, first of all compels



an agricultural nation connected with her by the closest ties of



race, of language, and of interest, to become herself a



manufacturing nation, and then, in order to hinder her from



following the impulse thus forcibly given to her, compels her to



assist that nation's own colonies to attain independence?



    After Huskisson's death, Mr Poulett Thompson undertook the



direction of the commercial affairs of England; this statesman



followed his celebrated predecessor in his policy as well as in his



office. In the meantime, so far as concerned North America, there



remained little for him to do, for in that country, without special



efforts on the part of the English, by means of the influence of



the cotton planters and the importers, and by the aid of the



Democratic party, especially by means of the so-called Compromise



Bill in 1832, a modification of the former tariff had taken place,



which, although it certainly amended the excesses and faults of the



former tariff, and also still secured to the American manufactories



a tolerable degree of protection in respect of the coarser fabrics



of cotton and woollen, nevertheless gave the English all the



concessions which they could have desired without England having



been compelled to make any counter concessions.



    Since the passing of that Bill, the exports of the English to



America have enormously increased. And subsequently to this time



they greatly exceed the English imports from North America, so that



at any time it is in the power of England to draw to herself as



much as she pleases of the precious metals circulating in America,



and thereby to occasion commercial crises in the United States as



often as she herself is in want of money. But the most astonishing



thing in this matter is that that bill had for its author Henry



Clay, the most eminent and clearsighted defender of the American



manufacturing interest. For it must be remembered that the



prosperity of the American manufacturers which resulted from the



tariff of 1828 excited so greatly the jealousy of the cotton



planters, that the Southern States threatened to bring about a



dissolution of the Union in case the tariff of 1828 was not



modified. The Federal Government, which was dominated by the



Democratic party, had sided with the Southern planters from purely



party and electioneering motives, and also managed to get the



agriculturists of the Middle and Western States, who belonged to



that party, to adopt the same views.



    These last had lost their former sympathy with the



manufacturing interest in consequence of the high prices of produce



which had prevailed, which, however, were the result for the most



part of the prosperity of the home manufactories and of the



numerous canals and railways which were undertaken. They may also



have actually feared that the Southern States would press their



opposition so far as to bring about a real dissolution of the Union



and even civil war. Hence it became the party interests of the



Democrats of the Central and Eastern States not to alienate the



sympathies of the Democrats of the Southern States. In consequence



of these political circumstances, public opinion veered round so



much in favour of free trade with England, that there was reason to



fear that all the manufacturing interests of the country might be



entirely sacrificed in favour of English free competition. Under



such circumstances the Compromise Bill of Henry Clay appeared to be



the only means of at least partially preserving the protective



system. By this bill part of the American manufactures, viz. those



of finer and more expensive articles, was sacrificed to foreign



competition, in order to preserve another class of them, viz. the



manufacture of articles of a coarser and a less expensive



character. In the meantime all appearances seem to indicate that



the protective system in North America in the course of the next



few years will again raise its head and again make new progress.



However much the English may desire to lessen and mitigate the



commercial crises in North America, however large also may be the



amount of capital which may pass over from England to North America



in the form of purchases of stock or of loans or by means of



emigration, the existing and still increasing disproportion between



the value of the exports and that of imports cannot possibly in the



long run be equalised by those means. Alarming commercial crises,



which continually increase in their magnitude, must occur, and the



Americans must at length be led to recognise the sources of the



evil and to determine to put a stop to them.



    It thus lies in the very nature of things, that the number of



the advocates of the protective system must again increase, and



those of free trade again diminish. Hitherto, the prices of



agricultural produce have been maintained at an unusually high



level, owing to the previous prosperity of the manufactories,



through the carrying out of great public undertakings, through the



demand for necessaries of life arising from the great increase of



the production of cotton, also partially through bad harvests. One



may, however, foresee with certainty, that these prices in the



course of the next few years will fall as much below the average as



they have hitherto ranged above it. The greater part of the



increase of American capital has since the passing of the



Compromise Bill been devoted to agriculture, and is only now



beginning to become productive. While thus agricultural production



has unusually increased, on the other hand the demand for it must



unusually diminish. Firstly, because public works are no more being



undertaken to the same extent; secondly, because the manufacturing



population in consequence of foreign competition can no more



increase to an important extent; and thirdly, because the



production of cotton so greatly exceeds the consumption that the



cotton planters will be compelled, owing to the low prices of



cotton, to produce for themselves those necessaries of life which



they have hitherto procured from the Middle and Western States. If



in addition rich harvests occur, then the Middle and Western States



will again suffer from an excess of produce, as they did before the



tariff of 1828. But the same causes must again produce the same



results; viz. the agriculturists of the Middle and Western States



must again arrive at the conviction, that the demand for



agricultural produce can only be increased by the increase of the



manufacturing population of the country, and that that increase can



only be brought about by an extension of the protective system.



While in this manner the partisans of protection will daily



increase in number and influence, the opposite party will diminish



in like proportion until the cotton planters under such altered



circumstances must necessarily come to the conviction that the



increase of the manufacturing population of the country and the



increase of the demand for agricultural produce and raw materials



both consist with their own interests if rightly understood.



    Because, as we have shown, the cotton planters and the



Democrats in North America were striving most earnestly of their



own accord to play into the hands of the commercial interests of



England, no opportunity was offered at the moment on this side for



Mr Poulett Thompson to display his skill in commercial diplomacy.



    Matters were quite in another position in France. There people



still steadily clung to the prohibitive system. There were indeed



many State officials who were disciples of theory, and also



deputies who were in favour of an extension of commercial relations



between England and France, and the existing alliance with England



had also rendered this view to a certain extent popular. But how to



attain that object, opinions were less agreed, and in no respect



were they quite clear. It seemed evident and also indisputable that



the high duties on the foreign necessaries of life and raw



materials, and the exclusion of English coal and pig-iron, operated



very disadvantageously to French industry, and that an increase in



the exports of wines, brandy, and silk fabrics would be extremely



advantageous to France.



    In general, people confined themselves to universal declamation



against the disadvantages of the prohibitive system. But to attack



this in special cases did not appear at the time to be at all



advisable. For the Government of July had their strongest



supporters among the rich bourgeoisie, who for the most part were



interested in the great manufacturing undertakings.



    Under these circumstances Mr Poulett Thompson formed a plan of



operations which does all honour to his breadth of thought and



diplomatic adroitness. He sent to France a man thoroughly versed in



commerce and industry and in the commercial policy of France, well



known for his 'liberal sentiments' a learned man and a very



accomplished writer, Dr Bowring, who travelled through the whole of



France, and subsequently through Switzerland also, to gather on the



spot materials for arguments against the prohibitive system and in



favour of free trade. Dr Bowring accomplished this task with his



accustomed ability and adroitness. Especially he clearly indicated



the before-mentioned advantages of a freer commercial intercourse



between the two countries in respect of coal, pig-iron, wines, and



brandies. In the report which he published, he chiefly confined his



arguments to these articles; in reference to the other branches of



industry he only gave statistics, without committing himself to



proofs or propositions how these could be promoted by means of free



trade with England.



    Dr Bowring acted in precise accordance with the instructions



given to him by Mr Poulett Thompson, which were framed with



uncommon art and subtlety, and which appear at the head of his



report. In these Mr Thompson makes use of the most liberal



expressions. He expresses himself, with much consideration for the



French manufacturing interests, on the improbability that any



important result was to be expected from the contemplated



negotiations with France. This instruction was perfectly adapted



for calming the apprehensions respecting the views of England



entertained by the French woollen and cotton manufacturing



interests which had become so powerful. According to Mr Thompson,



it would be folly to ask for important concessions respecting



these.



    On the other hand, he gives a hint how the object might more



easily be attained in respect of 'less important articles.' These



less important articles are certainly not enumerated in the



instruction, but the subsequent experience of France has completely



brought to light what Mr Thompson meant by it, for at the time of



the writing of this instruction the exports of linen yarn and linen



fabrics of England to France were included in the term 'less



important.'



    The French Government, moved by the representations and



explanations of the English Government and its agents, and with the



intention of making to England a comparatively unimportant



concession, which would ultimately prove advantageous to France



herself, lowered the duty on linen yarn and linen fabrics to such



an extent that they no longer gave any protection to French



industry in face of the great improvements which the English had



made in these branches of manufacture, so that even in the next few



years the export of these articles from England to France increased



enormously (1838, 32,000,000 francs); and that France stood in



danger, owing to the start which England had thus obtained, of



losing its entire linen industry, amounting to many hundred



millions in value, which was of the greatest importance for her



agriculture and for the welfare of her entire rural population,



unless means could be found to put a check on the English



competition by increasing the duties.



    That France was duped by Mr Poulett Thompson was clear enough.



He had already clearly seen in the year 1834 what an impulse the



linen manufacture of England would receive in the next few years in



consequence of the new inventions which had been made there, and in



this negotiation he had calculated on the ignorance of the French



Government respecting these inventions and their necessary



consequences. The advocates of this lowering of duties now indeed



endeavoured to make the world believe that by it they only desired



to make a concession to the belgian linen manufactures. But did



that make amends for their lack of acquaintance with the advances



made by the English, and their lack of foresight as to the



necessary consequences?



    Be that as it may, this much is clearly demonstrated, that it



was necessary for France to protect herself still more, under



penalty of losing the greater part of her linen manufacturing for



the benefit of England; and that the first and most recent



experiment of the increase of freedom of trade between England and



France remains as an indelible memorial of English craft and of



French inexperience, as a new Methuen Treaty, as a second Eden



Treaty. But what did Mr Poulett Thompson do when he perceived the



complaints of the French linen manufacturers and the inclination of



the French Government to repair the mistake which had been made? He



did what Mr Huskisson had done before him, he indulged in threats,



he threatened to exclude French wines and silk fabrics. This is



English cosmopolitanism. France must give up a manufacturing



industry of a thousand years' standing, bound up in the closest



manner with the entire economy of her lower classes and especially



with her agriculture, the products of which must be reckoned as



chief necessaries of life for all classes, and of the entire amount



of between three and four hundred millions, in order thereby to



purchase the privilege of exporting to England some few millions



more in value of wines and silk manufactures. Quite apart from this



disproportion in value, it must be considered in what a position



France would be placed if the commercial relations between both



nations became interrupted in consequence of a war; in case viz.



that France could no more export to England her surplus products of



silk manufactures and wines, but at the same time suffered from the



want of such an important necessary of life as linen.



    If anyone reflects on this he will see that the linen question



is not simply a question of economical well-being, but, as



everything is which concerns the national manufacturing power, is



still more a question of the independence and power of the nation.



    It seems indeed as if the spirit of invention had set itself



the task, in this perfecting of the linen manufacture, to make the



nations comprehend the nature of the manufacturing interest, its



relations with agriculture, and its influence on the independence



and power of the State, and to expose the erroneous arguments of



the popular theory. The school maintains, as is well known, that



every nation possesses special advantages in various branches of



production, which she has either derived from nature, or which she



has partly acquired in the course of her career, and which under



free trade compensate one another. We have in a previous chapter



adduced proof that this argument is only true in reference to



agriculture, in which production depends for the most part on



climate and on the fertility of the soil, but that it is not true



in respect to manufacturing industry, for which all nations



inhabiting temperate climates have equal capability provided that



they possess the necessary material, mental, social, and political



qualifications. England at the present day offers the most striking



proof of this. If any nations whatever are specially adapted by



their past experience and exertions, and through their natural



qualifications, for the manufacture of linen, those are the



Germans, the belgians, the Dutch, and the inhabitants of the North



of France for a thousand years past. The English, on the other



hand, up to the middle of the last century, had notoriously made



such small progress in that industry, that they imported a great



proportion of the linen which they required, from abroad. It would



never have been possible for them, without the duties by which they



continuously protected this manufacturing industry, even to supply



their own markets and colonies with linen of their own manufacture.



And it is well known how Lords Castlereagh and Liverpool adduced



proof in Parliament, that without protection it was impossible for



the Irish linen manufactures to sustain competition with those of



Germany. At present, however, we see how the English threaten to



monopolise the linen manufacture of the whole of Europe, in



consequence of their inventions, notwithstanding that they were for



a hundred years the worst manufacturers of linen in all Europe,



just as they have monopolised for the last fifty years the cotton



markets of the East Indies, notwithstanding that one hundred years



previously they could not even compete in their own market with the



Indian cotton manufacturers. At this moment it is a matter of



dispute in France how it happens that England has lately made such



immense progress in the manufacture of linen, although Napoleon was



the first who offered such a great reward for the invention of a



machine for spinning cotton, and that the French machinists and



manufacturers had been engaged in this trade before the English.



The inquiry is made whether the English or the French possessed



more mechanical talent. All kinds of explanations are offered



except the true and the natural one. It is absurd to attribute



specially to the English greater mechanical talent, or greater



skill and perseverance in industry, than to the Germans or to the



French. Before the time of Edward III the English were the greatest



bullies and good-for-nothing characters in Europe; certainly it



never occurred to them to compare themselves with the Italians and



Belgians or with the Germans in respect to mechanical talent or



industrial skill; but since then their Government has taken their



education in hand, and thus they have by degrees made such progress



that they can dispute the palm of industrial skill with their



instructors. If the English in the last twenty years have made more



rapid progress in machinery for linen manufacture than other



nations, and especially the French, have done, this has only



occurred because, firstly, they had attained greater eminence in



mechanical skill; secondly, that they were further advanced in



machinery for spinning and weaving cotton, which is so similar to



that for spinning and weaving linen; thirdly, that in consequence



of their previous commercial policy, they had become possessed of



more capital than the French; fourthly, that in consequence of that



commercial policy their home market for linen goods was far more



extensive than that of the French; and lastly that their protective



duties, combined with the circumstances above named, afforded to



the mechanical talent of the nation greater stimulus and more means



to devote itself to perfecting this branch of industry.



    The English have thus given a striking confirmation of the



opinions which we in another place have propounded and explained --



that all individual branches of industry have the closest



reciprocal effect on one another; that the perfecting of one branch



prepares and promotes the perfecting of all others; that no one of



them can be neglected without the effects of that neglect being



felt by all; that, in short, the whole manufacturing power of a



nation constitutes an inseparable whole. Of these opinions they



have by their latest achievements in the linen industry offered a



striking confirmation.







NOTES:







1. Even a part of the production of wool in England is due to the



observance of this maxim. Edward IV imported under special



privileges 3,000 head of sheep from Spain (where the export of



sheep was prohibited), and distributed them among various parishes,



with a command that for seven years none were to be slaughtered or



castrated. (Essai sur le Commerce d'Angleterre, tome i. p. 379.) As



soon as the object of these measures had been attained, England



rewarded the Spanish Government for the special privileges granted



by the latter, by prohibiting the import of Spanish wool. The



efficacy of this prohibition (however unjust it may be deemed) can



as little be denied as that of the prohibitions of the import of



wool by Charles II (1672 and 1674).







2. France, said Pitt, has advantages above England in respect of



climate and other natural gifts, and therefore excels England in



its raw produce; on the other hand, England has the advantage over



France in its artificial products. The wines, brandies, oils, and



vinegars of France, especially the first two, articles of such



importance and of such value, that the value of our natural



products cannot be in the least compared with them. But, on the



other hand, it is equally certain that England is the exclusive



producer of some kinds of manufactured goods, and that in respect



of other kinds she possesses such advantages that she can defy



without doubt all the competition of France. This is a reciprocal



condition and a basis on which an advantageous commercial treaty



between both nations should be founded. As each of them has its



peculiar staple commodities, and each possesses that which is



lacking to the other, so both should deal with one another like two



great merchants who are engaged in different branches of trade, and



by a reciprocal exchange of their goods can at once become useful



to one another. Let us further only call to mind on this point the



wealth of the county with which we stand in the position of



neighbours, its great population, its vicinity to us, and the



consequent quick and regular exchange. Who could then hesitate a



moment to give his approval to the system of freedom, and who would



not earnestly and impatiently wish for the utmost possible



expedition in establishing it? The possession of such an extensive



and certain market must give quite an extraordinary impulse to our



trade, and the customs revenue which would then be diverted from



the hands of the smuggler into the State revenue would benefit our



finances, and thus two main springs of British wealth and of



British power would be made more productive.







3. Since List wrote these lines, the duties which foreign silk



manufacturers had to pay on the import of their goods into England



have been totally abolished. The results of their abolition may be



learned from Mr Wardle's report on the English silk trade, as



follows: London, in 1825, contained 24,000 looms and 60,000



operatives engaged in silk manufacture. At the present time these



have dwindled to 1,200 looms and less then 4,000 operatives. In



Coventry, in 1861, the ribbon trade is stated to have given



subsistence to 40,600 persons; while at the present time probably



not more than 10,000 persons are supported by it, and the



power-looms at work in Coventry have decreased from 1,800 to 600.



In Derby the number of operatives employed in silk manufacture has



decreased from 6,650 (in 1850) to 2,400 at present. In the



Congleton district they have decreased from 5,186 (in 1860) to



1,530 (in 1884); while of the forty silk-throwsters' works which



that district contained (in 1859) only twelve now remain, with



'about three-fourths of their machinery employed.' In Manchester



this trade has practically died out, while at Middleton the



industry is 'simply ruined.' These results (stated by Mr Wardle)



may account for the decrease in England's imports of raw silk, from



8,000,000 pounds (in 1871) to less than 3,000,000 pounds.



    On the other hand, since List wrote, the United States of



America have increased and steadily maintained a considerable



protective duty on the importation of foreign silk manufactures.



The results of that policy were publicly stated by Mr Robert P.



Porter (member of the United States' Tariff Commission), in a



speech in 1883, to have been as follows:



    Five thousand persons were employed in silk manufacture in the



United States before the Morill tariff (1861). In 1880 their number



had increased to 30,000. The value of silk manufactures produced in



the States increased from 1,200,000 l. in 1860 to more than



8,000,000 l. in 1880. 'Yet the cost of the manufactured goods to



the consumer, estimated on a gold basis, has steadily declined at



a much greater rate than the cost of the raw material.' After



reference to the earthenware and plate-glass manufactures, Mr



Porter adds: 'The testimony before the Tariff Commission showed



unquestionably that the competition in the United States had



resulted in a reduction in the cost to the American consumer. In



this way, gentlemen, I contend, and am prepared to prove



statistically. that protection, so far as the United States are



concerned, has in every case ultimately benefited the consumer; and



on this ground I defend it and believe in it.' -- TRANSLATOR.







4. Chaptal, De l'Industrie Française vol. ii., p. 147.







Chapter 34







The Insular Supremacy and the German Commercial Union







    What a great nation is at the present day without a vigorous



commercial policy, and what she may become by the adoption of a



vigorous commercial policy, Germany has learnt for herself during



the last twenty years. Germany was that which Franklin once said of



the State of New Jersey, 'a cask which was tapped and drained by



its neighbours on every side.' England, not contented with having



ruined for the Germans the greater part of their own manufactories



and supplied them with enormous quantities of cotton and woollen



fabrics, excluded from her ports German grain and timber, nay from



time to time also even German wool. There was a time when the



export of manufactured goods from England to Germany was ten times



greater than that to her highly extolled East Indian Empire.



Nevertheless the all-monopolising islanders would not even grant to



the poor Germans what they conceded to the conquered Hindoos, viz.



to pay for the manufactured goods which they required by



agricultural produce. In vain did the Germans humble themselves to



the position of hewers of wood and drawers of water for the



Britons. The latter treated them worse than a subject people.



Nations, like individuals, if they at first only permit themselves



to be ill-treated by one, soon become scorned by all, and finally



become an object of derision to the very children. France, not



contented with exporting to Germany enormous quantities of wine,



oil, silk, and millinery, grudged the Germans their exports of



cattle, grain, and flax; yes, even a small maritime province



formerly possessed by Germany and inhabited by Germans, which



having become wealthy and powerful by means of Germany, at all



times was only able to maintain itself with and by means of



Germany, barred for half a generation Germany's greatest river by



means of contemptible verbal quibbles. To fill up the measure of



this contempt, the doctrine was taught from a hundred professorial



chairs, that nations could only attain to wealth and power by means



of universal free trade. Thus it was; but how is it now? Germany



has advanced in prosperity and industry, in national self-respect



and in national power, in the course of ten years as much as in a



century. And how has this result been achieved? It was certainly



good and beneficial that the internal tariffs were abolished which



separated Germans from Germans; but the nation would have derived



small comfort from that if her home industry had thenceforth



remained freely exposed to foreign competition. It was especially



the protection which the tariff of the Zollverein secured to



manufactured articles of common use, which has wrought this



miracle. Let us freely confess it, for Dr Bowring(1*) has



incontrovertibly shown it, that the Zollverein tariff has not, as



was before asserted, imposed merely duties for revenue -- that it



has not confined itself to duties of ten to fifteen per cent as



Huskisson believed -- let us freely admit that it has imposed



protective duties of from twenty to sixty per cent as respects the



manufactured articles of common use.



    But what has been the operation of these protective duties? Are



the consumers paying for their German manufactured goods twenty to



sixty per cent more than they formerly paid for foreign ones (as



must be the case if the popular theory is correct), or are these



goods at all worse than the foreign ones? Nothing of the sort. Dr



Bowring himself adduces testimony that the manufactured goods



produced under the high customs tariff are both better and cheaper



than the foreign ones.(2*) The internal competition and the



security from destructive competition by the foreigner has wrought



this miracle, of which the popular school knows nothing and is



determined to know nothing. Thus, that is not true, which the



popular school maintains, that a protective duty increases the



price of the goods of home production by the amount of the



protective duty. For a short time the duty may increase the price,



but in every nation which is qualified to carry on manufacturing



industry the consequence of the protection will be, that the



internal competition will soon reduce the prices lower than they



had stood at when the importation was free.



    But has agriculture at all suffered under these high duties?



Not in the least; it has gained-gained tenfold during the last ten



years. The demand for agricultural produce has increased. The



prices of it everywhere are higher. It is notorious that solely in



consequence of the growth of the home manufactories the value of



land has everywhere risen from fifty to a hundred per cent, that



everywhere higher wages are being paid, and that in all directions



improvements in the means of transport are either being effected or



projected.



    Such brilliant results as these must necessarily encourage us



to proceed farther on the system which we have commenced to follow.



Other States of the Union have also proposed to take similar steps,



but have not yet carried them into effect; while, as it would



appear, some other States of the Union only expect to attain



prosperity solely by the abolition of the English duties on grain



and timber, and while (as it is alleged) there are still to be



found influential men who believe in the cosmopolitical system and



distrust their own experience. Dr Bowring's report gives us most



important explanations on these points as well as on the



circumstances of the German Commercial Union and the tactics of the



English Government. Let us endeavour to throw a little light on



this report.



    First of all, we have to consider the point of view from which



it was written. Mr Labouchere, President of the board of Trade



under the Melbourne Ministry, had sent Dr Bowring to Germany for



the same purpose as that for which Mr Poulett Thompson had sent him



to France in the year 1834. Just as it was intended to mislead the



French by concessions in respect of wines and brandies to open



their home market to English manufactured goods, so it was intended



to mislead the Germans to do the same by concessions in respect of



grain and timber; only there was a great difference between the two



missions in this respect, that the concession which was to be



offered to the French had to fear no opposition in England, while



that which had to be offered to the Germans had first to be fought



for in England herself.



    Hence the tendency of these two reports was of necessity of



quite a different character. The report on the commercial relations



between France and England was written exclusively for the French;



to them it was necessary to represent that Colbert had accomplished



nothing satisfactory through his protective regulations; it was



necessary to make people believe that the Eden Treaty was



beneficial to France, and that Napoleon's Continental system, as



well as the then existing French prohibitive system, had been



extremely injurious to her. In short, in this case it was necessary



to stick closely to the theory of Adam Smith; and the good results



of the protective system must be completely and unequivocally



denied. The task was not quite so simple with the other report, for



in this, one had to address the English land-owners and the German



Governments at one and the same time. To the former it was



necessary to say: See, there is a nation which has already in



consequence of protective regulations made enormous advances in her



industry, and which, in possession of all necessary means for doing



so, is making rapid steps to monopolise her own home market and to



compete with England in foreign markets. This, you Tories in the



House of Lords -- this, you country squires in the House of



Commons, is your wicked doing. This has been brought about by your



unwise corn laws; for by them the prices of provisions and raw



materials and the wages of labour have been kept low in Germany. By



them the German manufactories have been placed in an advantageous



position compared to the English ones. Make haste, therefore, you



fools, to abolish these corn laws. By that means you will doubly



and trebly damage the German manufactories : firstly, because the



prices of provisions and raw materials and the wages of labour will



be raised in Germany and lowered in England; secondly, because by



the export of German grain to England the export of English



manufactured goods to Germany will be promoted; thirdly, because



the German Commercial Union has declared that it is disposed to



reduce their duties on common cotton and woollen goods in the same



proportion in which England facilitates the import of German grain



and timber. Thus we Britons cannot fail once more to crush the



German manufactories. But the question cannot wait. Every year the



manufacturing interests are gaining greater influence in the German



Union; and if you delay, then your corn-law abolition will come too



late. It will not be long before the balance will turn. Very soon



the German manufactories will create such a great demand for



agricultural produce that Germany will have no more surplus corn to



sell to foreign countries. What concessions, then, are you willing



to offer to the German Governments to induce them to lay hands on



their own manufactories in order to hinder them from spinning



cotton for themselves, and from encroaching upon your foreign



markets in addition?



    All this the writer of the report was compelled to make clear



to the landowners in Parliament. The forms of the British State



administration permit no secret Government reports. Dr Bowring's



report must be published, must therefore be seen by the Germans in



translations and extracts. Hence one must use no expressions which



might lead the Germans to a perception of their true interests.



Therefore to every method which was adapted to influence



Parliament, an antidote must be added for the use of the German



Governments. It must be alleged, that in consequence of the



protective system much German capital had been diverted into



improper channels. The agricultural interests of Germany would be



damaged by the protective system. That interest for its part ought



only to turn its attention to foreign markets; agriculture was in



Germany by far the most important productive industry, for



three-fourths of the inhabitants of Germany were engaged in it. It



was mere nonsense to talk about protection for the producers; the



manufacturing interest itself could only thrive under foreign



competition : public opinion in Germany desired freedom of trade.



Intelligence in Germany was too universal for a desire for high



duties to be entertained. The most enlightened men in the country



were in favour of a reduction of duties on common woollen and



cotton fabrics, in case the English duties on corn and timber were



reduced.



    In short, in this report two entirely different voices speak,



which contradict one another like two opponents. Which of the two



must be deemed the true one-that which speaks to the Parliament, or



that which speaks to the German Governments? There is no difficulty



in deciding this point, for everything which Dr Bowring adduces in



order to induce Parliament to lower the import duties on grain and



timber is supported by statistical facts, calculations, and



evidence; while everything that he adduces to dissuade the German



Governments from the protective system is confined to mere



superficial assertions.



    Let us consider in detail the arguments by which Dr Bowring



proves to the Parliament that in case a check is not put to the



progress of the German protective system in the way which he



pointed out, the German market for manufactured goods must become



irrecoverably lost to England.



    The German people is remarkable, says Dr Bowring, for



temperance, thrift, industry, and intelligence, and enjoys a system



of universal education. Excellent polytechnic schools diffuse



technical instruction throughout the entire country.



    The art of design is especially much more cultivated there than



in England. The great annual increase of its population, of its



head of cattle, and especially of sheep, proves what progress



agriculture there has achieved. (The report makes no mention of the



improvement in the value of property, though that is an important



feature, nor of the increase in the value of produce.) The wages of



labour have risen thirty per cent in the manufacturing districts.



The country possesses a great amount of water power, as yet unused,



which is the cheapest of all motive powers. Its mining industry is



everywhere flourishing, more than at any previous time. From 1832



up to 1837 the imports of raw cotton have increased from 118,000



centners to 240,000 centners; the imports of cotton yarn from



172,000 centners to 322,000 centners; the exports of cotton fabrics



from 26,000 centners to 75,000 centners; the number of



cotton-weaving looms in Prussia from 22,000 in 1825 to 32,000 in



1834; the imports of raw wool from 99,000 centners to 195,000



centners; the exports of the same from 100,000 centners to 122,000



centners; the imports of woollen articles from 15,000 centners to



18,000 centners; the exports of the same from 49,000 centners to



69,000 centners.



    The manufacture of linen cloths contends with difficulty



against the high duties in England, France, and Italy and has not



increased. On the other hand, the imports of linen yarn have



increased from 30,000 centners in 1832 to 86,000 centners in 1835,



chiefly through the imports from England, which are still



increasing. The consumption of indigo increased from 12,000



centners in 1831 to 24,000 centners in 1837; a striking proof of



the progress of German industry. The exports of pottery have been



more than doubled from 1832 to 1836. The imports of stoneware have



diminished from 5,000 centners to 2,000 centners, and the exports



of it increased from 4,000 centners to 18,000 centners. The imports



of porcelain have diminished from 4,000 centners to 1,000 centners,



and the exports of it have increased from 700 centners to 4,000



centners. The output of coal has increased from 6,000,000 Prussian



tons in 1832 to 9,000,000 in 1836. In 1816 there were 8,000,000



sheep in Prussia; and in 1837, 15,000,000.



    In Saxony in 1831 there were 14,000 stocking-weaving machines;



in 2836, 20,000. From 1831 to 1837, the number of manufactories for



spinning woollen yarn and of spindles had increased in Saxony to



more than double their previous number. Everywhere machine



manufactories had arisen, and many of these were in the most



flourishing condition.



    In short, in all branches of industry, in proportion as they



have been protected, Germany has made enormous advances, especially



in woollen and cotton goods for common use, the importation of



which from England had entirely ceased. At the same time Dr Bowring



admits, in consequence of a trustworthy opinion which had been



expressed to him, 'that the price of the Prussian stuffs was



decidedly lower than that of the English; that certainly in respect



of some of the colours they were inferior to the best English



tints, but that others were perfect and could not be surpassed;



that in spinning, weaving, and all preparatory processes, the



German goods were fully equal to the British, but only in the



finish a distinct inferiority might be observed, but that the want



of this would disappear after a little time.'



    It is very easy to understand how by means of such



representations as these the English Parliament may at length be



induced to abandon its corn laws, which have hitherto operated as



a protective system to Germany. But it appears to us utterly



incomprehensible how the German Union, which has made such enormous



advances in consequence of the protective system, should be induced



by this report to depart from a system which has yielded them such



excellent results.



    It is very well for Dr Bowring to assure us that the home



industry of Germany is being protected at the expense of the



agriculturists. But how can we attach any credence to his



assurance, when we see, on the contrary, that the demand for



agricultural produce, prices of produce, the wages of labour, the



rents, the value of property, have everywhere considerably risen,



without the agriculturist having to pay more than he did before for



the manufactured goods which he requires?



    It is very well for Dr Bowring to give us an estimate showing



that in Germany three persons are engaged in agriculture to every



one in manufactures, but that statement convinces us that the



number of Germans engaged in manufacturing is not yet in proper



proportion to the number of German agriculturists. And we cannot



see by what other means this disproportion can be equalised, than



by increasing the protection on those branches of manufacture which



are still carried on in England for the supply of the German market



by persons who consume English instead of German agricultural



produce. It is all very well for Dr Bowring to assert that German



agriculture must only direct its attention to foreign countries if



it desires to increase its sale of produce; but that a great demand



for agricultural produce can only be attained by a flourishing home



manufacturing power is taught us not alone by the experience of



England, but Dr Bowring himself implicitly admits this, by the



apprehension which he expresses in his report, that if England



delays for some time to abolish her corn laws, Germany will then



have no surplus of either corn or timber to sell to foreign



countries.



    Dr Bowring is certainly right when he asserts that the



agricultural interest in Germany is still the predominant one, but



just for the very reason that it is predominant it must (as we have



shown in former chapters), by promoting the manufacturing



interests, seek to place itself in a just proportion with them,



because the prosperity of agriculture depends on its being in equal



proportion with the manufacturing interest, but not on its own



preponderance over it.



    Further, the author of the report appears to be utterly steeped



in error when he maintains that foreign competition in German



markets is necessary for the German manufacturing interest itself,



because the German manufacturers, as soon as they are in a position



to supply the German markets, must compete with the manufacturers



of other countries for the disposal of their surplus produce, which



competition they can only sustain by means of cheap production. But



cheap production will not consist with the existence of the



protective system, inasmuch as the object of that system is to



secure higher prices to the manufacturers.



    This argument contains as many errors and falsehoods as words.



Dr Bowring cannot deny that the manufacturer can offer his products



at cheaper prices, the more he is enabled to manufacture -- that,



therefore, a manufacturing Power which exclusively possesses its



home market can work so much the cheaper for foreign trade. The



proof of this he can find in the same tables which he has published



on the advances made by German industry; for in the same proportion



in which the German manufactories have acquired possession of their



own home market, their export of manufactured goods has also



increased. Thus the recent experience of Germany, like the ancient



experience of England, shows us that high prices of manufactured



goods are by no means a necessary consequence of protection.



    Finally, German industry is still very far from entirely



supplying her home market. In order to do that, she must first



manufacture for herself the 13,000 centners of cotton fabrics, the



18,000 centners of woollen fabrics, the 500,000 centners of cotton



yarn, thread, and linen yarn, which at present are imported from



England. If, however, she accomplishes that, she will then import



500,000 centners more raw cotton than before, by which she will



carry on so much the more direct exchange trade with tropical



countries, and be able to pay for the greater part if not the whole



of that requirement with her own manufactured goods.



    We must correct the view of the author of the report, that



public opinion in Germany is in favour of free trade, by stating



that since the establishment of the Commercial Union people have



acquired a clearer perception of what it is that England usually



understands by the term 'free trade,' for, as he himself says,



'Since that period the sentiments of the German people have been



diverted from the region of hope and of fantasy to that of their



actual and material interests.' The author of the report is quite



right when he says that intelligence is very greatly diffused



amongst the German people, but for that very reason people in



Germany have ceased to indulge in cosmopolitical dreams. People



here now think for themselves -- they trust their own conclusions,



their own experience, their own sound common sense, more than



one-sided systems which are opposed to all experience. They begin



to comprehend why it was that Burke declared in confidence to Adam



Smith 'that a nation must not be governed according to



cosmopolitical systems, but according to knowledge of their special



national interests acquired by deep research.' People in Germany



distrust counsellors who blow both cold and hot out of the same



mouth. People know also how to estimate at their proper value the



interests and the advice of those who are our industrial



competitors. Finally, people in Germany bear in mind as often as



English offers are under discussion the well-known proverb of the



presents offered by the Danaidae.



    For these very reasons we may doubt that influential German



statesmen have seriously given grounds for hope to the author of



the report, that Germany is willing to abandon her protective



policy for the benefit of England, in exchange for the pitiful



concession of permission to export to England a little grain and



timber. At any rate public opinion in Germany would greatly



hesitate to consider such statesmen to be thoughtful ones. In order



to merit that title in Germany in the present day, it is not enough



that a man should have thoroughly learned superficial phrases and



arguments of the cosmopolitical school. People require that a



statesman should be well acquainted with the powers and the



requirements of the nation, and, without troubling himself with



scholastic systems, should develop the former and satisfy the



latter. But that man would betray an unfathomable ignorance of



those powers and wants, who did not know what enormous exertions



are requisite to raise a national industry to that stage to which



the German industry has already attained; who cannot in spirit



foresee the greatness of its future; who could so grievously



disappoint the confidence which the German industrial classes have



reposed in their Governments, and so deeply wound the spirit of



enterprise in the nation; who was incapable of distinguishing



between the lofty position which is occupied by a manufacturing



nation of the first rank, and the inferior position of a country



which merely exports corn and timber; who is not intelligent enough



to estimate how precarious a foreign market for grain and timber is



even in ordinary times, how easily concessions of this kind can be



again revoked, and what convulsions are involved in an interruption



of such a trade, occasioned by wars or hostile commercial



regulations; who, finally, has not learned from the example of



other great states how greatly the existence, the independence, and



the power of the nation depends on its possession of a



manufacturing power of its own, developed in all its branches.



    Truly one must greatly under-estimate the spirit of nationality



and of unity which has arisen in Germany since 1830, if one



believed, as the author of the report does (p. 26), that the policy



of the Commercial Union will follow the separate interests of



Prussia, because two-thirds of the population of the Union are



Prussian. But Prussia's interests demand the export of grain and



timber to England; the amount of her capital devoted to



manufactures is unimportant; Prussia will therefore oppose every



system which impedes the import of foreign manufactures, and all



the heads of departments in Prussia are of that opinion.



Nevertheless the author of the report says at the beginning of his



report: 'The German Customs Union is an incarnation of the idea of



national unity which widely pervades this country. If this Union is



well led, it must bring about the fusion of all German interests in



one common league. The experience of its benefits has made it



popular. It is the first step towards the nationalisation of the



German people. By means of the common interest in commercial



questions, it has paved the way for political nationality, and in



place of narrow-minded views, prejudices, and customs, it has laid



down a broader and stronger element of German national existence.'



Now, how does the opinion agree with these perfectly true prefatory



observations, that Prussia will sacrifice the independence and the



future greatness of the nation to a narrow regard to her own



supposed (but in any case only momentary) private interest -- that



Prussia will not comprehend that Germany must either rise or fall



with her national commercial policy, as Prussia herself must rise



or fall with Germany? How does the assertion that the Prussian



heads of departments are opposed to the protective system, agree



with the fact that the high duties on ordinary woollen and cotton



fabrics emanated from Prussia herself? And must we not be compelled



to conjecture from these contradictions, and from the fact that the



author of the report paints in such glowing colours the condition



and the progress of the industry of Saxony, that he himself is



desirous of exciting the private jealousy of Prussia?



    Be that as it may, it is very strange that Dr Bowring attaches



such great importance to the private statements of heads of



departments, he an English author who ought to be well aware of the



power of public opinion -- who ought to know that in our days the



private views of heads of departments even in unconstitutional



states count for very little if they are opposed to public opinion,



and especially to the material interests of the whole nation, and



if they favour retrograde steps which endanger the whole



nationality. The author of the report also feels this well enough



himself, when he states at page 98 that the Prussian Government has



sufficiently experienced, as the English Government has done in



connection with the abolition of the English corn laws, that the



views of public officials cannot everywhere be carried into effect,



that hence it might be necessary to consider whether German grain



and timber should not be admitted to the English markets even



without previous concessions on the part of the German Union,



because by that very means the way might be paved for the admission



of the English manufactured goods into the German market. This view



is in any case a correct one. Dr Bowring sees clearly that the



German industry would never have been strengthened but for those



laws; that consequently the abolition of the corn laws would not



only check the further advances of German industry, but must cause



it again to retrograde greatly, provided always that in that case



the German customs legislation remains unchanged. It is only a pity



that the British did not perceive the soundness of this argument



twenty years ago; but now, after that the legislation of England



has itself undertaken the divorce of German agriculture from



English manufactures, after that Germany has pursued the path of



perfecting her industry for twenty years, and has made enormous



sacrifices for this object, it would betoken political blindness if



Germany were now, owing to the abolition of the English corn laws,



to abstain in any degree from pursuing her great national career.



Indeed, we are firmly convinced that in such a case it would be



necessary for Germany to increase her protective duties in the same



proportion in which the English manufactories would derive



advantage from the abolition of the corn laws as compared with



those of Germany. Germany can for a long time follow no other



policy in respect to England than that of a less advanced



manufacturing nation which is striving with all her power to raise



herself to an equal position with the most advanced manufacturing



nation. Every other policy or measure than that, involves the



imperilling of the German nationality. If the English are in want



of foreign corn or timber, then they may get it in Germany or where



else they please. Germany will not on that account any the less



protect the advances in industry which she has made up to this



time, or strive any the less to make future advances. If the



British will have nothing to do with German grain and timber, so



much the better. In that case the industry, the navigation, the



foreign trade of Germany will raise their heads so much the



quicker, the German internal means of transport will be so much the



sooner completed, the German nationality will so much the more



certainly rest on its natural foundation. Perhaps Prussia may not



in this way so soon be able to sell the corn and timber of her



Baltic provinces at high prices as if the English markets were



suddenly opened to her. But through the completion of the internal



means of transport, and through the internal demand for



agricultural produce created by the manufactories, the sales of



those provinces to the interior of Germany will increase fast



enough, and every benefit to these provinces which is founded on



the home demand for agricultural produce will be gained by them for



all future time. They will never more have to oscillate as



heretofore between calamity and prosperity from one decade to



another. But further, as a political power Prussia will gain a



hundred-fold more in concentrated strength in the interior of



Germany by this policy than the material values which she



sacrifices for the moment in her maritime provinces, or rather



invests for repayment in the future.



    The object of the English ministry in this report is clearly to



obtain the admission into Germany of ordinary English woollen and



cotton fabrics, partly through the abolition or at least



modification of charging duties by weight, partly through the



lowering of the tariff, and partly by the admission of the German



grain and timber into the English market. By these means the first



breach can be made in the German protective system. These articles



of ordinary use (as we have already shown in a former chapter) are



by far the most important, they are the fundamental element of the



national industry. Duties of ten per cent ad valorem, which are



clearly aimed at by England, would, with the assistance of the



usual tricks of under declaration of value, sacrifice the greater



part of the German industry to English competition, especially if



in consequence of commercial crises the English manufacturers were



sometimes induced to throw on the market their stocks of goods at



any price. It is therefore no exaggeration if we maintain that the



tendency of the English proposals aims at nothing less than the



overthrow of the entire Germ an protective system, in order to



reduce Germany to the position of an English agricultural colony.



With this object in view it is impressed on.the notice of Prussia



how greatly her agriculture might gain by the reduction of the



English corn and timber duties, and how unimportant her



manufacturing interest is. With the same view, the prospect is



offered to Prussia of a reduction of the duties on brandy. And in



order that the other states may not go quite empty away a five per



cent reduction of the duties on Nüremberg wares, children's toys,



eau de Cologne, and other trifles, is promised. That gives



satisfaction to the small German states, and also does not cost



much.



    The next attempt will be to convince the German governments, by



means of this report, how advantageous to them it would be to let



England spin cotton and linen yarns for them. It cannot be doubted



that hitherto the policy adopted by the Union, first of all to



encourage and protect the printing of cloths and then weaving, and



to import the medium and finer yarns, has been the right one. But



from that it in nowise follows that it would continue to be the



right one for all time. The tariff legislation must advance as the



national industry advances if it is rightly to fulfil its purpose.



We have already shown that the spinning factories, quite apart from



their importance in themselves, yet are the source of further



incalculable benefits, inasmuch as they place us in direct



commercial communication with the countries of warm climate, and



hence that they exercise an incalculable influence on our



navigation and on our export of manufactures, and that they benefit



our manufactories of machinery more than any other branch of



manufacture. Inasmuch as it cannot be doubted that Germany cannot



be hindered either by want of water power and of capable workmen,



or by lack of material capital or intelligence, from carrying on



for herself this great and fruitful industry, so we cannot see why



we should not gradually protect the spinning of yarns from one



number to another, in such a way that in the course of five to ten



years we may be able to spin for ourselves the greater part of what



we require. However highly one may estimate the advantages of the



export of grain and timber, they cannot nearly equal the benefits



which must accrue to us from the spinning manufacture. Indeed, we



have no hesitation in expressing the belief that it could be



incontestably proved, by a calculation of the consumption of



agricultural products and timber which would be created by the



spinning industry, that from this branch of manufacture alone far



greater benefits must accrue to the German landowners than the



foreign market will ever or can ever offer them.



    Dr Bowring doubts that Hanover, Brunswick, the two



Mecklenburgs, Oldenburg, and the Hanse Towns will join the Union,



unless the latter is willing to make a radical reduction in its



import duties. The latter proposal, however, cannot be seriously



considered, because it would be immeasurably worse than the evil



which by it, it is desired to remedy.



    Our confidence in the prosperity of the future of Germany is,



however, by no means so weak as that of the author of the report.



Just as the Revolution of July has proved beneficial to the German



Commercial Union, so must the next great general convulsion make an



end of all the minor hesitations by which these small states have



hitherto been withheld from yielding to the greater requirements of



the German nationality. Of what value the commercial unity has been



to the nationality, and of what value it is to German governments,



quite apart from mere material interests, has been recently for the



first time very strongly demonstrated, when the desire to acquire



the Rhine frontier has been loudly expressed in France.



    From day to day it is necessary that the governments and



peoples of Germany should be more convinced that national unity is



the rock on which the edifice of their welfare, their honour, their



power, their present security and existence, and their future



greatness, must be founded. Thus from day to day the apostasy of



these small maritime states will appear more and more, not only to



the states in the Union, but to these small states themselves, in



the light of a national scandal which must be got rid of at any



price. Also, if the matter is intelligently considered, the



material advantages of joining the Union are much greater for those



states themselves than the sacrifice which it requires. The more



that manufacturing industry, that the internal means of transport,



the navigation, and the foreign trade of Germany, develop



themselves, in that degree in which under a wise commercial policy



they can and must be developed in accordance with the resources of



the nation, so much the more will the desire become more vigorous



on the part of those small states directly to participate in these



advantages, and so much the more will they leave off the bad habit



of looking to foreign countries for blessings and prosperity.



    In reference to the Hanse Towns especially, the spirit of



imperial citizenship of the sovereign parish of Hamburg in no way



deters us from our hopes. In those cities, according to the



testimony of the author of the report himself, dwell a great number



of men who comprehend that Hamburg, Bremen, and Lubeck are and must



be to the German nation that which London and Liverpool are to the



English, that which New York, Boston, and Philadelphia are to the



Americans -- men who clearly see that the Commercial Union can



offer advantages to their commerce with the world which far exceed



the disadvantages of subjection to the regulations of the Union,



and that a prosperity without any guarantee for its continuance is



fundamentally a delusion.



    What sensible inhabitant of those seaports could heartily



congratulate himself on the continual increase of their tonnage, on



the continual extension of their commercial relations, if he



reflected that two frigates, which coming from Heligoland could be



stationed at the mouths of the Weser and the Elbe, would be in a



position to destroy in twenty-four hours this work of a quarter of



a century? But the Union will guarantee to these seaports their



prosperity and their progress for all future time, partly by the



creation of a fleet of its own and partly by alliances. It will



foster their fisheries, secure special advantages to their



shipping, protect and promote their foreign commercial relations,



by effective consular establishments and by treaties. Partly by



their means it will found new colonies, and by their means carry on



its own colonial trade. For a union of States comprising



thirty-five millions of inhabitants (for the Union will comprise



that number at least when it is fully completed), which owing to an



annual increase of population of one and a half per cent can easily



spare annually two or three hundred thousand persons, whose



provinces abound with well-informed and cultivated inhabitants who



have a peculiar propensity to seek their fortune in distant



countries, people who can take root anywhere and make themselves at



home wherever unoccupied land is to be cultivated, are called upon



by Nature herself to place themselves in the first rank of nations



who colonise and diffuse civilisation.



    The feeling of the necessity for such a perfect completion of



the Commercial Union is so universally entertained in Germany, that



hence the author of the report could not help remarking, 'More



coasts, more harbours, more navigation, a Union flag, the



possession of a navy and of a mercantile marine, are wishes very



generally entertained by the supporters of the Commercial Union,



but there is little prospect at present of the Union making head



against the increasing fleet of Russia and the commercial marine of



Holland and the Hanse Towns.' Against them certainly not, but so



much the more with them and by means of them. It lies in the very



nature of every power to seek to divide in order to rule. After the



author of the report has shown why it would be foolish on the part



of the maritime states to join the Union, he desires also to



separate the great seaports from the German national body for all



time, inasmuch as he speaks to us of the warehouses of Altona which



must become dangerous to the warehouses of Hamburg, as though such



a great commercial empire could not find the means of making the



warehouses of Altona serviceable to its objects. We will not follow



the author through his acute inferences from this point; we will



only say, that if they were applied to England, they would prove



that London and Liverpool would increase their commercial



prosperity in an extraordinary degree if they were separated from



the body of the English nation. The spirit which underlies these



arguments is unmistakably expressed in the report of the English



consul at Rotterdam. 'For the commercial interests of Great



Britain,' says Mr Alexander Ferrier at the end of his report, 'it



appears of the greatest possible importance that no means should be



left untried to prevent the aforesaid states, and also Belgium,



from entering the Zollverein, for reasons which are too clear to



need any exposition.' Who could possibly blame Mr Ferrier for



speaking thus, or Dr Bowring for speaking thus, or the English



ministers for acting as the others speak? The national instinct of



England speaks and acts through them. But to expect prosperity and



blessing to Germany from proposals which proceed from such a source



as that, would appear to exceed even a decent degree of national



good nature. 'Whatever may happen,' adds Mr Ferrier to the words



above quoted, 'Holland must at all times be considered as the main



channel for the commercial relations of South Germany with other



countries.' Clearly Mr Ferrier understands by the term 'other



countries' merely England; clearly he means to say that if the



English manufacturing supremacy should lose its means of access to



Germany or the North Sea and the Baltic, Holland would still remain



to it as the great means of access by which it could predominate



over the markets for manufactured goods and colonial produce of the



south of Germany.



    But we from a national point of view say and maintain that



Holland is in reference to its geographical position, as well as in



respect to its commercial and industrial circumstances, and to the



origin and language of its inhabitants, a German province, which



has been separated from Germany at a period of German national



disunion, without whose reincorporation in the German Union Germany



may be compared to a house the door of which belongs to a stranger:



Holland belongs as much to Germany as Brittany and Normandy belong



to France, and so long as Holland is determined to constitute an



independent kingdom of her own, Germany can as little attain



independence and power as France would have been enabled to attain



these if those provinces had remained in the hands of the English.



That the commercial power of Holland has declined, is owing to the



unimportance of the country. Holland will and must also,



notwithstanding the prosperity of her colonies, continue to



decline, because the nation is too weak to support the enormous



expense of a considerable military and naval power. Through her



exertions to maintain her nationality Holland must become more and



more deeply involved in debt. Notwithstanding her great colonial



prosperity, she is and remains all the same a country dependent on



England, and by her seeming independence she only strengthens the



English supremacy. This is also the secret reason why England at



the congress of Vienna took under her protection the restoration of



the Dutch seeming independence. The case is exactly the same as



with the Hanse Towns. On the side of England, Holland is a



satellite for the English fleet -- unite it with Germany, she is



the leader of the German naval power. In her present position



Holland cannot nearly so well derive profit from her colonial



possessions as if they became a constituent part of the German



Union, especially because she is too weak in the elements which are



necessary for colonisation -- in population and in mental powers.



Further than this, the profitable development of her colonies, so



far as that has hitherto been effected, depends for the most part



on German good nature, or rather on the nonacquaintance of the



Germans with their own national commercial interests; for while all



other nations reserve their market for colonial produce for their



own colonies and for the countries subject to them, the German



market is the only one which remains open to the Dutch for the



disposal of their surplus colonial produce. As soon as the Germans



clearly comprehend that those from whom they purchase colonial



produce must be made to understand that they on their part must



purchase manufactured goods from Germany under differentially



favourable treatment, then the Germans will also clearly see that



they have it in their power to compel Holland to join the



Zollverein. That union would be of the greatest advantage to both



countries. Germany would give Holland the means not only of



deriving profit from her colonies far better than at present, but



also to found and to acquire new colonies. Germany would grant



special perferential privileges to the Dutch and Hanseatic



shipping, and grant special preferential privileges to Dutch



colonial produce in the German markets. Holland and the Hanse



Towns, in return, would preferentially export German manufactures,



and preferentially employ their surplus capital in the



manufactories and the agriculture of the interior of Germany. 



    Holland , as she has sunk from her eminence as a commercial



power because she, the mere fraction of a nation, wanted to make



herself pass as an entire nation; because she sought her advantage



in the oppression and the weakening of the productive powers of



Germany , instead of basing her greatness on the prosperity of the



countries which lie behind her, with which every maritime state



must stand or fall; because she sought to become great by her



separation from the German nation instead of by her union with it;



Holland can only again attain to her ancient state of prosperity by



means of the German Union and in the closest connection with it.



Only by this union is it possible to constitute an agricultural



manufacturing commercial nationality of the first magnitude.



    Dr Bowring groups in his tables the imports and exports of the



German Customs Union with the Hanse Towns and Holland and Belgium



all together, and from this grouping it clearly appears how greatly



all these countries are dependent on the English manufacturing



industry, and how immeasurably they might gain in their entire



productive power by union. He estimates the imports of these



countries from England at 19,842,121 l. sterling of official value,



or 8,550,347 l. of declared value, but the exports of those



countries to England (on the other hand) at only 4,804,491 l.



sterling; in which, by the way, are included the great quantities



of Java coffee, cheese, butter, &c. which England imports from



Holland. These totals speak volumes. We thank the Doctor for his



statistical grouping together -- would that it might betoken a



speedy political grouping.







NOTES:







1. Report on the German Zollverein to Lord Viscount Palmerston, by



John Bowring, 1840.







2. See statement of R. B. Porter, note to p. 299.







Chapter 35







Continental Politics







    The highest ultimate aim of rational politics is (as we have



shown in our Second Book) the uniting of all nations under a common



law of right, an object which is only to be attained through the



greatest possible equalisation of the most important nations of the



earth in civilisation, prosperity, industry, and power, by the



conversion of the antipathies and conflicts which now exist between



them into sympathy and harmony. But the solution of this problem is



a work of immensely long duration. At the present time the nations



are divided and repelled from one another by manifold causes; chief



among these are conflicts about territory. As yet, the



apportionment of territory to the European nations does not



correspond to the nature of things. Indeed, even in theory, people



are not yet agreed upon the fundamental conditions of a just and



natural apportionment of territory. Some desire that their national



territory should be determined according to the requirements of



their metropolis without regard to language, commerce, race, and so



forth, in such a way that the metropolis should be situated in the



centre and be protected as much as possible against foreign



attacks. They desire to have great rivers for their frontiers.



Others maintain, and apparently with greater reason, that



sea-coasts, mountains, language, and race, constitute better



frontiers than great rivers. There still are nations who are not in



possession of those mouths of rivers and sea-coasts which are



indispensable to them for the development of their commerce with



the world and for their naval power.



    If every nation was already in possession of the territory



which is necessary for its internal development, and for the



maintenance of its political, industrial, and commercial



independence, then every conquest of territory would be contrary to



sound policy, because by the unnatural increase of territory the



jealousy of the nation which is thus encroached upon would be



excited and kept alive, and consequently the sacrifices which the



conquering nation would have to make for retaining such provinces



would be immeasurably greater than the advantages accruing from



their possession. A just and wise apportionment of territory is,



however, at this day not to be thought of, because this question is



complicated by manifold interests of another nature. At the same



time it must not be ignored that rectification of territory must be



reckoned among the most important requirements of the nations, that



striving to attain it is legitimate, that indeed in many cases it



is a justifiable reason for war.



    Further causes of antipathy between the nations are, at the



present time, the diversity of their interests in respect to



manufactures, commerce, navigation, naval power, and colonial



possessions, also the difference in their degrees of civilisation,



of religion, and of political condition. All these interests are



complicated in manifold ways through the interests of dynasties and



powers.



    The causes of antipathy are, on the other hand, causes of



sympathy. The less powerful nations sympathise against the most



powerful, those whose independence is endangered sympathise against



the aggressors, territorial powers against naval supremacy, those



whose industry and commerce are defective sympathise against those



who are striving for an industrial and commercial monopoly, the



half-civilised against the civilised, those who are subjects of a



monarchy against those whose government is entirely or partially



democratic.



    Nations at this time pursue their own interests and sympathies



by means of alliances of those who are like-minded and have like



interests against the interests and tendencies which conflict with



theirs. As, however, these interests and tendencies conflict with



one another in various ways, these alliances are liable to change.



Those nations who are friends to-day may be enemies to-morrow, and



vice versâ, as soon as ever some one of the great interests or



principles is at stake by which they feel themselves repelled from



or drawn towards one another.



    Politicians have long felt that the equalisation of the nations



must be their ultimate aim. That which people call the maintenance



of the European balance of power has always been nothing else than



the endeavours of the less powerful to impose a check on the



encroachments of the more powerful. Yet politics have not seldom



confounded their proximate object with their ultimate one, and vice



versâ.



    The proximate task of politics always consists in clearly



perceiving in what respect the alliance and equalisation of the



different interests is at the moment most pressing, and to strive



that until this equalisation is attained all other questions may be



suspended and kept in the background.



    When the dynastic, monarchic, and aristocratic interests of



Europe allied themselves against the revolutionary tendencies of



1789, disregarding all considerations regarding power and commerce,



their policy was a correct one.



    It was just as correct when the French Empire introduced the



tendency of conquest in place of that of revolution.



    Napoleon sought by his Continental system to establish a



Continental coalition against the predominant naval and commercial



power of England; but in order to succeed, it was necessary for



him, first of all, to take away from the Continental nations the



apprehension of being conquered by France. He failed, because on



their part the fear of his supremacy on land greatly outweighed the



disadvantages which they suffered from the naval supremacy.



    With the fall of the French Empire, the object of the great



alliance ceased. From that time forth, the Continental powers were



menaced neither by the revolutionary tendencies nor by the lust of



conquest of France. England's predominance in manufactures,



navigation, commerce, colonial possessions, and naval power, had,



on the other hand, enormously increased during the conflicts



against the Revolution and against the French conquest. From that



time forth, it became the interest of the Continental powers to



ally themselves with France against the commercial and naval



predominance. Solely from fear of the skin of the dead lion, the



Continental powers did not heed sufficiently the living leopard who



had hitherto fought in their ranks. The Holy Alliance was a



political error.



    This error also brought about its own punishment through the



revolution of Italy. The Holy Alliance had unnecessarily called



into life a counter force which no longer existed, or which at



least would not for a long time have revived again. Fortunately for



the Continental powers, the dynasty of July contrived to appease



the revolutionary tendency in France. France concluded the alliance



with England in the interests of the dynasty of July and of



strengthening the constitutional monarchy. England concluded it in



the interest of the maintenance of her commercial supremacy.



    The Franco-English alliance ceased as soon as ever the dynasty



of July and the constitutional monarchy in France felt themselves



to be sufficiently firmly established; but, on the other hand, the



interests of France in respect of naval power, navigation,



commerce, industry, and foreign possessions came again more to the



front. It is clear that France has again an equal interest with the



other Continental powers in these questions, and the establishing



of a Continental alliance against the naval predominance of England



appears to be becoming a question of the day, provided the dynasty



of July can succeed in creating perfect unity of will between the



different organs of State administration, also to thrust into the



background those territorial questions which are excited by the



revolutionary tendencies, and entirely to appease in the minds of



the monarchical Continental powers the fear of the tendencies of



France towards revolution and aggression.



    Nothing, however, at this time so greatly impedes a closer



union of the continent of Europe as the fact that the centre of it



still never takes the position for which it is naturally fitted.



Instead of being a mediator between the east and the west of that



continent, on all questions of arrangement of territory, of the



principle of their constitutions, of national independence and



power, for which it is qualified by its geographical position, by



its federal constitution which excludes all apprehension of



aggression in the minds of neighbouring nations, by its religious



toleration, and its cosmopolitical tendencies, and finally by its



civilisation and the elements of power which it possesses, this



central part of Europe constitutes at present the apple of discord



for which the east and the west contend, while each party hopes to



draw to its own side this middle power, which is weakened by want



of national unity, and is always uncertainly wavering hither and



thither.



    If, on the other hand, Germany could constitute itself with the



maritime territories which appertain to it, with Holland, Belgium,



and Switzerland, as a powerful commercial and political whole -- if



this mighty national body could fuse representative institutions



with the existing monarchical, dynastic, and aristocratic



interests, so far as these are compatible with one another -- then



Germany could secure peace to the continent of Europe for a long



time, and at the same time constitute herself the central point of



a durable Continental alliance.



    That the naval power of England greatly exceeds that of all



other nations, if not on the number of ships, yet certainly in



fighting power -- that hence the nations which are less powerful at



sea can only match England at sea by uniting their own naval power,



is clear. From hence it follows, that every nation which is less



powerful at sea has an interest in the maintenance and prosperity



of the naval power of all other nations who are similarly weak at



sea; and further, that fractions of other nations which, hitherto



divided, have possessed either no naval power whatever or only an



unimportant one, should constitute themselves into one united naval



power. In regard to England, France and North America sustain loss



if the naval power of Russia declines, and vice versâ. They all



gain, if Germany, Holland, and Belgium constitute together a common



naval power; for while separated these last are mere satellites to



the supremacy of England, but if united they strengthen the



opposition to that supremacy of all nations at sea.



    None of these less powerful nations possesses a mercantile



marine which exceeds the requirements of its own international



trade -- none of these nations possesses a manufacturing power



which would maintain important preponderance over that of the



others. None of them, therefore, has any ground to fear the



competition of the others. On the other hand, all have a common



interest in protecting themselves against the destructive



competition of England. Hence it must be to the interests of all



that the predominating manufacturing power of England should lose



those means of access (Holland, Belgium, and the Hanse Towns) by



means of which England has hitherto dominated the markets of the



Continent.



    Inasmuch as the products of tropical climates are chiefly paid



for by the manufactured products of temperate climates, and hence



the consumption of the former depends on the sale of the latter,



therefore every manufacturing nation should endeavour to establish



direct intercourse with tropical countries. And thus, if all



manufacturing nations of the second rank understand their own



interests and act accordingly, no nation will be permitted to



maintain a predominant amount of colonial possessions in tropical



countries. If, for instance, England could succeed in the object



for which she is at present striving, viz. to produce in India the



colonial produce which she requires -- in that case England could



only carry on trade with the West Indies to the extent to which she



was able to sell to other countries the colonial produce which she



now obtains from the West Indies in exchange for her manufactured



goods. If, however, she could not dispose of these to other



countries, then her West Indian possessions would become useless to



her. She would then have no other option than either to let them go



free, or to surrender the trade with them to other manufacturing



countries. Hence it follows that all manufacturing nations less



powerful at sea have a common interest in following this policy and



in reciprocally supporting one another in it, and it follows



further that no one of these nations would lose by the accession of



Holland to the German Commercial Union, and through the closer



connection of Germany with the Dutch colonies.



    Since the emancipation of the Spanish and Portuguese colonies



in South America and the West Indies, it is no longer indispensably



necessary that a manufacturing nation should possess colonies of



its own in tropical climates in order to put itself in a position



to carry on directly the exchange of manufactured goods against



colonial produce. As the markets of these emancipated tropical



countries are free, every manufacturing nation which is able to



compete in these free markets can carry on direct trade with them.



But these free tropical countries can only produce great quantities



of colonial products, and only consume great quantities of



manufactured goods, if prosperity and morality, peace and repose,



lawful order and religious tolerance, prevail within them. All



nations not powerful at sea, especially those who possess no



colonies, or only unimportant ones, have hence a common interest in



bringing about such a state of things by their united power. To



England, with her commercial supremacy, the circumstances of these



countries cannot matter so much because she is sufficiently



supplied, or at least hopes to become sufficiently supplied, with



colonial produce from her own exclusive and subject markets in the



East and West Indies. From this point of view also we must partly



judge respecting the extremely important question of slavery. We



are very far from ignoring that much philanthropy and good motive



lies at the root of the zeal with which the object of the



emancipation of the negroes is pursued by England, and that this



zeal does great honour to the character of the English nation. But



at the same time, if we consider the immediate effects of the



measures adopted by England in reference to this matter, we cannot



get rid of the idea that also much political motive and commercial



interest are mingled with it. These effects are: (1) That by the



sudden emancipation of the blacks, through their rapid transition



from a condition of disorder and carelessness little removed from



that of wild animals to a high degree of individual independence,



the yield of tropical produce of South America and the West Indies



will be extremely diminished and ultimately reduced to nothing, as



the example of St. Domingo incontestably shows, inasmuch as there



since the expulsion of the French and Spaniards the production has



greatly decreased from year to year, and continues to do so. (2)



That the free negroes continually seek to obtain an increase in



their wages, whilst they limit their labour to the supply of their



most indispensable wants; that hence their freedom merely leads to



idleness. (3) That, on the other hand, England possesses in the



East Indies ample means for supplying the whole world with colonial



products. It is well known that the Hindoos, owing to great



industry and great moderation in their food and other wants,



especially in consequence of the precepts of their religion, which



forbid the use of animal food, are excessively frugal. To these



must be added the want of capital among the natives, the great



fruitfulness of the soil in vegetable products, and the restriction



of caste and the great competition of those in want of work.



    The result of all this is, that wages in India are incomparably



lower than in the West Indies and South America, whether the



plantations there are cultivated by free blacks or by slaves; that



consequently the production of India, after trade has been set free



in that country, and wiser principles of administration have



prevailed, must increase at an enormous rate, and the time is no



longer distant when England will not only be able to supply all her



own requirements of colonial produce from India, but also export



great quantities to other countries. Hence it follows that England



cannot lose through the diminution of production in the West Indies



and South America, to which countries other nations also export



manufactured goods, but she will gain if the colonial production in



India becomes preponderant, which market England exclusively



supplies with manufactured goods. (4) Finally, it may be asserted,



that by the emancipation of the slaves England desires to hang a



sword over the head of the North American slave states, which is so



much the more menacing to the Union the more this emancipation



extends and the wish is excited among the negroes of North America



to partake of similar liberty. The question if rightly viewed must



appear a philanthropical experiment of doubtful benefit towards



those on whose behalf it was undertaken from motives of general



philanthropy, but must in any case appear to those nations who rely



on the trade with South America and the West Indies as not



advantageous to them; and they may not unreasonably inquire:



Whether a sudden transition from slavery to freedom may not prove



more injurious to the negroes themselves than the maintenance of



the existing state of things? -- whether it may not be the task of



several generations to educate the negroes (who are accustomed to



an almost animal state of subjection) to habits of voluntary labour



and thrift? -- whether it might not better attain the object if the



transition from slavery to freedom was made by the introduction of



a mild form of serfdom, whereby at first some interest might be



secured to the serf in the land which he cultivates, and a fair



share of the fruits of his labour, allowing sufficient rights to



the landlord in order to bind the serf to habits of industry and



order? -- whether such a condition would not be more desirable than



that of a miserable, drunken, lazy, vicious, mendicant horde called



free negroes, in comparison with which Irish misery in its most



degraded form may be deemed a state of prosperity and civilisation?



If, however, we are required to believe that the zeal of the



English to make everything which exists upon earth partakers of the



same degree of freedom which they possess themselves, is so great



and irrepressible that they must be excused if they have forgotten



that nature makes no advances by leaps and bounds, then we must



venture to put the questions: Whether the condition of the lowest



caste of the Hindoos is not much more wretched and intolerable than



that of the American negroes? -- and how it happens that the



philanthropic spirit of England has never been excited on behalf of



these most miserable of mankind? -- how it happens that English



legislation has never intervened for their benefit? -- how it



happens that England has been active enough in deriving means for



her own enrichment out of this miserable state of things, without



thinking of any direct means of ameliorating it?



    The English-Indian policy leads us to the Eastern question. If



we can dismiss from the politics of the day all that which at this



moment has reference to territorial conflicts, to the dynastic,



monarchic, aristocratic, and religious interests, and to the



circumstances of the various powers, it cannot be ignored that the



Continental powers have a great national economic interest in



common in the Eastern question. However successful the present



endeavours of the powers may be to keep this question in the



background for a time, it will continually again come to the front



with renewed force. It is a conclusion long arrived at by all



thoughtful men, that a nation so thoroughly undermined in her



religious, moral, social, and political foundations as Turkey is,



is like a corpse, which may indeed be held up for a time by the



support of the living, but must none the less pass into corruption.



The case is quite the same with the Persians as with the Turks,



with the Chinese and Hindoos and all other Asiatic people. Wherever



the mouldering civilisation of Asia comes into contact with the



fresh atmosphere of Europe, it falls to atoms; and Europe will



sooner or later find herself under the necessity of taking the



whole of Asia under her care and tutelage, as already India has



been so taken in charge by England. In this utter chaos of



countries and peoples there exists no single nationality which is



either worthy or capable of maintenance and regeneration. Hence the



entire dissolution of the Asiatic nationalities appears to be



inevitable, and a regeneration of Asia only possible by means of an



infusion of European vital power, by the general introduction of



the Christian religion and of European moral laws and order, by



European immigration, and the introduction of European systems of



government.



    If we reflect on the course which such a regeneration might



possibly pursue, the first consideration that strikes one is that



the greater part of the East is richly provided by nature with



resources for supplying the manufacturing nations of Europe with



great quantities of raw materials and necessary articles of every



kind, but especially for producing tropical products, and in



exchange for these for opening unlimited markets to European



manufacturers. From this circumstance, nature appears to have given



an indication that this regeneration, as generally is the case with



the civilisation of barbarous peoples, must proceed by the path of



free exchange of agricultural produce against manufactured goods.



For that reason the principle must be firmly maintained above all



by the European nations, that no exclusive commercial privileges



must be reserved to any European nation in any part of Asia



whatever, and that no nation must be favoured above others there in



any degree. It would be especially advantageous to the extension of



this trade, if the chief commercial emporiums of the East were



constituted free cities, the European population of which should



have the right of self-government in consideration of an annual



payment of tax to the native rulers. But European agents should be



appointed to reside with these rulers, after the example of English



policy in India, whose advice the native rulers should be bound to



follow in respect of the promotion of public security order, and



civilisation.



    All the Continental powers have especially a common interest



that neither of the two routes from the Mediterranean to the Red



Sea and to the Persian Gulf should fall into the exclusive



possession of England, nor remain impassable owing to Asiatic



barbarism. To commit the duty of protecting these important points



to Austria, would insure the best guarantees to all European



nations.



    Further, the Continental powers in general have a common



interest with the United States in maintaining the principle that



'free ships cover free goods,' and that only an effectual blockade



of individual ports, but not a mere proclamation of the blockade of



entire coasts, ought to be respected by neutrals. Finally, the



principle of the annexation of wild and uninhabited territories



appears to require revision in the common interest of the



Continental powers. People ridicule in our days the fact that the



Holy Father formerly undertook to make presents of islands and



parts of the globe, nay even to divide the world into two parts



with a stroke of the pen, and to apportion this part to one man and



that to another. Can it, however, be deemed much more sensible to



acknowledge the title to an entire quarter of the globe to vest in



the man who first erected somewhere on the earth a pole adorned



with a piece of silk? That in the case of islands of moderate size



the right of the discoverer should be respected, may be admitted



consistently with common sense; but when the question arises as to



islands which are as large as a great European kingdom (like New



Zealand) or respecting a continent which is larger than the whole



of Europe (like Australia), in such a case by nothing less than an



actual occupation by colonisation, and then only for the actually



colonised territory, can a claim to exclusive possession be



admitted consistently with common sense. And it is not clear why



the Germans and the French should not have the right to found



colonies in those parts of the world at points which are distant



from the English stations.



    If we only consider the enormous interests which the nations of



the Continent have in common, as opposed to the English maritime



supremacy, we shall be led to the conviction that nothing is so



necessary to these nations as union, and nothing is so ruinous to



them as Continental wars. The history of the last century also



teaches us that every war which the powers of the Continent have



waged against one another has had for its invariable result to



increase the industry, the wealth, the navigation, the colonial



possessions, and the power of the insular supremacy.



    Hence, it cannot be denied that a correct view of the wants and



interests of the Continent underlaid the Continental system of



Napoleon, although it must not be ignored that Napoleon desired to



give effect to this idea (right in itself) in a manner which was



contrary to the independence and to the interests of the other



Continental powers. The Continental system of Napoleon suffered



from three capital defects. In the first place, it sought to



establish, in the place of the English maritime supremacy, a French



Continental supremacy; it sought the humiliation, or destruction



and dissolution, of other nationalities on the Continent for the



benefit of France, instead of basing itself on the elevation and



equalisation of the other Continental nations. Furthermore, France



followed herself an exclusive commercial policy against the other



countries of the Continent, while she claimed for herself free



competition in those countries. Finally, the system almost entirely



destroyed the trade between the manufacturing countries of the



Continent and tropical countries, and found itself compelled to



find a remedy for the destruction of this international trade by



the use of substituted articles.(1*)



    That the idea of this Continental system will ever recur, that



the necessity of realising it will the more forcibly impress itself



on the Continental nations in proportion as the preponderance of



England in industry, wealth, and power further increases, is



already very clear, and will continually become more evident. But



it is not less certain that an alliance of the Continental nations



can only have a good result if France is wise enough to avoid the



errors of Napoleon. Hence, it is foolish of France if she raises



(contrary to all justice, and to the actual nature of



circumstances) claims for extension of frontiers at the expense of



Germany, and thereby compels other nations of the Continent to ally



themselves with England.



    It is foolish of France if she speaks of the Mediterranean Sea



as of a French lake, and seeks to acquire exclusive influence in



the Levant and in South America.



    An effective Continental system can only originate from the



free union of the Continental powers, and can succeed only in case



it has for its object (and also effects) an equal participation in



the advantages which result from it, for in that way only, and in



no other, can the maritime powers of second rank command respect



from the predominant power of England in such a way that the latter



without any recourse to the force of arms will concede all the just



requirements of the less powerful states. Only by such an alliance



as that will the Continental manufacturing powers be able to



maintain their relations with tropical countries, and assert and



secure their interests in the East and the West.



    In any case the British, who are ever too anxious for



supremacy, must feel it hard when they perceive in this manner how



the Continental nations will reciprocally raise their manufacturing



power by mutual commercial concessions and by treaties; how they



will reciprocally strengthen their navigation and their naval



power; how they will assert their claim to that share for which



they are fitted by nature in civilising and colonising barbarous



and uncultivated countries, and in trade with tropical regions.



Nevertheless, a glance into the future ought sufficiently to



console the britons for these anticipated disadvantages.



    For the same causes which have raised Great Britain to her



present exalted position, will (probably in the course of the next



century) raise the United States of America to a degree of



industry, wealth, and power, which will surpass the position in



which England stands, as far as at present England excels little



Holland. In the natural course of things the United States will



increase their population within that period to hundreds of



millions of souls; they will diffuse their population, their



institutions, their civilisation, and their spirit over the whole



of Central and South America, just as they have recently diffused



them over the neighbouring Mexican province. The Federal Union will



comprise all these immense territories, a population of several



hundred millions of people will develop the resources of a



continent which infinitely exceeds the continent of Europe in



extent and in natural wealth. The naval power of the western world



will surpass that of Great Britain, as greatly as its coasts and



rivers exceed those of Britain in extent and magnitude.



    Thus in a not very distant future the natural necessity which



now imposes on the French and Germans the necessity of establishing



a Continental alliance against the British supremacy, will impose



on the British the necessity of establishing a European coalition



against the supremacy of America. Then will Great Britain be



compelled to seek and to find in the leadership of the united



powers of Europe protection, security, and compensation against the



predominance of America, and an equivalent for her lost supremacy.



    It is therefore good for England that she should practise



resignation betimes, that she should by timely renunciations gain



the friendship of European Continental powers, that she should



accustom herself betimes to the idea of being only the first among



equals.







NOTES:







1. This fact is confirmed by Mad. Junot, in Mémoires de la Duchess



d'Abrantès. -- [TRANSLATOR.]











Chapter 36







The Commercial Policy of the German Zollverein







    If any nation whatever is qualified for the establishment of a



national manufacturing power, it is Germany; by the high rank which



she maintains in science and art, in literature and education, in



public administration and in institutions of public utility; by her



morality and religious character, her industry and domestic



economy; by her perseverance and steadfastness in business



occupations; as also by her spirit of invention, by the number and



vigour of her population; by the extent and nature of her



territory, and especially by her highly advanced agriculture, and



her physical, social, and mental resources.



    If any nation whatever has a right to anticipate rich results



from a protective system adapted to her circumstances, for the



progress of her home manufactures, for the increase of her foreign



trade and her navigation, for the perfecting of her internal means



of transport, for the prosperity of her agriculture, as also for



the maintenance of her independence and the increase of her power



abroad, it is Germany.



    Yes, we venture to assert, that on the development of the



German protective system depend the existence, the independence and



the future of the German nationality. Only in the soil of general



prosperity does the national spirit strike its roots, produce fine



blossoms and rich fruits; only from the unity of material interests



does mental power arise, and only from both of these national



power. But of what value are all our endeavours, whether we are



rulers or subjects, nobles or simple citizens, learned men,



soldiers, or civilians, manufacturers, agriculturists, or



merchants, without nationality and without guarantees for the



continuance of our nationality?



    Meanwhile, however, the German protective system only



accomplishes its object in a very imperfect manner, so long as



Germany does not spin for herself the cotton and linen yarn which



she requires; so long as she does not directly import from tropical



countries the colonial produce which she requires, and pay for it



with goods of her own manufacture; so long as she does not carry on



this trade with her own ships; so long as she has no means of



protecting her own flag; so long as she possesses no perfect system



of transport by river, canal, or railway; so long as the German



Zollverein does not include all German maritime territories and



also Holland and belgium. We have treated these subjects



circumstantially in various places in this book, and it is only



necessary for us here to recapitulate what we have already thus



treated.



    If we import raw cotton from Egypt, Brazil, and North America,



we in that case pay for it in our own manufactured goods; if, on



the other hand, we import cotton yarn from England, we have to pay



the value of it in raw materials and articles of food which we



could more advantageously work up or consume ourselves, or else we



must pay for it in specie which we have acquired elsewhere, and



with which we could more advantageously purchase foreign raw



materials to work up for ourselves, or colonial produce for our own



consumption.



    In the same way the introduction of spinning linen yarn by



machinery offers us the means not only of increasing our home



consumption of linen, and of perfecting our agriculture, but also



of enormously increasing our trade with tropical countries.



    For the two above-named branches of industry, as well as for



the manufacture of woollens, we are as favourably circumstanced as



any other nation, by an amount of water power hitherto not



utilised, by cheap necessaries of life, and by low wages. What we



lack is simply and solely a guarantee for our capitalists and



artisans by which they may be protected against loss of capital and



want of work. A moderate protective duty of about twenty-five per



cent during the next five years, which could be maintained for a



few years at that rate and then be lowered to fifteen to twenty per



cent, ought completely to accomplish this object. Every argument



which is adduced by the supporters of the theory of values against



such a measure, has been refuted by us. On the other hand, we may



add a further argument in favour of that measure, that these great



branches of industry especially offer us the means for establishing



extensive machine manufactories and for the development of a race



of competent technical instructors and practical foremen.



    In the trade in colonial produce Germany, as France and England



have done, has to follow the principle -- that in respect to the



purchase of the colonial produce which we require, we should give



a preference to those tropical countries which purchase



manufactured goods from us; or, in short, that we should buy from



those who buy from us. That is the case in reference to our trade



with the West Indies and to North and South America.



    But it is not yet the case in reference to our trade with



Holland, which country supplies us with enormous quantities of her



colonial produce, but only takes in return disproportionately small



quantities of our manufactured goods.



    At the same time Holland is naturally directed to the market of



Germany for the disposal of the greater part of her colonial



produce, inasmuch as England and France derive their supplies of



such produce for the most part from their own colonies and from



subject countries (where they exclusively possess the market for



manufactured goods), and hence they only import small quantities of



Dutch colonial produce.



    Holland has no important manufacturing industry of her own,



but, on the other hand, has a great productive industry in her



colonies, which has recently greatly increased and may yet be



immeasurably further increased. But Holland desires of Germany that



which is unfair, and acts contrary to her own interests if rightly



understood, inasmuch as she desires to dispose of the greater part



of her colonial produce to Germany, while she desires to supply her



requirements of manufactured goods from any quarter she likes best.



This is, for Holland, an only apparently beneficial and a



short-sighted policy; for if Holland would give preferential



advantages to German manufactured goods both in the mother country



and in her colonies, the demand in Germany for Dutch colonial



produce would increase in the same proportion in which the sale of



German manufactured goods to Holland and her colonies increased,



or, in other words, Germany would be able to purchase so much the



more colonial produce in proportion as she sold more manufactured



goods to Holland; Holland would be able to dispose of so much more



colonial produce to Germany as she purchased from Germany



manufactured goods. This reciprocal exchange operation is, at



present, rendered impracticable by Holland if she sells her



colonial produce to Germany while she purchases her requirements in



manufactured goods from England, because England (no matter how



much of manufactured goods she sells to Holland) will always supply



the greater part of her own requirements of colonial produce from



her own colonies, or from the countries which are subject to her.



    Hence the interests of Germany require that she should either



demand from Holland a differential duty in favour of Germany's



manufacturing production, by which the latter can secure to herself



the exclusive market for manufactured goods in Holland and her



colonies, or, in case of refusal, that Germany should impose a



differential duty on the import of colonial produce in favour of



the produce of Central and South America and of the free markets of



the West Indies.



    The above-named policy would constitute the most effective



means of inducing Holland to join the German Zollverein.



    As matters now stand, Germany has no reason for sacrificing her



own manufactories of beetroot sugar to the trade with Holland; for



only in case Germany can pay for her requirements of this article



by means of her own manufactured goods, is it more to her advantage



to supply that requirement by an exchange trade with tropical



countries, than by producing it herself at home.



    Hence the attention of Germany should be at once chiefly



directed to the extension of her trade with Northern, Central, and



South America, and with the free markets of the West Indies. In



connection with that, the following measures, in addition to that



above adverted to, appear desirable: the establishment of a regular



service of steamships between the German seaports and the principal



ports of those countries, the promotion of emigration thither, the



confirmation and extension of friendly relations between them and



the Zollverein, and especially the promotion of the civilisation of



those countries.



    Recent experience has abundantly taught us how enormously



commerce on a large scale is promoted by a regular service of



steamships. France and belgium are already treading in the



footsteps of England in this respect, as they well perceive that



every nation which is behindhand in this more perfect means of



transport must retrograde in her foreign trade. The German seaports



also have already recognised this; already one public company has



been completely formed in Bremen for building two or three steam



vessels for the trade with the United States. This, however, is



clearly an insufficient provision. The commercial interests of



Germany require not only a regular service of steam vessels with



North America, especially with New York, Boston, Charleston, and



New Orleans, but also with Cuba, San Domingo, and Central and South



America. Germany ought to be behind no other nation in respect to



these latter lines of steam navigation. It must certainly not be



ignored that the means which are required for these objects will be



too great for the spirit of enterprise, and perhaps also for the



power of the German seaports, and it seems to us they can only be



carried into effect by means of liberal subsidies on the part of



the states of the Zollverein. The prospect of such subsidies as



well as of differential duties in favour of German shipping, ought



at once to constitute a strong motive for these seaports to become



included in the Commercial Union. When one considers how greatly



the exports of manufactured goods and the imports of colonial



produce, and consequently also the customs revenue, of the states



of the Zollverein would be increased by such a measure, one cannot



doubt that even a considerable expenditure for this object must



appear as only a reproductive investment of capital from which rich



returns are to be expected.



    Through the increase of the means of intercourse of Germany



with the above-named countries, the emigration of Germans to those



countries and their settlement there as citizens would be no less



promoted; and by that means the foundation would be laid for future



increase of commerce with them. For this object the states of the



Zollverein ought to establish everywhere consulates and diplomatic



agencies, by means of which the settlement and undertakings of



German citizens could be promoted, and especially to assist those



states in every practicable way in giving stability to their



governments and improving their degree of civilisation.



    We do not share in the least the opinion of those who think



that the tropical countries of America offer less advantages to



German colonisation than those of temperate climate in North



America. However great, as we have openly confessed, is our



attachment for the last-named country, and however little we are



able or desire to deny that an individual German emigrant who



possesses a little capital has greater hope of permanently making



his fortune in Western North America, we must nevertheless here



express our opinion that emigration to Central and South America,



if it were well led and undertaken on a large scale, offers in a



national point of view much greater advantages for Germany than



emigration to North America. What good is it if the emigrants to



North America become ever so prosperous? In their personal relation



they are lost for ever to the German nationality, and also from



their material production Germany can expect only unimportant



fruits. It is a pure delusion if people think that the German



language can be maintained by the Germans who live in the interior



of the United States, or that after a time it may be possible to



establish entire German states there. We once ourselves entertained



this illusion, but after ten years' observation in the country



itself, on the spot, we have entirely given it up. It lies in the



very spirit of every nationality, and above all in that of the



United States, to assimilate itself in language, literature,



administration, and legislation; and it is good that that is so.



However many Germans may now be living in North America, yet



certainly not one of them is living there whose great-grandchildren



will not greatly prefer the English language to the German, and



that for the very natural reason that the former is the language of



the educated people, of the literature, the legislation, the



administration, the courts of justice, and the trade and commerce



of the country. The same thing can and will happen to the Germans



in North America as happened to the Huguenots in Germany and the



French in Louisiana. They naturally must and will be amalgamated



with the predominant population: some a little sooner, others a



little later, according as they dwell more or less together with



fellow-countrymen.



    Still less dependence can be placed on an active intercourse



between Germany and the German emigrants to the west of North



America. The first settler is always compelled by necessity to make



for himself the greater part of his articles of clothing and



utensils; and these customs, which originated from mere necessity,



continue for the most part to the second and third generation.



Hence it is that North America itself is a country which makes



powerful efforts in manufacturing industry, and will continually



strive more and more to gain possession of her home market for



manufactured goods, for her own industry.



    On the other hand, we would on that account by no means



maintain that the American market for manufactured goods is not a



very important one, and well worthy of regard, especially for



Germany On the contrary, we are of opinion that for many articles



of luxury and for manufactured articles which are easy of



transport, and in which the wages of labour constitute a chief



element of the price, that market is one of the most important, and



must from year to year, as respects the articles above named,



become more important for Germany. What we contend is only this,



that those Germans who emigrate to the west of North America give



no important assistance in increasing the demand for German



manufactured goods, and that in reference to that object emigration



to Central and South America requires and deserves very much more



direct encouragement.



    The above-mentioned countries, including Texas, are for the



most part adapted for raising colonial produce. They can and will



never make great progress in manufacturing industry. Here there is



an entirely new and rich market for manufactured goods to acquire;



whoever has here established firm commercial relations, may remain



in possession of them for all future time. These countries, without



sufficient moral power of their own to raise themselves to a higher



grade of civilisation, to introduce well-ordered systems of



government, and to endue them with stability, will more and more



come to the conviction that they must be aided from outside,



namely, by immigration. In these quarters the English and French



are hated on account of their arrogance, and owing to jealousy for



national independence -- the Germans for the opposite reasons are



liked. Hence the states of the Zollverein ought to devote the



closest attention to these countries.



    A vigorous German consular and diplomatic system ought to be



established in these quarters, the branches of which should enter



into correspondence with one another. Young explorers should be



encouraged to travel through these countries and make impartial



reports upon them. Young merchants should be encouraged to inspect



them -- young medical men to go and practise there. Companies



should be founded and supported by actual share subscription, and



taken under special protection, which companies should be formed in



the German seaports in order to buy large tracts of land in those



countries and to settle them with German colonists -- companies for



commerce and navigation, whose object should be to open new markets



in those countries for German manufactures and to establish lines



of steamships -- mining companies, whose object should be to devote



German knowledge and industry to winning the great mineral wealth



of those countries. In every possible way the Zollverein ought to



endeavour to gain the good-will of the population and also of the



governments of those countries, and especially to promote by that



means public security means of communication, and public order;



indeed, one ought not to hesitate, in case one could by that means



put the governments of those countries under obligation to us, also



to assist them by sending an important auxiliary corps.



    A similar policy ought to be followed in reference to the East



-- to European Turkey and the Lower Danubian territories. Germany



has an immeasurable interest that security and order should be



firmly established in those countries, and in no direction so much



as in this is the emigration of Germans so easy for individuals to



accomplish, or so advantageous for the nation. A man dwelling by



the Upper Danube could transport himself to Moldavia and Wallachia,



to Servia, or also to the south-western shores of the Black Sea,



for one-fifth part of the expenditure of money and time which are



requisite for his emigration to the shores of Lake Erie. What



attracts him to the latter more than to the former is, the greater



degree of liberty, security, and order which prevails in the



latter. But under the existing circumstances of Turkey it ought not



to be impossible to the German states, in alliance with Austria, to



exercise such an influence on the improvement of the public



condition of those countries, that the German colonist should no



longer feel himself repelled from them, especially if the



governments themselves would found companies for colonisation, take



part in them themselves, and grant them continually their special



protection.



    In the meantime it is clear that settlements of this kind could



only have a specially beneficial effect on the industry of the



states of the Zollverein, if no obstacles were placed in the way of



the exchange of German manufactured goods for the agricultural



produce of the colonists, and if that exchange was promoted by



cheap and rapid means of communication. Hence it is to the interest



of the states of the Zollverein, that Austria should facilitate as



much as possible the through traffic on the Danube, and that steam



navigation on the Danube should be roused to vigorous activity --



consequently that it should at the outset be actually subsidised by



the Governments.



    Especially, nothing is so desirable as that the Zollverein and



Austria at a later period, after the industry of the Zollverein



states has been better developed and has been placed in a position



of greater equality to that of Austria, should make, by means of a



treaty, reciprocal concessions in respect to their manufactured



products.



    After the conclusion of such a treaty, Austria would have an



equal interest with the states of the Zollverein in making the



Turkish provinces available for the benefit of their manufacturing



industry and of their foreign commerce.



    In anticipation of the inclusion in the Zollverein of the



German seaports and Holland, it would be desirable that Prussia



should now make a commencement by the adoption of a German



commercial flag, and by laying the foundation for a future German



fleet, and that she should try whether and how German colonies can



be founded in Australia, New Zealand, or in or on other islands of



Australasia.



    The means for such attempts and commencements, and for the



undertakings and subventions which we have previously recommended



as desirable, must be acquired in the same way in which England and



France have acquired the means of supporting their foreign commerce



and their colonisation and of maintaining their powerful fleets,



namely, by imposing duties on the imports of colonial produce.



United action, order, and energy could be infused into these



measures of the Zollverein, if the Zollverein states would assign



the direction of them in respect to the North and transmarine



affairs to Prussia, and in respect to the Danube and Oriental



affairs to Bavaria. An addition of ten per cent to the present



import duties on manufactures and colonial produce would at present



place one million and a half per annum at the disposal of the



Zollverein. And as it may be expected with certainty, as a result



of the continual increase in the export of manufactured goods, that



in the course of time consumption of colonial produce in the states



of the Zollverein will increase to double and treble its present



amount, and consequently their customs revenue will increase in



like proportion, sufficient provision will be made for satisfying



the requirements above mentioned, if the states of the Zollverein



establish the principle that over and above the addition of ten per



cent a part also of all future increase in import duties should be



placed at the disposal of the Prussian Government to be expended



for these objects.



    As regards the establishment of a German transport system, and



especially of a German system of railways, we beg to refer to a



work of our own which specially treats of that subject. This great



enterprise will pay for itself, and all that is required of the



Governments can be expressed in one word, and that is -- ENERGY.









End













Third Book







The Systems











Chapter 28







The National Economists of Italy







    Italy has been the forerunner of all modern nations, in the



theory as well as in the practice of Political Economy. Count



Pechio has given us a laboriously written sketch of that branch of



Italian literature; only his book is open to the observation, that



he has clung too slavishly to the popular theory, and has not duly



set forth the fundamental causes of the decline of Italy's national



industry -- the absence of national unity, surrounded as she was by



great nationalities united under hereditary monarchies; further,



priestly rule and the downfall of municipal freedom in the Italian



republics and cities. If he had more deeply investigated these



causes, he could not have failed to apprehend the special tendency



of the 'Prince' of Macchiavelli, and he would not have passed that



author by with merely an incidental reference to him.(1*)



    Through a remark of Pechio, that Macchiavelli in a letter to



his friend Guicciardini (in 1525) had proposed a union of all the



Powers of Italy against the foreigner, and that as that letter was



communicated to Pope Clement VII he had thus exercised considerable



influence in the formation of the 'Holy League' (in 1526), we were



led to imagine that the same tendency must underlie the 'Prince.'



As soon as we referred to that work, we found our anticipation



confirmed at first sight. The object of the 'Prince' (written in



1513) was clearly to impress the Medici with the idea, that they



were called upon to unite the whole of Italy under one sovereignty;



and to indicate to them the means whereby that end might be



attained. The title and form of that book, as though its general



intention was to treat of the nature of absolute government, were



undoubtedly selected from motives of prudence. It only alludes



incidentally to the various hereditary Princes and their



governments. Everywhere the author has in view only one Italian



usurper. Principalities must be overthrown, dynasties destroyed,



the feudal aristocracy brought under subjection, liberty in the



republics rooted out. The virtues of heaven and the artifices of



hell, wisdom and audacity, valour and treachery, good fortune and



chance, must all be called forth, made use of, and tried by the



usurper, in order to found an Italian empire. And to this end a



secret is confided to him, the power of which has been thoroughly



made manifest three hundred years later -- a national army must be



created, to whom victory must be assured by new discipline and by



newly invented arms and manoeuvres.(2*)



    If the general character of his arguments leaves room for doubt



as to the special bias of this author, such doubt will be removed



by his last chapter. There he plainly declares that foreign



invasions and internal divisions are the fundamental causes of all



the evils prevailing in Italy; that the House of the Medici, under



whose dominion were (fortunately) Tuscany and the States of the



Church, were called by Providence itself to accomplish that great



work; that the present was the best time and opportunity for



introducing a new régime, that now a new Moses must arise to



deliver his people from the bondage of Egypt, that nothing



conferred on a Prince more distinction and fame than great



enterprises.(3*)



    That anyone may read between the lines the tendency of that



book in the other chapters also, may be best seen by the manner in



which the author in his ninth chapter speaks of the States of the



Church. It is merely an irony when he says, 'The priests possessed



lands but did not govern them, they held lordships but did not



defend them; these happiest of all territories were directly



protected by God's Providence, it would be presumption to utter a



criticism upon them.' He clearly by this language meant it to be



understood without saying so in plain words: This country presents



no special impediment to a bold conqueror, especially to a Medici



whose relative occupies the Papal chair.



    But how can we explain the advice which Macchiavelli gives to



his proposed usurper respecting the republics, considering his own



republican sentiments? And must it be solely attributed to a design



on his part to ingratiate himself with the Prince to whom his book



is dedicated, and thus to gain private advantages, when he, the



zealous republican, the great thinker and literary genius, the



patriotic martyr, advised the future usurper utterly to destroy the



freedom of the Italian republics? It cannot be denied that



Macchiavelli, at the time when he wrote the 'Prince,' was



languishing in poverty, that he regarded the future with anxiety,



that he earnestly longed and hoped for employment and support from



the Medici. A letter which he wrote on October 10, 1513, from his



poor dwelling in the country to his friend Bettori, at Florence,



places that beyond doubt.(4*)



    Nevertheless, there are strong reasons for believing that he by



this book did not merely design to flatter the Medici, and to gain



private advantage, but to promote the realisation of a plan of



usurpation; a plan which was not opposed to his



republican-patriotic ideas, though according to the moral ideas of



our day it must be condemned as reprehensible and wicked. His



writings and his deeds in the service of the State prove that



Macchiavelli was thoroughly acquainted with the history of all



periods, and with the political condition of all States. But an eye



which could see so far backwards, and so clearly what was around



it, must also have been able to see far into the future. A spirit



which even at the beginning of the sixteenth century recognised the



advantage of the national arming of Italy, must also have seen that



the time for small republics was past, that the period for great



monarchies had arrived, that nationality could, under the



circumstances then existing, be won only by means of usurpation,



and maintained only by despotism, that the oligarchies as they then



existed in the Italian republics constituted the greatest obstacle



to national unity, that consequently they must be destroyed, and



that national freedom would one day grow out of national unity.



Macchiavelli evidently desired to cast away the worn-out liberty of



a few cities as a prey to despotism, hoping by its aid to acquire



national union, and thus to insure to future generations freedom on



a greater and a nobler scale.



    The earliest work written specially on Political Economy in



Italy, is that of Antonio Serra of Naples (in 1613), on the means



of providing 'the Kingdoms' with an abundance of gold and silver.



    J. B. Say and M'Culloch appear to have seen and read only the



title of this book: they each pass it over with the remark that it



merely treats of money; and its title certainly shows that the



author laboured under the error of considering the precious metals



as the sole constituents of wealth. If they had read farther into



it, and duly considered its contents, they might perhaps have



derived from it some wholesome lessons. Antonio Serra, although he



fell into the error of considering an abundance of gold and silver



as the tokens of wealth, nevertheless expresses himself tolerably



clearly on the causes of it.



    He certainly puts mining in the first place as the direct



source of the precious metals; but he treats very justly of the



indirect means of acquiring them. Agriculture, manufactures,



commerce, and navigation, are, according to him, the chief sources



of national wealth. The fertility of the soil is a sure source of



prosperity; manufactures are a still more fruitful source, for



several reasons, but chiefly because they constitute the foundation



of an extensive commerce. The productiveness of these sources



depends on the characteristic qualifications of the people (viz.



whether they are industrious, active, enterprising, thrifty, and so



forth), also on the nature and circumstances of the locality



(whether, for instance, a city is well situated for maritime



trade). But above all these causes, Serra ranks the form of



government, public order, municipal liberty, political guarantees,



the stability of the laws. ' No country can prosper,' says he, '



where each successive ruler enacts new laws, hence the States of



the Holy Father cannot be so prosperous as those countries whose



government and legislation are more stable. In contrast with the



former, one may observe in Venice the effect which a system of



order and legislation, which has continued for centuries, has on



the public welfare.' This is the quintessence of a system of



Political Economy which in the main, notwithstanding that its



object appears to be only the acquisition of the precious metals,



is remarkable for its sound and natural doctrine. The work of J. B.



Say, although it comprises ideas and matter on Political Economy of



which Antonio Serra had in his day no foreknowledge, is far



inferior to Serra's on the main points, and especially as respects



a due estimate of the effect of political circumstances on the



wealth of nations. Had Say studied Serra instead of laying his work



aside, he could hardly have maintained (in the first page of his



system of Political Economy) that 'the constitution of countries



cannot be taken into account in respect to Political Economy; that



the people have become rich, and become poor, under every form of



government; that the only important point is, that its



administration should be good.'



    We are far from desiring to maintain the absolute



preferableness of any one form of government compared with others.



One need only cast a glance at the Southern States of America, to



be convinced that democratic forms of government among people who



are not ripe for them can become the cause of decided



retrogression. in public prosperity. One need only look at Russia,



to perceive that people who are yet in a low degree of civilisation



are capable of making most remarkable progress in their national



well-being under an absolute monarchy. But that in no way proves



that people have become rich, i.e. have attained the highest degree



of economical well-being, under all forms of government. History



rather teaches us that such a degree of public well-being, namely,



a flourishing state of manufactures and commerce, has been attained



in those countries only whose political constitution (whether it



bear the name of democratic or aristocratic republic, or limited



monarchy) has secured to their inhabitants a high degree of



personal liberty and of security of property whose administration



has guaranteed to them a high degree of activity and power



successfully to strive for the attainment of their common objects,



and of steady continuity in those endeavours. For in a state of



highly advanced civilisation, it is not so important that the



administration should be good for a certain period, but that it



should be continuously and conformably good; that the next



administration should not destroy the good work of the former one;



that a thirty years' administration of Colbert should not be



followed by a Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, that for



successive centuries one should follow one and the same system, and



strive after one and the same object. Only under those political



constitutions in which the national interests are represented (and



not under an absolute Government, under which the State



administration is necessarily always modified according to the



individual will of the ruler) can such a steadiness and consistency



of administration be secured, as Antonio Serra rightly observes. On



the other hand, there are undoubtedly certain grades of



civilisation in which the administration by absolute power may



prove far more favourable to the economical and mental progress of



the nation (and generally is so) than that of a limited monarchy.



We refer to periods of slavery and serfdom, of barbarism and



superstition, of national disunity, and of caste privileges. For,



under such circumstances, the constitution tends to secure not only



the interests of the nation, but also the continuance of the



prevailing evils, whereas it is the interest and the nature of



absolute government to destroy the latter, and it is also possible



that an absolute ruler may arise of distinguished power and



sagacity, who may cause the nation to make advances for centuries,



and secure to its nationality existence and progress for all future



time.



    It is consequently only a conditional commonplace truth on the



faith of which J. B. Say would exclude politics from his doctrine.



In every case it is the chief desideratum that the administration



should be good; but the efficiency of the administration depends on



the form of government, and that form of government is clearly the



best which most promotes the moral and material welfare and the



future progress of any given nation. Nations have made some



progress un der all forms of government. But a high degree of



economical development has only been attained in those nations



whose form of government has been such as to secure to them a high



degree of freedom and power, of steadiness of laws and of policy,



and efficient institutions.



    Antonio Serra sees the nature of things as it actually exists,



and not through the spectacles of previous systems, or of some one



principle which he is determined to advocate and carry out. He



draws a comparison between the condition of the various States of



Italy, and perceives that the greatest degree of wealth is to be



found where there is extensive commerce; that extensive commerce



exists where there is a well-developed manufacturing power, but



that the latter is to be found where there is municipal freedom.



    The opinions of beccaria are pervaded by the false doctrines of



the physiocratic school. That author indeed either discovered, or



derived from Aristotle, the principle of the division of labour,



either before, or contemporaneously with, Adam Smith; he, however,



carries it farther than Adam Smith, inasmuch as he not only applies



it to the division of the work in a single manufactory, but shows



that the public welfare is promoted by the division of occupation



among the members of the community. At the same time he does not



hesitate, with the physiocrats, to assert that manufactures are



non-productive.



    The views of the great philosophical jurist, Filangieri, are



about the narrowest of all. Imbued with false cosmopolitanism, he



considers that England, by her protective policy, has merely given



a premium to contraband trade, and weakened her own commerce.



    Verri, as a practical statesman, could not err so widely as



that. He admits the necessity of protection to native industry



against foreign competition; but did not or could not see that such



a policy is conditional on the greatness and unity of the



nationality.







NOTES:







1. During a journey in Germany which the author undertook while



this work was in the press, he learned for the first time that



Doctors Von Ranke and Gervinus have criticised Macchiavelli's



Prince from the same point of view as himself.







2. Everything that Macchiavelli has written, whether before or



after the publication of the Prince, indicates that he was



revolving in his mind plans of this kind. How otherwise can it be



explained, why he, a civilian, a man of letters, an ambassador and



State official, who had never borne arms, should have occupied



himself so much in studying the art of war, and that he should have



been able to write a work upon it which excited the wonder of the



most distinguished soldiers of his time?







3. Frederick the Great in his Anti-Macchiavel treats of the Prince



as simply a scientific treatise on the rights and duties of princes



generally. Here it is remarkable that he, while contradicting



Macchiavelli chapter by chapter, never mentions the last or



twenty-sixth chapter, which bears the heading, 'A Summons to free



Italy from the Foreigners,' and instead of it inserts a chapter



which is not contained in Macchiavelli's work with the heading, 'On



the different kinds of Negotiations, and On the just Reasons for a



Declaration of War.'







4. First published in the work, Pensieri intorno allo scopo di



Nicolo Macchiavelli nel libro 'Il Principe.' Milano, 1810.







Chapter 29







The Industrial System (Falsely Termed by the School 'The Mercantile



System')







    At the period when great nationalities arose, owing to the



union of entire peoples brought about by hereditary monarchy and by



the centralisation of public power, commerce and navigation, and



hence wealth and naval power, existed for the most part (as we have



before shown) in republics of cities, or in leagues of such



republics. The more, however, that the institutions of these great



nationalities became developed, the more evident became the



necessity of establishing on their own territories these main



sources of power and of wealth.



    Under the conviction that they could only take root and



flourish under municipal liberty, the royal power favoured



municipal freedom and the establishment of guilds, both which it



regarded as counterpoises against the feudal aristocracy, who were



continually striving for independence, and always hostile to



national unity. But this expedient appeared insufficient, for one



reason, because the total of the advantages which individuals



enjoyed in the free cities and republics was much greater than the



total of those advantages which the monarchical governments were



able to offer, or chose to offer, in their own municipal cities; in



the second place, because it is very difficult, indeed impossible,



for a country which has always been principally engaged in



agriculture, successfully to displace in free competition those



countries which for centuries have acquired supremacy in



manufactures, commerce, and navigation; lastly, because in the



great monarchies the feudal institutions acted as hindrances to the



development of their internal agriculture, and consequently to the



growth of their internal manufactures. Hence, the nature of things



led the great monarchies to adopt such political measures as tended



to restrict the importation of foreign manufactured goods, and



foreign commerce and navigation, and to favour the progress of



their own manufactures, and their own commerce and navigation.



    Instead of raising revenue as they had previously done by



duties on the raw materials which they exported, they were



henceforth principally levied on the imported manufactured goods.



The benefits offered by the latter policy stimulated the merchants,



seamen, and manufacturers of more highly civilised cities and



countries to immigrate with their capital into the great



monarchies, and stimulated the spirit of enterprise of the subjects



of the latter. The growth of the national industry was followed by



the growth of the national freedom. The feudal aristocracy found it



necessary in their own interest to make concessions to the



industrial and commercial population, as well as to those engaged



in agriculture; hence resulted progress in agriculture as well as



in native industry and native commerce, which had a reciprocally



favourable influence on those two other factors of national wealth.



We have shown how England, in consequence of this system, and



favoured by the Reformation, made forward progress from century to



century in the development of her productive power, freedom, and



might. We have stated how in France this system was followed for



some time with success, but how it came to grief there, because the



institutions of feudalism, of the priesthood, and of the absolute



monarchy, had not yet been reformed. We have also shown how the



Polish nationality succumbed, because the elective system of



monarchy did not possess influence and steadiness enough to bring



into existence powerful municipal institutions, and to reform the



feudal aristocracy. As a result of this policy, there was created



in the place of the commercial and manufacturing city, and of the



agricultural province which chiefly existed outside the political



influence of that city, the agricultural-manufacturing-commercial



State; a nation complete in itself, an harmonious and compact



whole, in which, on the one hand, the formerly prevailing



differences between monarchy, feudal aristocracy, and citizenhood



gave place to one harmonious accord, and, on the other hand, the



closest union and reciprocally beneficial action took place between



agriculture, manufactures, and commerce. This was an immeasurably



more perfect commonwealth than the previously existing one, because



the manufacturing power, which in the municipal republic had been



confined to a narrow range, now could extend itself over a wider



sphere; because now all existing resources were placed at its



disposition; because the division of labour and the confederation



of the productive powers in the different branches of manufactures,



as well as in agriculture, were made effectual in an infinitely



greater degree; because the numerous classes of agriculturists



became politically and commercially united with the manufacturers



and merchants, and hence perpetual concord was maintained between



them; the reciprocal action between manufacturing and commercial



power was perpetuated and secured for ever; and finally, the



agriculturists were made partakers of all the advantages of



civilisation arising from manufactures and commerce. The



agricultural-manufacturing-commercial State is like a city which



spreads over a whole kingdom, or a country district raised up to be



a city. In the same proportion in which material production was



promoted by this union, the mental powers must necessarily have



been developed, the political institutions perfected, the State



revenues, the national military power, and the population,



increased. Hence we see at this day, that nation which first of all



perfectly developed the agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial



State, standing in these respects at the head of all other nations.



    The Industrial System was not defined in writing, nor was it a



theory devised by authors, it was simply acted upon in practice,



until the time of Stewart, who deduced it for the most part from



the actual English practice, just as Antonio Serra deduced his



system from a consideration of the circumstances of Venice.



Stewart's treatise, however, cannot be considered a scientific



work. The greater part of it is devoted to money, banking, the



paper circulation -- commercial crises -- the balance of trade, and



the doctrine of population: -- discussions from which even in our



day much may be learned, but which are carried on in a very



illogical and unintelligible way, and in which one and the same



idea is ten times repeated. The other branches of political economy



are either superficially treated, or passed over altogether.



Neither the productive powers, nor the elements of price, are



thoroughly discussed. Everywhere the author appears to have in view



only the experiences and circumstances of England. In a word, his



book possesses all the merits and demerits of the practice of



England, and of that of Colbert. The merits of the Industrial



System as compared with later ones, are:



    1. That it clearly recognises the value of native manufactures



and their influence on native agriculture, commerce, and



navigation, and on the civilisation and power of the nation; and



expresses itself unreservedly to that effect.



    2. That it indicates what is in general the right means whereby



a nation which is qualified for establishing a manufacturing power,



may attain a national industry.(1*)



    3. That it is based on the idea of 'the nation,' and regarding



the nations as individual entities, everywhere takes into account



the national interests and national conditions.



    On the other hand, this system is chargeable with the following



chief faults:



    1. That it does not generally recognise the fundamental



principle of the industrial development of the nation and the



conditions under which it can be brought into operation.



    2. That it consequently would mislead peoples who live in a



climate unsuited for manufacturing, and small and uncivilised



states and peoples, into the adoption of the protective system.



    3. That it always seeks to apply protection to agriculture, and



especially to the production of raw materials -- to the injury of



agriculture -- whereas agricultural industry is sufficiently



protected against foreign competition by the nature of things.



    4. That it seeks to favour manufactures unjustly by imposing



restrictions on the export of raw materials, to the detriment of



agriculture.



    5. That it does not teach the nation which has already attained



manufacturing and commercial supremacy to preserve her own



manufacturers and merchants from indolence, by permitting free



competition in her own markets.



    6. That in the exclusive pursuit of the political object, it



ignores the cosmopolitical relations of all nations, the objects of



the whole human race; and hence would mislead governments into a



prohibitory system, where a protective one would amply suffice, or



imposing duties which are practically prohibitory, when moderate



protective duties would better answer the purpose.



    Finally.



    7. That chiefly owing to his utterly ignoring the principle of



cosmopolitanism, it does not recognise the future union of all



nations, the establishment of perpetual peace, and of universal



freedom of trade, as the goal towards which all nations have to



strive, and more and more to approach.



    The subsequent schools have, however, falsely reproached this



system for considering the precious metals as the sole constituents



of wealth, whereas they are merely merchandise like all other



articles of value; and that hence it would follow that we ought to



sell as much as possible to other nations and to buy from them as



little as possible.



    As respects the former objection, it cannot be truly alleged of



either Colbert's administration or of that of the English since



George I. that they have attached an unreasonable degree of



importance to the importation of the precious metals.



    To raise their own native manufactures, their own navigation,



their foreign trade, was the aim of their commercial policy; which



indeed was chargeable with many mistakes, but which on the whole



produced important results. We have observed that since the Methuen



Treaty (1703) the English have annually exported great quantities



of the precious metals to the East Indies, without considering



these exports as prejudicial.



    The Ministers of George I when they prohibited (in 1721) the



importation of the cotton and silk fabrics of India did not assign



as a reason for that measure that a nation ought to sell as much as



possible to the foreigner, and buy as little as possible from him;



that absurd idea was grafted on to the industrial system by a



subsequent school; what they asserted was, that it is evident that



a nation can only attain to wealth and power by the export of its



own manufactured goods, and by the import from abroad of raw



materials and the necessaries of life. England has followed this



maxim of State policy to the present day, and by following it has



become rich and mighty; this maxim is the only true one for a



nation which has been long civilised, and which has already brought



its own agriculture to a high degree of development.







NOTES:







1. Stewart says (book 1. chapter xxix.): 'In order to promote



industry, a nation must act as well as permit, and protect. Could



ever the woollen manufacture have been introduced into France from



the consideration of the great advantage which England had drawn



from it. if the king had not undertaken the support of it by



granting many privileges to the undertakers, and by laying strict



prohibitions on all foreign cloths? Is there any other way of



establishing a new manufacture anywhere?'







Chapter 30







The Physiocratic or Agricultural System







    Had the great enterprise of Colbert been permitted to succeed



-- had not the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the love of



splendour and false ambition of Louis XIV, and the debauchery and



extravagance of his successors, nipped in the bud the seeds which



Colbert had sown -- if consequently a wealthy manufacturing and



commercial interest had arisen in France, if by good fortune the



enormous properties of the French clergy had been given over to the



public, if these events had resulted in the formation of a powerful



lower house of Parliament, by whose influence the feudal



aristocracy had been reformed -- the physiocratic system would



hardly have ever come to light. That system was evidently deduced



from the then existing circumstances of France, and was only



applicable to those circumstances.



    At the period of its introduction the greater part of the



landed property in France was in the hands of the clergy and the



nobility It was cultivated by a peasantry languishing under a state



of serfdom and personal oppression, who were sunk in superstition,



ignorance, indolence, and poverty The owners of the land, who



constituted its productive instruments, were devoted to frivolous



pursuits, and had neither mind for, nor interest in, agriculture.



The actual cultivators had neither the mental nor material means



for agricultural improvements. The oppression of feudalism on



agricultural production was increased by the insatiable demands



made by the monarchy on the producers, which were made more



intolerable by the freedom from taxation enjoyed by the clergy and



nobility. Under such circumstances it was impossible that the most



important branches of trade could succeed, those namely which



depend on the productiveness of native agriculture, and the



consumption of the great masses of the people; those only could



manage to thrive which produced articles of luxury for the use of



the privileged classes. The foreign trade was restricted by the



inability of the material producers to consume any considerable



quantity of the produce of tropical countries, and to pay for them



by their own surplus produce; the inland trade was oppressed by



provincial customs duties.



    Under such circumstances, nothing could be more natural than



that thoughtful men, in their investigations into the causes of the



prevailing poverty and misery, should have arrived at the



conviction, that national welfare could not be attained so long as



agriculture was not freed from its fetters, so long as the owners



of land and capital took no interest in agriculture, so long as the



peasantry remained sunk in personal subjection, in superstition,



idleness, and ignorance, so long as taxation remained undiminished



and was not equally borne by all classes, so long as internal



tariff restrictions existed, and foreign trade did not flourish.



    But these thoughtful men (we must remember) were either



physicians to the King and his Court, Court favourites, or



confidants and friends of the aristocracy and the clergy they could



not and would not declare open war against either absolute power or



against clergy and nobility: There remained to them but one method



of disseminating their views, that of concealing their plan of



reform under the obscurity of a profound system, just as, in



earlier as well as later times, ideas of political and religious



reform have been embedded in the substance of philosophical



systems. Following the philosophers of their own age and country,



who, in view of the total disorganisation of the national condition



of France, sought consolation in the wider field of philanthropy



and cosmopolitanism (much as the father of a family, in despair at



the break-up of his household, goes to seek comfort in the tavern),



so the physiocrats caught at the cosmopolitan idea of universal



free trade, as a panacea by which all prevailing evils might be



cured. When they had got hold of this point of truth by exalting



their thoughts above, they then directed them beneath, and



discovered in the 'nett revenue' of the soil a basis for their



preconceived ideas. Thence resulted the fundamental maxim of their



system, 'the soil alone yields nett revenue' therefore agriculture



is the sole source of wealth. That is a doctrine from which



wonderful consequences might be inferred -- first feudalism must



fall, and if requisite, landowning itself; then all taxation ought



to be levied on the land, as being the source of all wealth; then



the exemption from taxation enjoyed by the nobility and clergy must



cease; finally the manufacturers must be deemed an unproductive



class, who ought to pay no taxes, but also ought to have no



State-protection, hence custom-houses must be abolished.



    In short, people contrived by means of the most absurd



arguments and contentions to prove those great truths which they



had determined beforehand to prove.



    Of the nation, and its special circumstances and condition in



relation to other nations, no further account was to be taken, for



that is clear from the 'Encyclopédie Méthodique,' which says, 'The



welfare of the individual is conditional on the welfare of the



entire human race.' Here, therefore, no account was taken of any



nation, of any war, of any foreign commercial measures: history and



experience must be either ignored or misrepresented. The great



merit of this system was, that it bore the appearance of an attack



made on the policy of Colbert and on the privileges of the



manufacturers, for the benefit of the landowners; while in reality



its blows told with most effect on the special privileges of the



latter. Poor Colbert had to bear all the blame of the sufferings of



the French agriculturists, while nevertheless everyone knew that



France possessed a great industry for the first time since



Colbert's administration; and that even the dullest intellect was



aware that manufactures constitute the chief means for promoting



agriculture and commerce. The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes --



the wanton wars of Louis XIV -- the profligate expenditure of Louis



XV -- were utterly ignored by these philosophers.



    Quesnay in his writings has adduced, and replied to, point by



point, the objections which were urged against his system. One is



astonished at the mass of sound sense which he puts into the mouth



of his opponents, and at the mass of mystical absurdity which he



opposes to those objections by way of argument. Notwithstanding,



all that absurdity was accepted as wisdom by the contemporaries of



this reformer, because the tendency of his system accorded with the



circumstances of France at that time, and with the philanthropic



and cosmopolitan ideas prevalent in that century.











Chapter 31







The System of Values of Exchange (Falsely Termed by the School, The



'Industrial' System) -- Adam Smith







    Adam Smith's doctrine is, in respect to national and



international conditions, merely a continuation of the physiocratic



system. Like the latter, it ignores the very nature of



nationalities, seeks almost entirely to exclude politics and the



power of the State, presupposes the existence of a state of



perpetual peace and of universal union, underrates the value of a



national manufacturing power, and the means of obtaining it, and



demands absolute freedom of trade.



    Adam Smith fell into these fundamental errors in exactly the



same way as the physiocrats had done before him, namely, by



regarding absolute freedom in international trade as an axiom



assent to which is demanded by common sense, and by not



investigating to the bottom how far history supports this idea.



    Dugald Stewart (Adam Smith's able biographer) informs us that



Smith, at a date twenty-one years before his work was published in



1776 (viz. in 1755), claimed priority in conceiving the idea of



universal freedom of trade, at a literary party at which he was



present, in the following words:



    'Man is usually made use of by statesmen and makers of



projects, as the material for a sort of political handiwork. The



project makers, in their operations on human affairs, disturb



Nature, whereas people ought simply to leave her to herself to act



freely; in order that she may accomplish her objects. In order to



raise a State from the lowest depth of barbarism to the highest



degree of wealth, all that is requisite is peace, moderate



taxation, and good administration of justice ; everything else will



follow of its own accord in the natural course of things. All



governments which act in a contrary spirit to this natural course,



which seek to divert capital into other channels, or to restrict



the progress of the community in its spontaneous course, act



contrary to nature, and, in order to maintain their position,



become oppressive and tyrannical.'



    Adam Smith set out from this fundamental idea, and to prove it



and to illustrate it was the sole object of all his later works. He



was confirmed in this idea by Quesnay, Turgot, and the other



coryphaei of the physiocratic school, whose acquaintance he had



made in a visit to France in the year 1765.



    Smith evidently considered the idea of freedom of trade as an



intellectual discovery which would constitute the foundation of his



literary fame. How natural, therefore, it was that he should



endeavour in his work to put aside and to refute everything that



stood in the way of that idea; that he should consider himself as



the professed advocate of absolute freedom of trade, and that he



thought and wrote in that spirit.



    How could it be expected, that with such preconceived opinions,



Smith should judge of men and of things, of history and statistics,



of political measures and of their authors, in any other light than



as they confirmed or contradicted his fundamental principle?



    In the passage above quoted from Dugald Stewart, Adam Smith's



whole system is comprised as in a nutshell. The power of the State



can and ought to do nothing, except to allow justice to be



administered, to impose as little taxation as possible. Statesmen



who attempt to found a manufacturing power, to promote navigation,



to extend foreign trade, to protect it by naval power, and to found



or to acquire colonies, are in his opinion project makers who only



hinder the progress of the community. For him no nation exists, but



merely a community, i.e. a number of individuals dwelling together.



These individuals know best for themselves what branches of



occupation are most to their advantage, and they can best select



for themselves the means which promote their prosperity.



    This entire nullification of nationality and of State power,



this exaltation of individualism to the position of author of all



effective power, could be made plausible only by making the main



object of investigation to be not the power which effects, but the



thing effected, namely, material wealth, or rather the value in



exchange which the thing effected possesses. Materialism must come



to the aid of individualism, in order to conceal what an enormous



amount of power accrues to individuals from nationality, from



national unity, and from the national confederation of the



productive powers. A bare theory of values must be made to pass



current as national economy, because individuals alone produce



values, and the State, incapable of creating values, must limit its



operations to calling into activity, protecting, and promoting the



productive powers of individuals. In this combination, the



quintessence of political economy may be stated as follows, viz.:



Wealth consists in the possession of objects of exchangeable value;



objects of exchangeable value are produced by the labour of



individuals in combination with the powers of nature and with



capital. By the division of labour, the productiveness of the



labour is increased; capital is accumulated by savings, by



production exceeding consumption. The greater the total amount of



capital, so much the greater is the division of labour, and hence



the capacity to produce. Private interest is the most effectual



stimulus to labour and to economy. Therefore the highest wisdom of



statecraft consists in placing no obstacle in the way of private



industry, and in caring only for the good administration of



justice. And hence also it is folly to induce the subjects of a



State, by means of State legislative measures, to produce for them



selves anything which they can buy cheaper from abroad. A system so



consistent as this is, which sets forth the elements of wealth,



which so clearly explains the process of its production, and



apparently so completely exposes the errors of the previous



schools, could not fail, in default of any other, to meet with



acceptance. The mistake has been simply, that this system at bottom



is nothing else than a system of the private economy of all the



individual persons in a country, or of the individuals of the whole



human race, as that economy would develop and shape itself, under



a state of things in which there were no distinct nations,



nationalities, or national interests -- no distinctive political



constitutions or degrees of civilisation -- no wars or national



animosities; that it is nothing more than a theory of values; a



mere shopkeeper's or individual merchant's theory -- not a



scientific doctrine, showing how the productive powers of an entire



nation can be called into existence, increased, maintained, and



preserved -- for the special benefit of its civilisation, welfare,



might, continuance, and independence.



    This system regards everything from the shopkeeper's point of



view. The value of anything is wealth, according to it, so its sole



object is to gain values. The establishment of powers of



production, it leaves to chance, to nature, or to the providence of



God (whichever you please), only the State must have nothing at all



to do with it, nor must politics venture to meddle with the



business of accumulating exchangeable values. It is resolved to buy



wherever it can find the cheapest articles -- that the home



manufactories are ruined by their importation, matters not to it.



If foreign nations give a bounty on the export of their



manufactured goods, so much the better; it can buy them so much the



cheaper. In its view no class is productive save those who actually



produce things valuable in exchange. It well recognises how the



division of labour promotes the success of a business in detail,



but it has no perception of the effect of the division of labour as



affecting a whole nation. It knows that only by individual economy



can it increase its capital, and that only in proportion to the



increase in its capital can it extend its individual trades; but it



sets no value on the increase of the productive power, which



results from the establishment of native manufactories, or on the



foreign trade and national power which arise out of that increase.



What may become of the entire nation in the future, is to it a



matter of perfect indifference, so long as private individuals can



gain wealth. It takes notice merely of the rent yielded by land,



but pays no regard to the value of landed property; it does not



perceive that the greatest part of the wealth of a nation consists



in the value of its land and its fixed property. For the influence



of foreign trade on the value and price of landed property, and for



the fluctuations and calamities thence arising; it cares not a



straw. In short, this system is the strictest and most consistent



'mercantile system,' and it is incomprehensible how that term could



have been applied to the system of Colbert, the main tendency of



which is towards an 'industrial system' -i.e. a system which has



solely in view the founding of a national industry -- a national



commerce -- without regarding the temporary gains or losses of



values in exchange.



    Notwithstanding, we would by no means deny the great merits of



Adam Smith. He was the first who successfully applied the



analytical method to political economy. By means of that method and



an unusual degree of sagacity, he threw light on the most important



branches of the science, which were previously almost wholly



obscure. Before Adam Smith only a practice existed; his works



rendered it possible to constitute a science of political economy,



and he has contributed a greater amount of materials for that



object than all his predecessors or successors.



    But that very peculiarity of his mind by which, in analysing



the various constituent parts of political economy, he rendered



such important service, was the cause why he did not take a



comprehensive view of the community in its entirety; that he was



unable to combine individual interests in one harmonious whole;



that he would not consider the nation in preference to mere



individuals; that out of mere anxiety for the freedom of action of



the individual producers, he lost sight of the interests of the



entire nation. He who so clearly perceived the benefits of the



division of labour in a single manufactory, did not perceive that



the same principle is applicable with equal force to entire



provinces and nations.



    With this opinion, that which Dugald Stewart says of him



exactly agrees. Smith could judge individual traits of character



with extraordinary acuteness; but if an opinion was needed as to



the entire character of a man or of a book, one could not be



sufficiently astonished at the narrowness and obliquity of his



views. Nay, he was incapable of forming a correct estimate of the



character of those with whom he had lived for many years in the



most intimate friendship. 'The portrait,' says his biographer, 'was



ever full of life and expression, and had a strong resemblance to



the original if one compared it with the original from a certain



point of view; but it never gave a true and perfect representation



according to all its dimensions and circumstances.'







Chapter 32







The System of Values of Exchange (Continued) -- Jean Baptiste Say



and his School







    This author on the whole has merely endeavoured to systematise,



to elucidate, and to popularise, the materials which Adam Smith had



gathered together after an irregular fashion. In that he has



perfectly succeeded, inasmuch as he possessed in a high degree the



gift of systematisation and elucidation. Nothing new or original is



to be found in his writings, save only that he asserted the



productiveness of mental labours, which Adam Smith denied. Only,



this view, which is quite correct according to the theory of the



productive powers, stands opposed to the theory of exchangeable



values, and hence Smith is clearly more consistent than Say. Mental



labourers produce directly no exchangeable values; nay, more, they



diminish by their consumption the total amount of material



productions and savings, and hence the total of material wealth.



Moreover, the ground on which Say from his point of view includes



mental labourers among the productive class, viz. because they are



paid with exchangeable values, is an utterly baseless one, inasmuch



as those values have been already produced before they reach the



hands of the mental labourers; their possessor alone is changed,



but by that change their amount is not increased. We can only term



mental labourers productive if we regard the productive powers of



the nation, and not the mere possession of exchangeable values, as



national wealth. Say found himself opposed to Smith in this



respect, exactly as Smith had found himself opposed to the



physiocrats.



    In order to include manufacturers among the productive class,



Smith had been obliged to enlarge the idea of what constitutes



wealth; and Say on his part had no other alternative than either to



adopt the absurd view that mental labourers are not productive, as



it was handed down to him by Adam Smith, or else to enlarge the



idea of wealth as Adam Smith had done in opposition to the



physiocrats, namely, to make it comprise productive power; and to



argue, national wealth does not consist in the possession of



exchangeable values, but in the possession of power to produce,



just as the wealth of a fisherman does not consist in the



possession of fish, but in the ability and the means of continually



catching fish to satisfy his wants.



    It is noteworthy, and, so far as we are aware, not generally



known, that Jean Baptiste Say had a brother whose plain clear



common sense led him clearly to perceive the fundamental error of



the theory of values, and that J. B. Say himself expressed to his



doubting brother doubts as to the soundness of his own doctrine.



    Louis Say wrote from Nantes, that a technical language had



become prevalent in political economy which had led to much false



reasoning, and that his brother Jean himself was not free from



it.(1*) According to Louis Say, the wealth of nations does not



consist in material goods and their value in exchange, but in the



ability continuously to produce such goods. The exchange theory of



Smith and J. B. Say regards wealth from the narrow point of view of



an individual merchant, and this system, which would reform the



(so-called) mercantile system, is itself nothing else than a



restricted mercantile system.(2*) To these doubts and objections J.



B. Say replied to his brother that 'his (J. B. Say's) method



(method?) (viz. the theory of exchangeable values) was certainly



not the best, but that the difficulty was, to find a better.'(3*)



    What! difficult to find a better? Had not brother Louis, then,



found one? No, the real difficulty was that people had not the



requisite acuteness to grasp and to follow out the idea which the



brother had (certainly only in general terms) expressed; or rather,



perhaps, because it was very distasteful to have to overturn the



already established school, and to have to teach the precise



opposite of the doctrine by which one had acquired celebrity. The



only original thing in J. B. Say's writings is the form of his



system, viz. that he defined political economy as the science which



shows how material wealth is produced, distributed, and consumed.



It was by this classification and by his exposition of it that J.



B. Say made his success and also his school, and no wonder: for



here everything lay ready to his hand; he knew how to explain so



clearly and intelligibly the special process of production, and the



individual powers engaged in it; he could set forth so lucidly



(within the limits of his own narrow circle) the principle of the



division of labour, and so clearly expound the trade of



individuals. Every working potter, every huckster could understand



him, and do so the more readily, the less J. B. Say told him that



was new or unknown. For that in the work of the potter, hands and



skill (labour) must be combined with clay (natural material) in



order by means of the potter's wheel, the oven, and fuel (capital),



to produce pots (valuable products or values in exchange), had been



well known long before in every respectable potter's workshop, only



they had not known how to describe these things in scientific



language, and by means of it to generalise upon them. Also there



were probably very few hucksters who did not know before J. B.



Say's time, that by exchange both parties could gain values in



exchange, and that if anyone exported 1,000 thalers' worth of



goods, and got for them 1,500 thalers' worth of other goods from



abroad, he would gain 500 thalers.



    It was also well known before, that work leads to wealth, and



idleness to beggary; that private self-interest is the most



powerful stimulus to active industry; and that he who desires to



obtain young chickens, must not first eat the eggs. Certainly



people had not known before that all this was political economy;



but they were delighted to be initiated with so little trouble into



the deepest mysteries of the science, and thus to get rid of the



hateful duties which make our favourite luxuries so dear, and to



get perpetual peace, universal brotherhood, and the millennium into



the bargain. It is also no cause for surprise that so many learned



men and State officials ranked themselves among the admirers of



Smith and Say; for the principle of 'laissez faire et laissez



aller' demands no sagacity from any save those who first introduced



and expounded it; authors who succeeded them had nothing to do but



to reiterate, embellish, and elucidate their argument; and who



might not feel the wish and have the ability to be a great



statesman, if all one had to do was to fold one's hands in one's



bosom? It is a strange peculiarity of these systems, that one need



only adopt their first propositions, and let oneself be led



credulously and confidingly by the hand by the author, through a



few chapters, and One is lost. We must say to M. Jean Baptiste Say



at the outset that political economy is not, in our opinion, that



science which teaches only how values in exchange are produced by



individuals, distributed among them, and consumed by them; we say



to him that a statesman will know and must know, over and above



that, how the productive powers of a whole nation can be awakened,



increased, and protected, and how on the other hand they are



weakened, laid to sleep, or utterly destroyed; and how by means of



those national productive powers the national resources can be



utilised in the wisest and best manner so as to produce national



existence, national independence, national prosperity, national



strength, national culture, and a national future.



    This system (of Say) has rushed from one extreme view that the



State can and ought to regulate everything -- into the opposite



extreme -- that the State can and ought to do nothing: that the



individual is everything, and the State nothing at all. The opinion



of M. Say as to the omnipotence of individuals and the impotence of



the State verges on the ridiculous. Where he cannot forbear from



expressing a word of praise on the efficacy of Colbert's measures



for the industrial education of France, he exclaims, 'One could



hardly have given private persons credit for such a high degree of



wisdom.'



    If we turn our attention from the system to its author, we see



in him a man who, without a comprehensive knowledge of history,



without deep insight into State policy or State administration,



without political or philosophical views, with merely one idea



adopted from others in his head, rummages through history,



politics, statistics, commercial and industrial relations, in order



to discover isolated proofs and facts which may serve to support



his idea. If anyone will read his remarks on the Navigation Laws,



the Methuen Treaty, the system of Colbert, the Eden Treaty, &c. he



will find this judgment confirmed. It did not suit him to follow



out connectedly the commercial and industrial history of nations.



That nations have become rich and mighty under protective tariffs



he admits, only in his opinion they became so in spite of that



system and not in consequence of it; and he requires that we should



believe that conclusion on his word alone. He maintains that the



Dutch were induced to trade directly with the East Indies, because



Philip II forbade them to enter the harbour of Portugal; as though



the protective system would justify that prohibition, as though the



Dutch would not have found their way to the East Indies without it.



With statistics and politics M. Say is as dissatisfied as with



history: with the former because no doubt they produce the



inconvenient 'facts which he says 'have so often proved



contradictory of his system' -- with the latter because he



understood nothing at all of it. He cannot desist from his warnings



against the pitfalls into which statistical facts may mislead us,



or from reminding us that politics have nothing to do with



political economy, which sounds about as wise as if anyone were to



maintain that pewter must not be taken into account in the



consideration of a pewter platter.



    First a merchant, then a manufacturer, then an unsuccessful



politician, Say laid hold of political economy just as a man grasps



at some new undertaking when the old one cannot go on any longer.



We have his own confession on record, that he stood in doubt at



first whether he should advocate the (so-called) mercantile system,



or the system of free trade. Hatred of the Continental system (of



Napoleon) which had ruined his manufactory, and against the author



of it who had turned him out of the magistracy, determined him to



espouse the cause of absolute freedom of trade.



    The term 'freedom' in whatever connection it is used has for



fifty years past exercised a magical influence in France. Hence it



happened that Say, under the Empire as well as under the



Restoration, belonged to the Opposition, and that he incessantly



advocated economy. Thus his writings became popular for quite other



reasons than what they contained. Otherwise would it not be



incomprehensible that their popularity should have continued after



the fall of Napoleon, at a period when the adoption of Say's system



would inevitably have ruined the French manufacturers? His firm



adherence to the cosmopolitical principle under such circumstances



proves how little political insight the man had. How in little he



knew the world, is shown by his firm belief the cosmopolitical



tendencies of Canning and Huskisson. One thing only was lacking to



his fame, that neither Louis XVIII nor Charles X made him minister



of commerce and of finance. In that case history would have coupled



his name with that of Colbert, the one as the creator of the



national industry, the other as its destroyer.



    Never has any author with such small materials exercised such



a wide scientific terrorism as J. B. Say; the slightest doubt as to



the infallibility of his doctrine was branded as obscurantism; and



even men like Chaptal feared the anathemas of this



politico-economical Pope. Chaptal's work on the industry of France,



from the beginning to the end, is nothing else than an exposition



of the effects of the French protective system; he states that



expressly; he says distinctly that under the existing circumstances



of the world, prosperity for France can only be hoped for under the



system of protection. At the same time Chaptal endeavours by an



article in praise of free trade, directly in opposition to the



whole tendency of his book, to solicit pardon for his heresy from



the school of Say. Say imitated the Papacy even so far as to its



'Index.' He certainly did not prohibit heretical writings



individually by name, but he was stricter still; he prohibits all,



the non-heretical as well as the heretical; he warns the young



students of political economy not to read too many books, as they



might thus too easily be misled into errors; they ought to read



only a few, but those good books, which means in other words, 'You



ought only to read me and Adam Smith, no others.' but that none too



great sympathy should accrue to the immortal father of the school



from the adoration of his disciples, his successor and interpreter



on earth took good care, for, according to Say, Adam Smith's books



are full of confusion, imperfection, and contradictions; and he



clearly gives us to understand that one can only learn from himself



'how one ought to read Adam Smith.'



    Notwithstanding, when Say was at the zenith of his fame,



certain young heretics arose who attacked the basis of his system



so effectually and so boldly, that he preferred privately to reply



to them, and meekly to avoid any public discussion. Among these,



Tanneguy du Châtel (more than once a minister of State) was the



most vigorous and the most ingenious.



    'Selon vous, mon cher critique,' said Say to Du Châtel in a



private letter, ' il ne reste plus dans mon économie politique que



des actions sans motifs, des faits sans explication, une chaîne de



rapports dont les extrémités manquent et dont les anneaux les plus



importants sont brisés. Je partage donc l'infortune d'Adam Smith,



dont un de nos critiques a dit qu'il avait fait rétrograder



l'économie politique.'(4*) In a postscript to this letter he



remarks very naively, 'Dans le second article que vous annoncez, il



est bien inutile de revenir sur cette polémique, par laquelle nous



pouvions bien ennuyer le public.'



    At the present day the school of Smith and Say has been



exploded in France, and the rigid and spiritless influence of the



Theory of Exchangeable Values has been succeeded by a revolution



and an anarchy which neither M. Rossi nor M. Blanqui are able to



exorcise. The Saint-Simonians and the Fourrierists, with remarkable



talent at their head, instead of reforming the old doctrines, have



cast them entirely aside, and have framed for themselves a Utopian



system. Quite recently the most ingenious persons among them have



been seeking to discover the connection of their doctrines with



those of the previous schools, and to make their ideas compatible



with existing circumstances. Important results may be expected from



their labours, especially from those of the talented Michel



Chevalier. The amount of truth, and of what is practically



applicable in our day which their doctrines contain, consists



chiefly in their expounding the principle of the confederation and



the harmony of the productive powers. Their annihilation of



individual freedom and independence is their weak side; with them



the individual is entirely absorbed in the community, in direct



contradiction to the Theory of Exchangeable Values, according to



which the individual ought to be everything and the State nothing.



    It may be that the spirit of the world is tending to the



realisation of the state of things which these sects dream of or



prognosticate; in any case, however, I believe that many centuries



must elapse before that can be possible. It is given to no mortal



to estimate the progress of future centuries in discoveries and in



the condition of society. Even the mind of a Plato could not have



foretold that after the lapse of thousands of years the instruments



which do the work of society would be constructed of iron, steel,



and brass, nor could that of a Cicero have foreseen that the



printing press would render it possible to extend the



representative system over whole kingdoms, perhaps over whole



quarters of the globe, and over the entire human race. If meanwhile



it is given to only a few great minds to foresee a few instances of



the progress of future thousands of years, yet to every age is



assigned its own special task. But the task of the age in which we



live appears not to be to break up mankind into Fourrierist



'phalanstères,' in order to give each individual as nearly as



possible an equal share of mental and bodily enjoyments, but to



perfect the productive powers, the mental culture, the political



condition, and the power of whole nationalities, and by equalising



them in these respects as far as is possible, to prepare them



beforehand for universal union. For even if we admit that under the



existing circumstances of the world the immediate object which its



apostles had in view could be attained by each 'phalanstère,' what



would be its effect on the power and independence of the nation?



And would not the nation which was broken up into 'phalanstères,'



run the risk of being conquered by some less advanced nation which



continued to live in the old way, and of thus having its premature



institutions destroyed together with its entire nationality? At



present the Theory of Exchangeable Values has so completely lost



its influence, that it is almost exclusively occupied with



inquiries into the nature of Rent, and that Ricardo in his



'Principles of Political Economy' could write, 'The chief object of



political economy is to determine the laws by which the produce of



the soil ought to be shared between the landowner, the farmer, and



the labourer.'



    While some persons are firmly convinced that this science is



complete, and that nothing essential can further be added to it,



those, on the other hand, who read these writings with



philosophical or practical insight, maintain, that as yet there is



no political economy at all, that that science has yet to be



constructed; that until it is so, what goes by its name is merely



an astrology, but that it is both possible and desirable out of it



to produce an astronomy.



    Finally, we must remark, in order not to be misunderstood, that



our criticism of the writings alike of J. B. Say and of his



predecessors and successors refers only to their national and



international bearing; and that we recognise their value as



expositions of subordinate doctrines. It is evident that an author



may form very valuable views and inductions on individual branches



of a science, while all the while the basis of his system may be



entirely erroneous.







NOTES:







1. Louis Say, Etudes sur la Richesse des Nations, Preface, p. iv.







2. The following are the actual words of Louis Say (p. 10): 'La



richesse ne consiste pas dans les choses qui satisfont nos besoins



ou nos goûts, mais dans le pouvoir d'en jouir annuellement.' And



further (pp. 14 to 15): 'Le faux système mercantil, fondé sur la



richesse en métaux précieux, a été remplacé par un autre fondé sur



la richesse en vaieurs vénales ou échangeables, qui consiste à



n'évaiuer ce qui compose la richesse d'une nation que comme le fait



un marchand.' And (note, p. 14): 'L'école moderne qui refute le



système mercantil a elle-même créé un système qui lui-même doit



être appelé le système mercantil.'







3. Etudes sur la Richesse des Nations, p. 36 (quoting J. B. Say's



words): 'Que cette méthode était loin d'être bonne, mais que la



difficulté était d'en trouvor une meilleure.'







4. Say, Cours complet d'Economie politique pratique, vii. p. 378.









End













Second Book







The Theory











Chapter 11







Political and Cosmopolitical Economy







    Before Quesnay and the French economists there existed only a



practice of political economy which was exercised by the State



officials, administrators, and authors who wrote about matters of



administration, occupied themselves exclusively with the



agriculture, manufactures, commerce, and navigation of those



countries to which they belonged, without analysing the causes of



wealth, or taking at all into consideration the interests of the



whole human race.



    Quesnay (from whom the idea of universal free trade originated)



was the first who extended his investigations to the whole human



race, without taking into consideration the idea of the nation. He



calls his work 'Physiocratie, ou du Gouvernement le plus avantageux



au Genre Humain,' his demands being that we must imagine that the



merchants of all nations formed one commercial republic. Quesnay



undoubtedly speaks of cosmopolitical economy, i.e. of that science



which teaches how the entire human race may attain prosperity; in



opposition to political economy, or that science which limits its



teaching to the inquiry how a given nation can obtain (under the



existing conditions of the world) prosperity, civilisation, and



power, by means of agriculture, industry, and commerce.



    Adam Smith(1*) treats his doctrine in a similarly extended



sense, by making it his task to indicate the cosmopolitical idea of



the absolute freedom of the commerce of the whole world in spite of



the gross mistakes made by the physiocrates against the very nature



of things and against logic. Adam Smith concerned himself as little



as Quesnay did with true political economy, i.e. that policy which



each separate nation had to obey in order to make progress in its



economical conditions. He entitles his work, 'The Nature and Causes



of the Wealth of Nations' (i.e. of all nations of the whole human



race). He speaks of the various systems of Political economy in a



separate part of his work solely for the purpose of demonstrating



their non-efficiency, and of proving that 'political' or national



economy must be replaced by 'cosmopolitical or world-wide economy.'



Although here and there he speaks of wars, this only occurs



incidentally. The idea of a perpetual state of peace forms the



foundation of all his arguments. Moreover, according to the



explicit remarks of his biographer, Dugald Stewart, his



investigations from the commencement are based upon the principle



that 'most of the State regulations for the promotion of public



prosperity are unnecessary, and a nation in order to be transformed



from the lowest state of barbarism into a state of the highest



possible prosperity needs nothing but bearable taxation, fair



administration of justice, and peace.' Adam Smith naturally



understood under the word 'peace' the 'perpetual universal peace'



of the Abbé St. Pierre.



    J. B. Say openly demands that we should imagine the existence



of a universal republic in order to comprehend the idea of general



free trade. This writer, whose efforts were mainly restricted to



the formation of a system out of the materials which Adam Smith had



brought to light, says explicitly in the sixth volume (p. 288) of



his 'Economie politique pratique'. 'We may take into our



consideration the economical interests of the family with the



father at its head; the principles and observations referring



thereto will constitute private economy. Those principles, however,



which have reference to the interests of whole nations, whether in



themselves or in relation to other nations, form public economy



(l'économie publique). Political economy, lastly, relates to the



interests of all nations, to human society in general.'



    It must be remarked here, that in the first place Say



recognises the existence of a national economy or political



economy, under the name 'économie publique,' but that he nowhere



treats of the latter in his works; secondly, that he attributes the



name political economy to a doctrine which is evidently of



cosmopolitical nature; and that in this doctrine he invariably



merely speaks of an economy which has for its sole object the



interests of the whole human society, without regard to the



separate interests of distinct nations.



    This substitution of terms might be passed over if Say, after



having explained what he calls political economy (which, however,



is nothing else but cosmopolitical or world-wide economy, or



economy of the whole human race), had acquainted us with the



principles of the doctrine which he calls 'économie publique,'



which however is, properly speaking, nothing else but the economy



of given nations, or true political economy.



    In defining and developing this doctrine he could scarcely



forbear to proceed from the idea and the nature of the nation, and



to show what material modifications the 'economy of the whole human



race' must undergo by the fact that at present that race is still



separated into distinct nationalities each held together by common



powers and interests, and distinct from other societies of the same



kind which in the exercise of their natural liberty are opposed to



one another. However, by giving his cosmopolitical economy the name



political, he dispenses with this explanation, effects by means of



a transposition of terms also a transposition of meaning, and



thereby masks a series of the gravest theoretical errors.



    All later writers have participated in this error. Sismondi



also calls political economy explicitly 'La science qui se charge



du bonheur de l'espèce humaine.' Adam Smith and his followers teach



us from this mainly nothing more than what Quesnay and his



followers had taught us already, for the article of the 'Revue



Méthodique' treating of the physiocratic school states, in almost



the same words: 'The well-being of the individual is dependent



altogether on the well-being of the whole human race.'



    The first of the North American advocates of free trade, as



understood by Adam Smith -- Thomas Cooper, President of Columbia



College -- denies even the existence of nationality; he calls the



nation 'a grammatical invention,' created only to save periphrases,



a nonentity, which has no actual existence save in the heads of



politicians. Cooper is moreover perfectly consistent with respect



to this, in fact much more consistent than his predecessors and



instructors, for it is evident that as soon as the existence of



nations with their distinct nature and interests is recognised, it



becomes necessary to modify the economy of human society in



accordance with these special interests, and that if Cooper



intended to represent these modifications as errors, it was very



wise on his part from the beginning to disown the very existence of



nations.



    For our own part, we are far from rejecting the theory of



cosmopolitical economy, as it has been perfected by the prevailing



school; we are, however, of opinion that political economy, or as



Say calls it 'économie publique,' should also be developed



scientifically, and that it is always better to call things by



their proper names than to give them significations which stand



opposed to the true import of words.



    If we wish to remain true to the laws of logic and of the



nature of things, we must set the economy of individuals against



the economy of societies, and discriminate in respect to the latter



between true political or national economy (which, emanating from



the idea and nature of the nation, teaches how a given nation in



the present state of the world and its own special national



relations can maintain and improve its economical conditions) and



cosmopolitical economy, which originates in the assumption that all



nations of the earth form but one society living in a perpetual



state of peace.



    If, as the prevailing school requites, we assume a universal



union or confederation of all nations as the guarantee for an



everlasting peace, the principle of international free trade seems



to be perfectly justified. The less every individual is restrained



in pursuing his own individual prosperity, the greater the number



and wealth of those with whom he has free intercourse, the greater



the area over which his individual activity can exercise itself,



the easier it will be for him to utilise for the increase of his



prosperity the properties given him by nature, the knowledge and



talents which he has acquired, and the forces of nature placed at



his disposal. As with separate individuals, so is it also the case



with individual communities, provinces, and countries. A simpleton



only could maintain that a union for free commercial intercourse



between themselves is not as advantageous to the different states



included in the United States of North America, to the various



departments of France, and to the various German allied states, as



would be their separation by internal provincial customs tariffs.



    In the union of the three kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland



the world witnesses a great and irrefragable example of the



immeasurable efficacy of free trade between united nations. Let us



only suppose all other nations of the earth to be united in a



similar manner, and the most vivid imagination will not be able to



picture to itself the sum of prosperity and good fortune which the



whole human race would thereby acquire.



    Unquestionably the idea of a universal confederation and a



perpetual peace is commended both by common sense and religion.(2*)



If single combat between individuals is at present considered to be



contrary to reason, how much more must combat between two nations



be similarly condemned? The proofs which social economy can produce



from the history of the civilisation of mankind of the



reasonableness of bringing about the union of all mankind under the



law of right, are perhaps those which are the clearest to sound



human understanding.



    History teaches that wherever individuals are engaged in wars,



the prosperity of mankind is at its lowest stage, and that it



increases in the same proportion in which the concord of mankind



increases. In the primitive state of the human race, first unions



of families took place, then towns, then confederations of towns,



then union of whole countries, finally unions of several states



under one and the same government. If the nature of things has been



powerful enough to extend this union (which commenced with the



family) over hundreds of millions, we ought to consider that nature



to be powerful enough to accomplish the union of all nations. If



the human mind were capable of comprehending the advantages of this



great union, so ought we to venture to deem it capable of



understanding the still greater benefits which would result from a



union of the whole human race. Many instances indicate this



tendency in the spirit of the present times. We need only hint at



the progress made in sciences, arts, and discoveries, in industry



and social order. It may be already foreseen with certainty, that



after a lapse of a few decades the civilised nations of the earth



will, by the perfection of the means of conveyance, be united as



respects both material and mental interchange in as close a manner



as (or even closer than) that in which a century ago the various



counties of England were connected. Continental governments possess



already at the present moment in the telegraph the means of



communicating with one another, almost as if they were at one and



the same place. Powerful forces previously unknown have already



raised industry to a degree of perfection hitherto never



anticipated, and others still more powerful have already announced



their appearance. But the more that industry advances, and



proportionately extends over the countries of the earth, the



smaller will be the possibility of wars. Two nations equally well



developed in industry could mutually inflict on one another more



injury in one week than they would be able to make good in a whole



generation. But hence it follows that the same new forces which



have hitherto served particularly for production will not withhold



their services from destruction, and will principally favour the



side of defence, and especially the European Continental nations,



while they threaten the insular State with the loss of those



advantages which have been gained by her insular position for her



defence. In the congresses of the great European powers Europe



possesses already the embryo of a future congress of nations. The



endeavours to settle differences by protocol are clearly already



prevailing over those which obtain justice by force of arms. A



clearer insight into the nature of wealth and industry has led the



wiser heads of all civilised nations to the conviction that both



the civilisation of barbarous and semi-barbarous nations, and of



those whose culture is retrograding, as well as the formation of



colonies, offer to civilised nations a field for the development of



their productive powers which promises them much richer and safer



fruits than mutual hostilities by wars or restrictions on trade.



The farther we advance in this perception, and the more the



uncivilised countries come into contact with the civilised ones by



the progress made in the means of transport, so much more will the



civilised countries comprehend that the civilisation of barbarous



nations, of those distracted by internal anarchy, or which are



oppressed by bad government, is a task which offers to all equal



advantages -- a duty incumbent on them all alike, but one which can



only be accomplished by unity.



    That the civilisation of all nations, the culture of the whole



globe, forms a task imposed on the whole human race, is evident



from those unalterable laws of nature by which civilised nations



are driven on with irresistible power to extend or transfer their



powers of production to less cultivated countries. We see



everywhere, under the influence of civilisation, population, powers



of mind, material capital attaining to such dimensions that they



must necessarily flow over into other less civilised countries. If



the cultivable area of the country no longer suffices to sustain



the population and to employ the agricultural population, the



redundant portion of the latter seeks territories suitable for



cultivation in distant lands; if the talents and technical



abilities of a nation have become so numerous as to find no longer



sufficient rewards within it, they emigrate to places where they



are more in demand; if in consequence of the accumulation of



material capital, the rates of interest fall so considerably that



the smaller capitalist can no longer live on them, he tries to



invest his money more satisfactorily in less wealthy countries.



    A true principle, therefore, underlies the system of the



popular school, but a principle which must be recognised and



applied by science if its design to enlighten practice is to be



fulfilled, an idea which practice cannot ignore without getting



astray; only the school has omitted to take into consideration the



nature of nationalities and their special interests and conditions,



and to bring these into accord with the idea of universal union and



an everlasting peace.



    The popular school has assumed as being actually in existence



a state of things which has yet to come into existence. It assumes



the existence of a universal union and a state of perpetual peace,



and deduces therefrom the great benefits of free trade. In this



manner it confounds effects with causes. Among the provinces and



states which are already politically united, there exists a state



of perpetual peace; from this political union originates their



commercial union, and it is in consequence of the perpetual peace



thus maintained that the commercial union has become so beneficial



to them. All examples which history can show are those in which the



political union has led the way, and the commercial union has



followed.(3*) Not a single instance can be adduced in which the



latter has taken the lead, and the former has grown up from it.



That, however, under the existing conditions of the world, the



result of general free trade would not be a universal republic,



but, on the contrary, a universal subjection of the less advanced



nations to the supremacy of the predominant manufacturing,



commercial, and naval power, is a conclusion for which the reasons



are very strong and, according to our views, irrefragable. A



universal republic (in the sense of Henry IV and of the Abbé St.



Pierre), i.e. a union of the nations of the earth whereby they



recognize the same conditions of right among themselves and



renounce self-redress, can only be realised if a large number of



nationalities attain to as nearly the same degree as possible of



industry and civilisation, political cultivation, and power. Only



with the gradual formation of this union can free trade be



developed, only as a result of this union can it confer on all



nations the same great advantages which are now experienced by



those provinces and states which are politically united. The system



of protection, inasmuch as it forms the only means of placing those



nations which are far behind in civilisation on equal terms with



the one predominating nation (which, however, never received at the



hands of Nature a perpetual right to a monopoly of manufacture, but



which merely gained an advance over others in point of time), the



system of protection regarded from this point of view appears to be



the most efficient means of furthering the final union of nations,



and hence also of promoting true freedom of trade. And national



economy appears from this point of view to be that science which,



correctly appreciating the existing interests and the individual



circumstances of nations, teaches how every separate nation can be



raised to that stage of industrial development in which union with



other nations equally well developed, and consequently freedom of



trade, can become possible and useful to it.



    The popular school, however, has mixed up both doctrines with



one another; it has fallen into the grave error of judging of the



conditions of nations according to purely cosmopolitical



principles, and of ignoring from merely political reasons the



cosmopolitical tendency of the productive powers.



    Only by ignoring the cosmopolitical tendency of the productive



powers could Malthus be led into the error of desiring to restrict



the increase of population, or Chalmers and Torrens maintain more



recently the strange idea that augmentation of capital and



unrestricted production are evils the restriction of which the



welfare of the community imperatively demands, or Sismondi declare



that manufactures are things injurious to the community. Their



theory in this case resembles Saturn, who devours his own children



-- the same theory which allows that from the increase of



population, of capital and machinery division of labour takes



place, and explains from this the welfare of society, finally



considers these forces as monsters which threaten the prosperity of



nations, because it merely regards the present conditions of



individual nations, and does not take into consideration the



conditions of the whole globe and the future progress of mankind.



    It is not true that population increases in a larger proportion



than production of the means of subsistence; it is at least foolish



to assume such disproportion, or to attempt to prove it by



artificial calculations or sophistical arguments, so long as on the



globe a mass of natural forces still lies inert by means of which



ten times or perhaps a hundred times more people than are now



living can be sustained. It is mere narrow-mindedness to consider



the present extent of the productive forces as the test of how many



persons could be supported on a given area of land. The savage, the



hunter, and the fisherman, according to his own calculation, would



not find room enough for one million persons, the shepherd not for



ten millions, the raw agriculturist not for one hundred millions on



the whole globe; and yet two hundred millions are living at present



in Europe alone. The culture of the potato and of food-yielding



plants, and the more recent improvements made in agriculture



generally, have increased tenfold the productive powers of the



human race for the creation of the means of subsistence. In the



Middle Ages the yield of wheat of an acre of land in England was



fourfold, to-day it is ten to twenty fold, and in addition to that



five times more land is cultivated. In many European countries (the



soil of which possesses the same natural fertility as that of



England) the yield at present does not exceed fourfold. Who will



venture to set further limits to the discoveries, inventions, and



improvements of the human race? Agricultural chemistry is still in



its infancy; who can tell that to-morrow, by means of a new



invention or discovery, the produce of the soil may not be



increased five or ten fold? We already possess, in the artesian



well, the means of converting unfertile wastes into rich corn



fields; and what unknown forces may not yet be hidden in the



interior of the earth? Let us merely suppose that through a new



discovery we were enabled to produce heat everywhere very cheaply



and without the aid of the fuels at present known: what spaces of



land could thus be utilised for cultivation, and in what an



incalculable degree w ould the yield of a given area of land be



increased? If Malthus' doctrine appears to us in its tendency



narrow-minded, it is also in the methods by which it could act an



unnatural one, which destroys morality and power, and is simply



horrible. It seeks to destroy a desire which nature uses as the



most active means for inciting men to exert body and mind, and to



awaken and support their nobler feelings -- a desire to which



humanity for the greater part owes its progress. It would elevate



the most heartless egotism to the position of a law; it requires us



to close our hearts against the starving man, because if we hand



him food and drink, another might starve in his place in thirty



years' time. It substitutes cold calculation for sympathy. This



doctrine tends to convert the hearts of men into stones. But what



could be finally expected of a nation whose citizens should carry



stones instead of hearts in their bosoms? What else than the total



destruction of all morality, and with it of all productive forces,



and therefore of all the wealth, civilisation, and power of the



nation?



    If in a nation the population increases more than the



production of the means of subsistence, if capital accumulates at



length to such an extent as no longer to find investment, if



machinery throws a number of operatives out of work and



manufactured goods accumulate to a large excess, this merely



proves, that nature will not allow industry, civilisation, wealth,



and power to fall exclusively to the lot of a single nation, or



that a large portion of the globe suitable for cultivation should



be merely inhabited by wild animals, and that the largest portion



of the human race should remain sunk in savagery, ignorance, and



poverty.



    We have shown into what errors the school has fallen by judging



the productive forces of the human race from a political point of



view; we have now also to point out the mistakes which it has



committed by regarding the separate interests of nations from a



cosmopolitical point of view.



    If a confederation of all nations existed in reality, as is the



case with the separate states constituting the Union of North



America, the excess of population, talents, skilled abilities, and



material capital would flow over from England to the Continental



states, in a similar manner to that in which it travels from the



eastern states of the American Union to the western, provided that



in the Continental states the same security for persons and



property, the same constitution and general laws prevailed, and



that the English Government was made subject to the united will of



the universal confederation. Under these suppositions there would



be no better way of raising all these countries to the same stage



of wealth and cultivation as England than free trade. This is the



argument of the school. But how would it tally with the actual



operation of free trade under the existing conditions of the world?



    The Britons as an independent and separate nation would



henceforth take their national interest as the sole guide of their



policy. The Englishman, from predilection for his language, for his



laws, regulations, and habits, would whenever it was possible



devote his powers and his capital to develop his own native



industry, for which the system of free trade, by extending the



market for English manufactures over all countries, would offer him



sufficient opportunity; he would not readily take a fancy to



establish manufactures in France or Germany. All excess of capital



in England would be at once devoted to trading with foreign parts



of the world. If the Englishman took it into his head to emigrate,



or to invest his capital elsewhere than in England, he would as he



now does prefer those more distant countries where he would find



already existing his language, his laws, and regulations, rather



than the benighted countries of the Continent. All England would



thus be developed into one immense manufacturing city. Asia,



Africa, and Australia would be civilised by England, and covered



with new states modelled after the English fashion. In time a world



of English states would be formed, under the presidency of the



mother state, in which the European Continental nations would be



lost as unimportant, unproductive races. By this arrangement it



would fall to the lot of France, together with Spain and Portugal,



to supply this English world with the choicest wines, and to drink



the bad ones herself: at most France might retain the manufacture



of a little millinery. Germany would scarcely have more to supply



this English world with than children's toys, wooden clocks, and



philological writings, and sometimes also an auxiliary corps, who



might sacrifice themselves to pine away in the deserts of Asia or



Africa, for the sake of extending the manufacturing and commercial



supremacy, the literature and language of England. It would not



require many centuries before people in this English world would



think and speak of the Germans and French in the same tone as we



speak at present of the Asiatic nations.



    True political science, however, regards such a result of



universal free trade as a very unnatural one; it will argue that



had universal free trade been introduced at the time of the



Hanseatic League, the German nationality instead of the English



would have secured an advance in commerce and manufacture over all



other countries.



    It would be most unjust, even on cosmopolitical grounds, now to



resign to the English all the wealth and power of the earth, merely



because by them the political system of commerce was first



established and the cosmopolitical principle for the most part



ignored. In order to allow freedom of trade to operate naturally,



the less advanced nations must first be raised by artificial



measures to that stage of cultivation to which the English nation



has been artificially elevated. In order that, through that



cosmopolitical tendency of the powers of production to which we



have alluded, the more distant parts of the world may not be



benefited and enriched before the neighbouring European countries,



those nations which feel themselves to be capable, owing to their



moral, intellectual, social, and political circumstances, of



developing a manufacturing power of their own must adopt the system



of protection as the most effectual means for this purpose. The



effects of this system for the purpose in view are of two kinds: in



the first place, by gradually excluding foreign manufactured



articles from our markets, a surplus would be occasioned in foreign



nations, of workmen, talents, and capital, which must seek



employment abroad; and secondly by the premium which our system of



protection would offer to the immigration into our country of



workmen, talents, and capital, that excess of productive power



would be induced to find employment with us, instead of emigrating



to distant parts of the world and to colonies. Political science



refers to history, and inquires whether England has not in former



times drawn from Germany, Italy, Holland, France, Spain, and



Portugal by these means a mass of proDuctive power. She asks: Why



does the cosmopolitical school, when it pretends to weigh in the



balance the advantages and the disadvantages of the system of



protection, utterly ignore this great and remarkable instance of



the results of that system?







NOTES:







1. It is alleged that Adam Smith intended to have dedicated his



great work to Quesnay. -- TR. (See Life of Smith, published by T.



and J. Allman. 1825.)







2. The Christian religion inculcates perpetual peace. But until the



promise, 'There shall be one fold and one shepherd,' has been



fulfilled, the principle of the Quakers, however true it be in



itself, can scarcely be acted upon. There is no better proof for



the Divine origin of the Christian religion than that its doctrines



and promises are in perfect agreement with the demands of both the



material and spiritual well-being of the human race.







3. This statement was probably accurate up to the period when List



wrote, but a notable exception to it may now be adduced. The



commercial union of the various German states under the Zollverein



preceded by many years their political union under the Empire, and



powerfully promoted it. -- TR.







Chapter 12







The Theory of the Powers of Production and the Theory of Values







    Adam Smith's celebrated work is entitled, 'The Nature and



Causes of the Wealth of Nations.' The founder of the prevailing



economical school has therein indicated the double point of view



from which the economy of nations, like that of private separate



individuals, should be regarded.



    The causes of wealth are something totally different from



wealth itself. A person may possess wealth, i.e. exchangeable



value; if, however, he does not possess the power of producing



objects of more value than he consumes, he will become poorer. A



person may be poor; if he, however, possesses the power of



producing a larger amount of valuable articles than he consumes, he



becomes rich.



    The power of producing wealth is therefore infinitely more



important than wealth itself; it insures not only the possession



and the increase of what has been gained, but also the replacement



of what has been lost. This is still more the case with entire



nations (who cannot live out of mere rentals) than with private



individuals. Germany has been devastated in every century by



pestilence, by famine, or by civil or foreign wars; she has,



nevertheless, always retained a great portion of her powers of



production, and has thus quickly re-attained some degree of



prosperity; while rich and mighty but despot- and priest-ridden



Spain, notwithstanding her comparative enjoyment of internal



peace,(1*) has sunk deeper into poverty and misery. The same sun



still shines on the Spaniards, they still possess the same area of



territory, their mines are still as rich, they are still the same



people as before the discovery of America, and before the



introduction of the Inquisition; but that nation has gradually lost



her powers of production, and has therefore become poor and



miserable. The War of Independence of the United States of America



cost that nation hundreds of millions, but her powers of production



were immeasurably strengthened by gaining independence, and it was



for this reason that in the course of a few years after the peace



she obtained immeasurably greater riches than she.had ever



possessed before. If we compare the state of France in the year



1809 with that of the year 1839, what a difference in favour of the



latter! Nevertheless, France has in the interim lost her



sovereignty over a large portion of the European continent; she has



suffered two devastating invasions, and had to pay milliards of



money in war contributions and indemnities.



    It was impossible that so clear an intellect as Adam Smith



possessed could altogether ignore the difference between wealth and



its causes and the overwhelming influence of these causes on the



condition of nations. In the introduction to his work, he says in



clear words in effect: 'Labour forms the fund from which every



nation derives its wealth, and the increase of wealth depends first



on the productive power of labour, namely, on the degree of skill,



dexterity, and judgment with which the labour of the nation is



generally applied, and secondly, on the proportion between the



number of those employed productively and the number of those who



are not so employed.' From this we see how clearly Smith in general



perceived that the condition of nations is principally dependent on



the sum of their productive powers.



    It does not, however, appear to be the plan of nature that



complete sciences should spring already perfected from the brain of



individual thinkers. It is evident that Smith was too exclusively



possessed by the cosmopolitical idea of the physiocrats, 'universal



freedom of trade,' and by his own great discovery, 'the division of



labour,' to follow up the idea of the importance to a nation of its



powers of production. However much science may be indebted to him



in respect of the remaining parts of his work, the idea 'division



of labour' seemed to him his most brilliant thought. It was



calculated to secure for his book a name, and for himself



posthumous fame.



    He had too much worldly wisdom not to perceive that whoever



wishes to sell a precious jewel does not bring the treasure to



market most profitably by burying it in a sack of wheat, however



useful the grains of wheat may be, but better by exposing it at the



forefront. He had too much experience not to know that a débutant



(and he was this as regards political economy at the time of the



publication of his work) who in the first act creates a furore is



easily excused if in the following ones he only occasionally raises



himself above mediocrity; he had every motive for making the



introduction to his book, the doctrine of division of labour. Smith



has not been mistaken in his calculations; his first chapter has



made the fortune of his book, and founded his authority as an



economist.



    However, we on our part believe ourselves able to prove that



just this zeal to put the important discovery 'division of labour'



in an advantageous light, has hindered Adam Smith from following up



the idea 'productive power' (which has been expressed by him in the



introduction, and al so frequently afterwards, although merely



incidentally) and from exhibiting his doctrines in a much more



perfect form. By the great value which he attached to his idea



'division of labour' he has evidently been misled into representing



labour itself as the 'fund' of all the wealth of nations, although



he himself clearly perceives and also states that the



productiveness of labour principally depends on the degree of skill



and judgment with which the labour is performed. We ask, can it be



deemed scientific reasoning if we assign as the cause of a



phenomenon that which in itself is the result of a number of deeper



lying causes? It cannot be doubted that all wealth is obtained by



means of mental and bodily exertions (labour), but yet from that



circumstance no reason is indicated from which useful conclusions



may be drawn; for history teaches that whole nations have, in spite



of the exertions and of the thrift of their citizens, fallen into



poverty and misery. Whoever desires to know and investigate how one



nation from a state of poverty and barbarism has attained to one of



wealth and prosperity, and how another has fallen from a condition



of wealth and well-being into one of poverty and misery, has



always, after receiving the information that labour is the cause of



wealth and idleness the cause of poverty (a remark which King



Solomon made long before Adam Smith), to put the further question,



what are the causes of labour, and what the causes of idleness?



    It would be more correct to describe the limbs of men (the



head, hands, and feet) as the causes of wealth (we should thus at



least approach far nearer to the truth), and the question then



presents itself, what is it that induces these heads, arms, and



hands to produce, and calls into activity these exertions? What



else can it be than the spirit which animates the individuals, the



social order which renders their energy fruitful, and the powers of



nature which they are in a position to make use of? The more a man



perceives that he must provide for the future, the more his



intelligence and feelings incite him to secure the future of his



nearest connections, and to promote their well-being; the more he



has been from his youth accustomed to forethought and activity, the



more his nobler feelings have been developed, and body and mind



cultivated, the finer examples that he has witnessed from his



youth, the more opportunities he has had for utilising his mental



and bodily powers for the improvement of his condition, also the



less he has been restrained in his legitimate activity, the more



successful his past endeavours have been, and the more their fruits



have been secured to him, the more he has been able to obtain



public recognition and esteem by orderly conduct and activity, and



the less his mind suffers from prejudices, superstition, false



notions, and ignorance, so much the more will he exert his mind and



limbs for the object of production, so much the more will he be



able to accomplish, and so much the better will he make use of the



fruits of his labour. However, most depends in all these respects



on the conditions of the society in which the individual has been



brought up, and turns upon this, whether science and arts flourish,



and public institutions and laws tend to promote religious



character, morality and intelligence, security for person and for



property, freedom and justice; whether in the nation all the



factors of material prosperity, agriculture, manufactures, and



trade, have been equally and harmoniously cultivated; whether the



power of the nation is strong enough to secure to its individual



citizens progress in wealth and education from generation to



generation, and to enable them not merely to utilise the natural



powers of their own country to their fullest extent, but also, by



foreign trade and the possession of colonies, to render the natural



powers of foreign countries serviceable to their own.



    Adam Smith has on the whole recognised the nature of these



powers so little, that he does not even assign a productive



character to the mental labours of those who maintain laws and



order, and cultivate and promote instruction, religion, science,



and art. His investigations are limited to that human activity



which creates material values. With regard to this, he certainly



recognises that its productiveness depends on the 'skill and



judgment' with which it is exercised; but in his investigations as



to the causes of this skill and judgment, he does not go farther



than the division of labour, and that he illustrates solely by



exchange, augmentation of material capital, and extension of



markets. His doctrine at once sinks deeper and deeper into



materialism, particularism, and individualism. If he had followed



up the idea 'productive power' without allowing his mind to be



dominated by the idea of 'value,' 'exchangeable value,' he would



have been led to perceive that an independent theory of the



'productive power,' must be considered by the side of a 'theory of



values' in order to explain the economical phenomena. But he thus



fell into the mistake of explaining mental forces from material



circumstances and conditions, and thereby laid the foundation for



all the absurdities and contradictions from which his school (as we



propose to prove) suffers up to the present day, and to which alone



it must be attributed that the doctrines of political economy are



those which are the least accessible to the most intelligent minds.



That Smith's school teaches nothing else than the theory of values,



is not only seen from the fact that it bases its doctrine



everywhere on the conception of 'value of exchange,' but also from



the definition which it gives of its doctrine. It is (says J. B.



Say) that science which teaches how riches, or exchangeable values,



are produced, distributed, and consumed. This is undoubtedly not



the science which teaches how the productive powers are awakened



and developed, and how they become depressed and destroyed.



M'Culloch calls it explicitly 'the science of values,' and recent



English writers ' the science of exchange.'



    Examples from private economy will best illustrate the



difference between the theory of productive powers and the theory



of values.



    Let us suppose the case of two fathers of families, both being



landed proprietors, each of whom saves yearly 1,000 thalers and has



five sons. The one puts out his savings at interest, and keeps his



sons at common hard work, while the other employs his savings in



educating two of his sons as skilful and intelligent landowners,



and in enabling the other three to learn a trade after their



respective tastes; the former acts according to the theory of



values, the latter according to the theory of productive powers.



The first at his death may prove much richer than the second in



mere exchangeable value, but it is quite otherwise as respects



productive powers. The estate of the latter is divided into two



parts, and every part will by the aid of improved management yield



as much total produce as the whole did before; while the remaining



three sons have by their talents obtained abundant means of



maintenance. The landed property of the former will be divided into



five parts, and every part will be worked in as bad a manner as the



whole was heretofore. In the latter family a mass of different



mental forces and talents is awakened and cultivated, which will



increase from generation to generation, every succeeding generation



possessing more power of obtaining material wealth than the



preceding one, while in the former family stupidity and poverty



must increase with the diminution of the shares in the landed



property. So the slaveholder increases by slave-breeding the sum of



his values of exchange, but he ruins the productive forces of



future generations. All expenditure in the instruction of youth,



the promotion of justice, defence of nations, &c. is a consumption



of present values for the behoof of the productive powers. The



greatest portion of the consumption of a nation is used for the



education of the future generation, for promotion and nourishment



of the future national productive powers.



    The Christian religion, monogamy, abolition of slavery and of



vassalage, hereditability of the throne, invention of printing, of



the press, of the postal system, of money weights and measures, of



the calendar, of watches, of police, 'the introduction of the



principle of freehold property, of means of transport, are rich



sources of productive power. To be convinced of this, we need only



compare the condition of the European states with that of the



Asiatic ones. In order duly to estimate the influence which liberty



of thought and conscience has on the productive forces of nations,



we need only read the history of England and then that of Spain.



The publicity of the administration of justice, trial by jury,



parliamentary legislation, public control of State administration,



self-administration of the commonalties and municipalities, liberty



of the press, liberty of association for useful purposes, impart to



the citizens of constitutional states, as also to their public



functionaries, a degree of energy and power which can hardly be



produced by other means. We can scarcely conceive of any law or any



public legal decision which would not exercise a greater or smaller



influence on the increase or decrease of the productive power of



the nation.(2*) If we consider merely bodily labour as the cause of



wealth, how can we then explain why modern nations are incomparably



richer, more populous, more powerful, and prosperous than the



nations of ancient times? The ancient nations employed (in



proportion to the whole population) infinitely more hands, the work



was much harder, each individual possessed much more land, and yet



the masses were much worse fed and clothed than is the case in



modern nations. In order to explain these phenomena, we must refer



to the progress which has been made in the course of the last



thousand years in sciences and arts, domestic and public



regulations, cultivation of the mind and capabilities of



production. The present state of the nations is the result of the



accumulation of all discoveries, inventions, improvements,



perfections, and exertions of all generations which have lived



before us; they form the mental capital of the present human race,



and every separate nation is productive only in the proportion in



which it has known how to appropriate these attainments of former



generations and to increase them by its own acquirements, in which



the natural capabilities of its territory, its extent and



geographical position, its population and political power, have



been able to develop as completely and symmetrically as possible



all sources of wealth within its boundaries, and to extend its



moral, intellectual, commercial, and political influence over less



advanced nations and especially over the affairs of the world.



    The popular school of economists would have us believe that



politics and political power cannot be taken into consideration in



political economy. So far as it makes only values and exchange the



subjects of its investigations, this may be correct; we can define



the ideas of value and capital, profit, wages, and rent; we can



resolve them into their elements, and speculate on what may



influence their rising or falling, &c. without thereby taking into



account the political circumstances of the nation. Clearly,



however, these matters appertain as much to private economy as to



the economy of whole nations. We have merely to consider the



history of Venice, of the Hanseatic League, of Portugal, Holland,



and England, in order to perceive what reciprocal influence



material wealth and political power exercise on each other.



    The school also always falls into the strangest inconsistencies



whenever this reciprocal influence forces itself on their



consideration. Let us here only call to mind the remarkable dictum



of Adam Smith on the English Navigation Laws.(3*)



    The popular school, inasmuch as it does not duly consider the



nature of the powers of production, and does not take into account



the conditions of nations in their aggregate, disregards especially



the importance of developing in an equal ratio agriculture,



manufactures and commerce, political power and internal wealth, and



disregards especially the value of a manufacturing power belonging



specially to the nation and fully developed in all its branches. It



commits the error of placing manufacturing power in the same



category with agricultural power, and of speaking of labour,



natural power, capital, &c. in general terms without considering



the differences which exist between them. It does not perceive that



between a State devoted merely to agriculture and a State



possessing both agriculture and manufactures, a much greater



difference exists than between a pastoral State and an agricultural



one. In a condition of merely agricultural industry, caprice and



slavery, superstition and ignorance, want of means of culture, of



trade, and of transport, poverty and political weakness exist. In



the merely agricultural State only the least portion of the mental



and bodily powers existing in the nation is awakened and developed,



and only the least part of the powers and resources placed by



nature at its disposal can be made use of, while little or no



capital can be accumulated.



    Let us compare Poland with England: both nations at one time



were in the same stage of culture; and now what a difference.



Manufactories and manufactures are the mothers and children of



municipal liberty, of intelligence, of the arts and sciences, of



internal and external commerce, of navigation and improvements in



transport, of civilisation and political power. They are the chief



means of liberating agriculture from its chains, and of elevating



it to a commercial character and to a degree of art and science, by



which the rents, farming profits, and wages are increased, and



greater value is given to landed property. The popular school has



attributed this civilising power to foreign trade, but in that it



has confounded the mere exchanger with the originator. Foreign



manufactures furnish the goods for the foreign trade, which the



latter conveys to us, and which occasion consumption of products



and raw materials which we give in exchange for the goods in lieu



of money payments.



    If, however, trade in the manufactures of far distant lands



exercises admittedly so beneficial an influence on our agricultural



industry, how much more beneficial must the influence be of those



manufactures which are bound up with us locally, commercially, and



politically, which not only take from us a small portion, but the



largest portion of their requirements of food and of raw materials,



which are not made dearer to us by great costs of transport, our



trade in which cannot be interrupted by the chance of foreign



manufacturing nations learning to supply their own wants



themselves, or by wars and prohibitory import duties?



    We now see into what extraordinary mistakes and contradictions



the popular school has fallen in making material wealth or value of



exchange the sole object of its investigations, and by regarding



mere bodily labour as the sole productive power.



    The man who breeds pigs is, according to this school, a



productive member of the community, but he who educates men is a



mere non-productive. The maker of bagpipes or jews-harps for sale



is a productive, while the great composers and virtuosos are



non-productive simply because that which they play cannot be



brought into the market. The physician who saves the lives of his



patients does not belong to the productive class, but on the



contrary the chemist's boy does so, although the values of exchange



(viz. the pills) which he produces may exist only for a few minutes



before they pass into a valueless condition. A Newton, a Watt, or



a Kepler is not so productive as a donkey, a horse, or a draught-ox



(a class of labourers who have been recently introduced by



M'Culloch into the series of the productive members of human



society).



    We must not believe that J. B. Say has remedied this defect in



the doctrine of Adam Smith by his fiction of 'immaterial goods' or



products; he has thu s merely somewhat varnished over the folly of



its results, but not raised it out of its intrinsic absurdity. The



mental (immaterial) producers are merely productive, according to



his views, because they are remunerated with values of exchange,



and because their attainments have been obtained by sacrificing



values of exchange, and not because they produce productive



powers.(4*) They merely seem to him an accumulated capital.



M'Culloch goes still further; he says that man is as much a product



of labour as the machine which he produces, and it appears to him



that in all economical investigations he must be regarded from this



point of view. He thinks that Smith comprehended the correctness of



this principle, only he did not deduce the correct conclusion from



it. Among other things he draws the conclusion that eating and



drinking are productive occupations. Thomas Cooper values a clever



American lawyer at 3,000 dollars, which is about three times as



much as the value of a strong slave.



    The errors and contradictions of the prevailing school to which



we have drawn attention, can be easily corrected from the



standpoint of the theory of the productive powers. Certainly those



who fatten pigs or prepare pills are productive, but the



instructors of youths and of adults, virtuosos, musicians,



physicians, judges, and administrators, are productive in a much



higher degree. The former produce values of exchange, and the



latter productive powers, some by enabling the future generation to



become producers, others by furthering the morality and religious



character of the present generation, a third by ennobling and



raising the powers of the human wind, a fourth by preserving the



productive powers of his patients, a fifth by rendering human



rights and justice secure, a sixth by constituting and protecting



public security, a seventh by his art and by the enjoyment which it



occasions fitting men the better to produce values of exchange. In



the doctrine of mere values, these producers of the productive



powers can of course only be taken into consideration so far as



their services are rewarded by values of exchange; and this manner



of regarding their services may in some instances have its



practical use, as e.g. in the doctrine of public taxes, inasmuch as



these have to be satisfied by values of exchange. But whenever our



consideration is given to the nation (as a whole and in its



international relations) it is utterly insufficient, and leads to



a series of narrow-minded and false views.



    The prosperity of a nation is not, as Say believes, greater in



the proportion in which it has amassed more wealth (i.e. values of



exchange), but in the proportion in which it has more developed its



powers of production. Although laws and public institutions do not



produce immediate values, they nevertheless produce productive



powers, and Say is mistaken if he maintains that nations have been



enabled to become wealthy under all forms of government, and that



by weans of laws no wealth can be created. The foreign trade of a



nation must not be estimated in the way in which individual



merchants judge it, solely and only according to the theory of



values (i.e. by regarding merely the gain at any particular moment



of some material advantage); the nation is bound to keep steadily



in view all these conditions on which its present and future



existence, prosperity, and power depend.



    The nation must sacrifice and give up a measure of material



property in order to gain culture, skill, and powers of united



production; it must sacrifice some present advantages in order to



insure to itself future ones. If, therefore, a manufacturing power



developed in all its branches forms a fundamental condition of all



higher advances in civilisation, material prosperity, and political



power in every nation (a fact which, we think, we have proved from



history); if it be true (as we believe we can prove) that in the



present conditions of the world a new unprotected manufacturing



power cannot possibly be raised up under free competition with a



power which has long since grown in strength and is protected on



its own territory; how can anyone possibly undertake to prove by



arguments only based on the mere theory of values, that a nation



ought to buy its goods like individual merchants, at places where



they are to be had the cheapest -- that we act foolishly if we



manufacture anything at all which can be got cheaper from abroad --



that we ought to place the industry of the nation at the mercy of



the self-interest of individuals -- that protective duties



constitute monopolies, which are granted to the individual home



manufacturers at the expense of the nation? It is true that



protective duties at first increase the price of manufactured



goods; but it is just as true, and moreover acknowledged by the



prevailing economical school, that in the course of time, by the



nation being enabled to build up a completely developed



manufacturing power of its own, those goods are produced more



cheaply at home than the price at which they can be imported from



foreign parts. If, therefore, a sacrifice of value is caused by



protective duties, it is made good by the gain of a power of



production, which not only secures to the nation an infinitely



greater amount of material goods, but also industrial independence



in case of war. Through industrial independence and the internal



prosperity derived from it the nation obtains the means for



successfully carrying on foreign trade and for extending its



mercantile marine; it increases its civilisation, perfects its



institutions internally, and strengthens its external power. A



nation capable of developing a manufacturing power, if it makes use



of the system of protection, thus acts quite in the same spirit as



that landed proprietor did who by the sacrifice of some material



wealth allowed some of his children to learn a productive trade.



    Into what mistakes the prevailing economical school has fallen



by judging conditions according to the mere theory of values which



ought properly to be judged according to the theory of powers of



production, may be seen very clearly by the judgment which J. B.



Say passes upon the bounties which foreign countries sometimes



offer in order to facilitate exportation; he maintains that 'these



are presents made to our nation.' Now if we suppose that France



considers a protective duty of twenty-five per cent sufficient for



her not vet perfectly developed manufactures, while England were to



grant a bounty on exportation of thirty per cent, what would be the



consequence of the 'present' which in this manner the English would



make to the French? The French consumers would obtain for a few



years the manufactured articles which they needed much cheaper than



hitherto, but the French manufactories would be ruined, and



millions of men be reduced to beggary or obliged to emigrate, or to



devote themselves to agriculture for employment. Under the most



favourable circumstances, the present consumers and customers of



the French agriculturists would be converted into competitors with



the latter, agricultural production would be increased, and the



consumption lowered. The necessary consequence would be diminution



in value of the products, decline in the value of property,



national poverty and national weakness in France. The English



'present' in mere value would be dearly paid for in loss of power;



it would seem like the present which the Sultan is wont to make to



his pashas by sending them valuable silken cords.



    Since the time when the Trojans were 'presented' by the Greeks



with a wooden horse, the acceptance of 'presents' from other



nations has become for the nation which receives them a very



questionable transaction. The English have given the Continent



presents of immense value in the form of subsidies, but the



Continental nations have paid for them dearly by the loss of power.



These subsidies acted like a bounty on exportation in favour of the



English, and were detrimental to the German manufactories. If



England bound herself to-day to supply the Germans gratuitously for



years with all they required in manufactured articles, we could not



recommend them to accept such an offer. If the English are enabled



through new inventions to produce linen forty per cent. cheaper



than the Germans can by using the old process, and if in the use of



their new process they merely obtain a start of a few years over



the Germans, in such a case, were it not for protective duties, one



of the most important and oldest branches of Germany's industry



will be ruined. It will be as if a limb of the body of the German



nation had been lost. And who would be consoled for the loss of an



arm by knowing that he had nevertheless bought his shirts forty per



cent cheaper?



    If the English very often find occasion to offer presents to



foreign nations, very different are the forms in which this is



done; it is not unfrequently done against their will; always does



it behove foreign nations well to consider whether or not the



present should be accepted. Through their position as the



manufacturing and commercial monopolists of the world, their



manufactories from time to time fall into the state which they call



'glut,' and which arises from what they call 'overtrading.' At such



periods everybody throws his stock of goods into the steamers.



After the elapse of eight days the goods are offered for sale in



Hamburg, Berlin, or Frankfort, and after three weeks in New York,



at fifty per cent under their real value. The English manufacturers



suffer for the moment, but they are saved, and they compensate



themselves later on by better prices. The German and American



manufacturers receive the blows which were deserved by the English



-- they are ruined. The English nation merely sees the fire and



hears the report of the explosion; the fragments fall down in other



countries, and if their inhabitants complain of bloody heads, the



intermediate merchants and dealers say, 'The crisis has done it



all!' If we consider how often by such crises the whole



manufacturing power, the system of credit, nay the agriculture, and



generally the whole economical system of the nations who are placed



in free competition with England, are shaken to their foundations,



and that these nations have afterwards notwithstanding richly to



recompense the English manufacturers by higher prices, ought we not



then to become very sceptical as to the propriety, of the



commercial conditions of nations being regulated according to the



mere theory of values and according to cosmopolitical principles?



The prevailing economical school has never deemed it expedient to



elucidate the causes and effects of such commercial crises.



    The great statesmen of all modern nations, almost without



exception, have comprehended the great influence of manufactures



and manufactories on the wealth, civilisation, and power of



nations, and the necessity of protecting them. Edward III



comprehended this like Elizabeth; Frederick the Great like Joseph



II; Washington like Napoleon. Without entering into the depths of



the industry theory, their foreseeing minds comprehended the nature



of in its entirety, and appreciated it correctly. It was reserved



for the school of physiocrats to regard this nature from another



point of view in consequence of a sophistical line of reasoning.



Their castle in the air has disappeared; the more modern economical



school itself has destroyed it; but even the latter has also not



disentangled itself from the original errors, but has merely



advanced somewhat farther from them. Since it did not recognise the



difference between productive power and mere values of exchange,



and did not investigate the former independently of the latter, but



subordinated it to the theory of values of exchange, it was



impossible for that school to arrive at the perception how greatly



the nature of the agricultural productive power differs from the



nature of the manufacturing productive power. It does not discern



that through the development of a manufacturing industry in an



agricultural nation a mass of mental and bodily powers, of natural



powers and natural resources, and of instrumental powers too (which



latter the prevailing school terms 'capital'), is brought to bear,



and brought into use, which had not previously been active, and



would never have come into activity but for the formation and



development of an internal manufacturing power; it imagines that by



the establishment of manufacturing industry these forces must be



taken away from agriculture, and transferred to manufacture,



whereas the latter to a great extent is a perfectly new and



additional power, which, very far indeed from increasing at the



expense of the agricultural interest, is often the means of helping



that interest to attain a higher degree of prosperity and



development.







NOTES:











1. This is true respecting Spain up to the period of her invasion



by Napoleon, but not subsequently. Our author's conclusions are,



however, scarcely invalidated by that exception. -- TR.







2. Say states in his Economie Politique Pratique, vol. iii. p. 242,



'Les lois ne peuvent pas créer des richesses.' Certainly they



cannot do this, but they create productive power, which is more



important than riches, i.e. than possession of values of exchange.







3. Wealth of Nations, Book IV. chap. ii.







4. From the great number of passages wherein J. B. Say explains



this view, we merely quote the newest -- from the sixth volume of



Economie Politique Pratique, p. 307: 'Le talent d'un avocat, d'un



médecin, qui a été acquis au prix de quelque sacrifice et qui



produit un revenu, est une valeur capitale, non transmissible à la



vérité, mais qui réside néanmoins dans un corps visible, celui de



la personne qui le possède.'







Chapter 13







The National Division of Commercial Operations and the



Confederation of the National Productive Forces







    The school is indebted to its renowned founder for the



discovery of that natural law which it calls 'division of labour,'



but neither Adam Smith nor any of his successors have thoroughly



investigated its essential nature and character, or followed it out



to its most important consequences.



    The expression 'division of labour' is an indefinite one, and



must necessarily produce a false or indefinite idea.



    It is 'division of labour' if one savage on one and the same



day goes hunting or fishing, cuts down wood, repairs his wigwam,



and prepares arrows, nets, and clothes; but it is also 'division of



labour' if (as Adam Smith mentions as an example) ten different



persons share in the different occupations connected with the



manufacture of a pin: the former is an objective, and the latter a



subjective division of labour; the former hinders, the latter



furthers production. The essential difference between both is, that



in the former instance one person divides his work so as to produce



various objects, while in the latter several persons share in the



production of a single object.



    Both operations, on the other hand, may be called with equal



correctness a union of labour; the savage unites various tasks in



his person, while in the case of the pin manufacture various



persons are united in one work of production in common.



    The essential character of the natural law from which the



popular school explains such important phenomena in social economy,



is evidently not merely a division of labour, but a division of



different commercial operations between several individuals, and at



the same time a confederation or union of various energies,



intelligences, and powers on behalf of a common production. The



cause of the productiveness of these operations is not merely that



division, but essentially this union. Adam Smith well perceives



this himself when he states, 'The necessaries of life of the lowest



members of society are a product of joint labour and of the



co-operation of a number of individuals.'(1*) What a pity that he



did not follow out this idea (which he so clearly expresses) of



united labour.



    If we continue to consider the example of the pin manufacture



adduced by Adam Smith in illustration of the advantages of division



of labour, and seek for the causes of the phenomenon that ten



persons united in that manufacture can produce an infinitely larger



number of pins than if every one carried on the entire pin



manufacture separately, we find that the division of commercial



operations without combination of the productive powers towards one



common object could but little further this production.



    In order to create such a result, the different individuals



must co-operate bodily as well as mentally, and work together. The



one who makes the heads of the pins must be certain of the co



operation of the one who makes the points if he does not want to



run the risk of producing pin heads in vain. The labour operations



of all must be in the proper proportion to one another, the workmen



must live as near to one another as possible, and their



co-operation must be insured. Let us suppose e.g. that every one of



these ten workmen lives in a different country; how often might



their co-operation be interrupted by wars, interruptions of



transport, commercial crises, &c.; how greatly would the cost of



the product be increased, and consequently the advantage of the



division of operation diminished; and would not the separation or



secession of a single person from the union, throw all the others



out of work?



    The popular school, because it has regarded the division of



operation alone as the essence of this natural law, has committed



the error of applying it merely to the separate manufactory or



farm; it has not perceived that the same law extends its action



especially over the whole manufacturing and agricultural power,



over the whole economy of the nation.



    As the pin manufactory only prospers by the confederation of



the productive force of the individuals, so does every kind of



manufacture prosper only by the confederation of its productive



forces with those of all other kinds of manufacture. For the



success of a machine manufactory, for instance, it is necessary



that the mines and metal works should furnish it with the necessary



materials, and that all the hundred different sorts of



manufactories which require machines, should buy their products



from it. Without machine manufactories, a nation would in time of



war be exposed to the danger of losing the greater portion of its



manufacturing power.



    In like manner the entire manufacturing industry of a State in



connection with its agricultural interest, and the latter in



connection with the former, will prosper the more the nearer they



are placed to one another, and the less they are interrupted in



their mutual exchanges with one another. The advantages of their



confederation under one and the same political Power in times of



war, of national differences, of commercial crises, failure of



crops, &c., are not less perceptible than are the advantages of the



union of the persons belonging to a pin manufactory under one and



the same roof.



    Smith affirms that the division of labour is less applicable to



agriculture than to manufactures.(2*) Smith had in view only the



separate manufactory and the separate farm. He has, however,



neglected to extend his principle over whole districts and



provinces. Nowhere has the division of commercial operations and



the confederation of the productive powers greater influence than



where every district and every province is in a position to devote



itself exclusively, or at least chiefly, to those branches of



agricultural production for which they are mostly fitted by nature.



In one district corn and hops chiefly thrive, in another vines and



fruit, in a third timber production and cattle rearing, &c. If



every district is devoted to all these branches of production, it



is clear that its labour and its land cannot be nearly so



productive as if every separate district were devoted mainly to



those branches of production for which it is specially adapted by



nature, and as if it exchanged the surplus of its own special



products for the surplus produce of those provinces which in the



production of other necessaries of life and raw materials possess



a natural advantage equally peculiar to themselves. This division



of commercial operations, this confederation of the productive



forces occupied in agriculture, can only take place in a country



which has attained the greatest development of all branches of



manufacturing industry; for in such a country only can a great



demand for the greatest variety of products exist, or the demand



for the surplus of agricultural productions be so certain and



considerable that the producer can feel certain of disposing of any



quantity of his surplus produce during this or at least during next



year at suitable prices; in such a country only can considerable



capital be devoted to speculation in the produce of the country and



holding stocks of it, or great improvements in transport, such as



canals and railway systems, lines of steamers, improved roads, be



carried out profitably; and only by means of thoroughly good means



of transport can every district or province convey the surplus of



its peculiar products to all other provinces, even to the most



distant ones, and procure in return supplies of the peculiar



products of the latter. Where everybody supplies himself with what



he requires, there is but little opportunity for exchange, and



therefore no need for costly facilities of transport.



    We may notice how the augmentation of the powers of production



in consequence of the separation of occupations and the



co-operation of the powers of individuals begins in the separate



manufactory and extends to the united nation. The manufactory



prospers so much the more in proportion as the commercial



operations are divided, the more closely the workmen are united,



and the more the co-operation of each person is insured for the



whole. The productive powers of every separate manufactory are also



increased in proportion as the whole manufacturing power of the



country is developed in all its branches, and the more intimately



it is united with all other branches of industry. The agricultural



power of production is so much greater the more intimately a



manufacturing power developed in all its branches is united



locally, commercially, and politically with agriculture. In



proportion as the manufacturing power is thus developed will the



division of the commercial operations and the co-operation of the



productive powers in agriculture also develop themselves and be



raised to the highest stage of perfection. That nation will



therefore possess most productive power, and will consequently be



the richest, which has cultivated manufacturing industry in all



branches within its territory to the highest perfection, and whose



territory and agricultural production is large enough to supply its



manufacturing population with the largest part of the necessaries



of life and raw materials which they require.



    Let us now consider the opposite side of this argument. A



nation which possesses merely agriculture, and merely the most



indispensable industries, is in want of the first and most



necessary division of commercial operations among its inhabitants,



and of the most important half of its productive powers, indeed it



is in want of a useful division of commercial operations even in



the separate branches of agriculture itself. A nation thus



imperfect will not only be merely half as productive as a perfect



nation, but with an equal or even with a much larger territory,



with an equal or a much larger population, it will perhaps scarcely



obtain a fifth, probably scarcely a tenth, part of that material



wealth which a perfect nation is able to procure; and this for the



same reason owing to which in a very complicated manufactory ten



persons produce not merely ten times more, but perhaps thirty times



more, than one person, or a man with one arm cannot merely work



half as little, but infinitely less, than a man with two arms. This



loss in productive power will be so much greater, the more that the



manufacturing operations can be furthered by machinery, and the



less that machinery can be applied in agriculture. A part of the



productive power which the agricultural nation thus loses, will



fall to the lot of that nation which exchanges its manufactured



goods for agricultural products. This will, however, be a positive



loss only in case the agricultural nation has already reached that



stage of civilisation and political development which is necessary



for the establishment of a manufacturing power. If it has not yet



attained that stage, and still remains in a barbarous or



half-civilised state, if its agricultural power of production has



not yet developed itself even from the most primitive condition, if



by the importation of foreign fabrics and the exportation of raw



products its prosperity nevertheless increases considerably from



year to year, and its mental and social powers continue to be



awakened and increased, if such commerce as it can thus carry on is



not interrupted by foreign prohibition of importation of raw



products, or by wars, or if the territory of the agricultural



nation is situated in a tropical climate, the gain on both sides



will then be equal and in conformity with the laws of nature,



because under the influence of such an exchange of the native



products for foreign fabrics, a nation so situated will attain to



civilisation and development of its productive powers more quickly



and safely than when it has to develop them entirely out of its



resources. If, however, the agricultural nation has already reached



the culminating point of its agricultural development, as far as



that can be attained by the influence of foreign commerce, or if



the manufacturing nation refuses to take the products of the



agricultural nation in exchange for its manufactured goods, and if



nevertheless, owing to the successful competition of the



manufacturing nation in the markets of the agricultural nation, no



manufactures can spring up in the latter, in such a case the



agricultural productive power of the agricultural nation is exposed



to the danger of being crippled.



    By a crippled state of agriculture we mean that state of things



in which, from want of a powerful and steadily developing



manufacturing industry, the entire increase of population tends to



throw itself on agriculture for employment, consumes all the



surplus agricultural production of the country, and as soon as it



has considerably increased either has to emigrate or share with the



agriculturists already in existence the land immediately at hand,



till the landed property of every family has become so small that



it produces only the most elementary and necessary portion of that



family's requirements of food and raw materials, but no



considerable surplus which it might exchange with the manufacturers



for the manufactured products which it requires. Under a normal



development of the productive powers of the State, the greater part



of the increase of population of an agricultural nation (as soon as



it has attained a certain degree of culture) should transfer itself



to manufacturing industry, and the excess of the agricultural



products should partly serve for supplying the manufacturing



population with provisions and raw materials, and partly for



procuring for the agriculturists the manufactured goods, machines,



and utensils which they require for their consumption, and for the



increase of their own production.



    If this state of things sets in at the proper time,



agricultural and industrial productive power will increase



reciprocally, and indeed ad infinitum. The demand for agricultural



products on the part of the industrial population will be so great,



that no greater number of labourers will be diverted to



agriculture, nor any greater division of the existing land be made,



than is necessary to obtain the greatest possible surplus produce



from it. In proportion to this surplus produce the population



occupied in agriculture will be enabled to consume the products of



the workmen employed in manufacturing. A continuous increase of the



agricultural surplus produce will occasion a continuous increase of



the demand for manufacturing workmen. The excess of the



agricultural population will therefore continually find work in the



manufactories, and the manufacturing population will at length not



only equal the agricultural population in numbers, but will far



exceed it. This latter is the condition of England; that which we



formerly described is that of part of France and Germany. England



was principally brought to this natural division of industrial



pursuits between the two great branches of industry, by means of



her flocks of sheep and woollen manufactures, which existed there



on a large scale much sooner than in other countries. In other



countries agriculture was crippled mainly by the influence of



feudalism and arbitrary power. The possession of land gave



influence and power, merely because by it a certain number of



retainers could be maintained which the feudal proprietor could



make use of in his feuds. The more vassals he possessed, so many



more warriors he could muster. It was besides impossible, owing to



the rudeness of those times, for the landed proprietor to consume



his income in any other manner than by keeping a large number of



servants, and he could not pay these better and attach them to his



own person more surely than by giving them a bit of land to



cultivate under the condition of rendering him personal service and



of paying a smaller tax in produce. Thus the foundation for



excessive division of the soil was laid in an artificial manner;



and if in the present day the Government seeks by artificial means



to alter that system, in so doing it is merely restoring the



original state of things.



    In order to restrain the continued depreciation of the



agricultural power of a nation, and gradually to apply a remedy to



that evil in so far as it is the result of previous institutions,



no better means exists (apart from the promotion of emigration)



than to establish an internal manufacturing power, by which the



increase of population may be gradually drawn over to the latter,



and a greater demand created for agricultural produce, by which



consequently the cultivation of larger estates may be rendered more



profitable, and the cultivator induced and encouraged to gain from



his land the greatest possible amount of surplus produce.



    The productive power of the cultivator and of the labourer in



agriculture will always be greater or smaller according to the



degree in which the exchange of agricultural produce for



manufactures and other products of various kinds can proceed more



or less readily. That in this respect the foreign trade of any



nation which is but little advanced can prove in the highest degree



beneficial, we have shown in another chapter by the example of



England. But a nation which has already made considerable advances



in civilisation, in possession of capital, and in population, will



find the development of a manufacturing power of its own infinitely



more beneficial to its agriculture than the most flourishing



foreign trade can be without such manufactures, because it thereby



secures itself against all fluctuations to which it may be exposed



by war, by foreign restrictions on trade, and by commercial crises,



because it thereby saves the greatest part of the costs of



transport and commercial charges incurred in exporting its own



products and in importing manufactured articles, because it derives



the greatest advantages from the improvements in transport which



are called into existence by its own manufacturing industry, while



from the same cause a mass of personal and natural powers hitherto



unemployed will be developed, and especially because the reciprocal



exchange between manufacturing power and agricultural power is so



much greater, the closer the agriculturist and manufacturer are



placed to one another, and the less they are liable to be



interrupted in the exchange of their various products by accidents



of all kinds.



    In my letters to Mr. Charles J. Ingersoll, President of the



Society for Promoting Arts and Industries in Philadelphia, of the



year 1828 (entitled, 'Outlines of a New System of Political



Economy'), I tried to explain the advantages of a union of the



manufacturing power with agriculture in one and the same country,



and under one and the same political power, in the following



manner. Supposing you did not understand the art of grinding corn,



which has certainly been a great art in its time; supposing further



that the art of baking bread had remained unknown to you, as



(according to Anderson) the real art of salting herrings was still



unknown to the English in the seventeenth century; supposing,



therefore, that you had to send your corn to England to be ground



into flour and baked into bread, how large a quantity of your corn



would not the English retain as pay for the grinding and baking;



how much of it would the carters, seamen, and merchants consume,



who would have to be employed in exporting the corn and importing



the bread; and how much would come back into the hands of those who



cultivated the corn? There is no doubt that by such a process the



foreign trade would receive a considerable impetus, but it is very



doubtful whether this intercourse would be specially advantageous



to the welfare and independence of the nation. Consider only in



case of a war breaking out between your country (the United States)



and Great Britain, what would be the situation of those who



produced corn for the English mills and bakehouses, and on the



other hand the situation of those who had become accustomed to the



taste of the English bread. Just as, however, the economical



prosperity of the corn-cultivating interest requires that the corn



millers should live in its vicinity, so also does the prosperity of



the farmer especially require that the manufacturer should live



close to him, so also does the prosperity of a flat and open



country require that a prosperous and industrial town should exist



in its centre, and so does the prosperity of the whole agriculture



of a country require that its own manufacturing power should be



developed in the highest possible degree.



    Let us compare the condition of agriculture in the vicinity of



a populous town with its condition when carried on in distant



provinces. In the latter case the farmer can only cultivate for



sale those products which can bear a long transport, and which



cannot be supplied at cheaper prices and in better quality from



districts lying nearer to those who purchase them. A larger portion



of his profits will be absorbed by the costs of transport. He will



find it difficult to procure capital which he may employ usefully



on his farm. From want of better examples and means of education he



will not readily be led to avail himself of new processes, of



better implements, and of new methods of cultivation. The labourer



himself, from want of good example, of stimulus to exertion, and to



emulation in the exercise of his productive powers, will only



develop those powers inefficiently, and will indulge himself in



loitering about and in idleness.



    On the other hand, in the proximity of the town, the farmer is



in a position to use every patch of land for those crops which best



suit the character of the soil. He will produce the greatest



variety of things to the best advantage. Garden produce, poultry,



eggs, milk, butter, fruit, and especially articles which the farmer



residing at a distance considers insignificant and secondary



things, will bring to the farmer near the town considerable profit.



While the distant farmer has to depend mainly on the mere breeding



of cattle, the other will make much better profits from fattening



them, and will thereby be led to perfect his cultivation of root



crops and fodder. He can utilise with much profit a number of



things which are of little or no use to the distant farmer; e.g.



stone, sand, water power, &c. The most numerous and best machines



and implements as well as all means for his instruction, are close



at hand. It will be easy for him to accumulate the capital



necessary for the improvement of his farm. Landed proprietors and



workmen, by the means of recreation which the town affords, the



emulation which it excites among them, and the facility of making



profits, will be incited to exert all their mental and bodily



powers for the improvement of their condition. And precisely the



same difference exists between a nation which unites agriculture



and manufactures on its own territory, and a nation which can only



exchange its own agricultural products for foreign manufactured



goods.



    The whole social state of a nation will be chiefly determined



by the principle of the variety and division of occupations and the



cooperation of its productive powers. What the pin is in the pin



manufactory, that the national well-being is to the large society



which we term 'the nation.' The most important division of



occupations in the nation is that between the mental and material



ones. Both are mutually dependent on one another. The more the



mental producers succeed in promoting morality, religion,



enlightenment, increase of knowledge, extension of liberty and of



perfection of political institutions -- security of persons and



property within the State, and the independence and power of the



nation externally -- so much greater will be the production of



material Wealth. On the other hand, the more goods that the



material producers produce, the more will mental production be



capable of being promoted.



    The most important division of occupations, and the most



important co-operation of productive powers in material production,



is that of agriculture and manufacture. Both depend mutually upon



one another, as we have shown.



    As in the pin manufactory, so also in the nation does the



productiveness of every individual -- of every separate branch of



production -- and finally of the whole nation depend on the



exertions of all individuals standing in proper relation to one



another. We call this relation the balance or the harmony of the



productive powers. It is possible for a nation to possess too many



philosophers, philologers, and literati, and too few skilled



artisans, merchants, and seamen. This is the consequence of highly



advanced and learned culture which is not supported by a highly



advanced manufacturing power and by an extensive internal and



external trade; it is as if in a pin manufactory far more pin heads



were manufactured than pin points. The surplus pin heads in such a



nation are: a mass of useless books, subtle theoretical systems,



and learned controversies, through which the mind of the nation is



more obscured than cultivated, and is withdrawn from useful



occupations; consequently its productive powers are retarded in



their progress almost as much as if it possessed too many priests



and too few instructors of youth, too many soldiers and too few



politicians, too many administrators and too few judges and



defenders of justice and right.



    A nation which only carries on agriculture, is an individual



who in his material production lacks one arm. Commerce is merely



the medium of exchange between the agricultural and the



manufacturing power, and between their separate branches. A nation



which exchanges agricultural products for foreign manufactured



goods is an individual with one arm, which is supported by a



foreign arm. This support may be useful to it, but not so useful as



if it possessed two arms itself, and this because its activity is



dependent on the caprice of the foreigner. In possession of a



manufacturing power of its own, it can produce as much provisions



and raw materials as the home manufacturers can consume; but if



dependent upon foreign manufacturers, it can merely produce as much



surplus as foreign nations do not care to produce for themselves,



and which they are obliged to buy from another country.



    As between the different districts of one and the same country,



so does the division of labour and the co-operation of the



productive powers operate between the various nations of the earth.



The former is conducted by internal or national, the latter by



international commerce. The international co-operation of



productive powers is, however, a very imperfect one, inasmuch as it



may be frequently interrupted by wars, political regulations,



commercial crises, &c. Although it is the most important in one



sense, inasmuch as by it the various nations of the earth are



connected with one another, it is nevertheless the least important



with regard to the prosperity of any separate nation which is



already far advanced in civilisation. This is admitted by writers



of the popular school, who declare that the home market of a nation



is without comparison more important than its foreign market. It



follows from this, that it is the interest of every great nation to



make the national confederation of its productive powers the main



object of its exertions, and to consider their international



confederation as second in importance to it.



    Both international and national division of labour are chiefly



determined by climate and by Nature herself. We cannot produce in



every country tea as in China, spices as in Java, cotton as in



Louisiana, or corn, wool, fruit, and manufactured goods as in the



countries of the temperate zone. It would be folly for a nation to



attempt to supply itself by means of national division of labour



(i.e. by home production) with articles for the production of which



it is not favoured by nature, and which it can procure better and



cheaper by means of international division of labour (i.e. through



foreign commerce). And just as much does it betoken a want of



national intelligence or national industry if a nation does not



employ all the natural powers which it possesses in order to



satisfy its own internal wants, and then by means of the surplus of



its own productions to purchase those necessary articles which



nature has forbidden it to produce on its own territory.



    The countries of the world most favoured by nature, with regard



to both national and international division of labour, are



evidently those whose soil brings forth the most common necessaries



of life of the best quality and in the largest quantity, and whose



climate is most conducive to bodily and mental exertion, and these



are the countries of the temperate zone; for in these countries the



manufacturing power especially prospers, by means of which the



nation not merely attains to the highest degree of mental and



social development and of political power, but is also enabled to



make the countries of tropical climates and of inferior



civilisation tributary in a certain measure to itself. The



countries of the temperate zone therefore are above all others



called upon to bring their own national division of labour to the



highest perfection, and to use the international division of labour



for their enrichment.







NOTES:







1. Wealth of Nations, Book I. chap. i.







2. Wealth of Nations, Book I. chap. i.







Chapter 14







Private Economy and National Economy











    We have proved historically that the unity of the nation forms



the fundamental condition of lasting national prosperity; and we



have shown that only where the interest of individuals has been



subordinated to those of the nation, and where successive



generations have striven for one and the same object, the nations



have been brought to harmonious development of their productive



powers, and how little private industry can prosper without the



united efforts both of the individuals who are living at the time,



and of successive generations directed to one common object. We



have further tried to prove in the last chapter how the law of



union of powers exhibits its beneficial operation in the individual



manufactory, and how it acts with equal power on the industry of



whole nations. In the present chapter we have now to demonstrate



how the popular school has concealed its misunderstanding of the



national interests and of the effects of national union of powers,



by confounding the principles of private economy with those of



national economy.



    'What is prudence in the conduct of every private family,' says



Adam Smith,(1*) 'can scarce be folly in that of a great kingdom.'



Every individual in pursuing his own interests necessarily promotes



thereby also the interests of the community. It is evident that



every individual, inasmuch as he knows his own local circumstances



best and pays most attention to his occupation, is far better able



to judge than the statesman or legislator how his capital can most



profitably be invested. He who would venture to give advice to the



people how to invest their capital would not merely take upon



himself a useless task, but would also assume to himself an



authority which belongs solely to the producer, and which can be



entrusted to those persons least of all who consider themselves



equal to so difficult a task. Adam Smith concludes from this:



'Restrictions on trade imposed on the behalf of the internal



industry of a country, are mere folly; every nation, like every



individual, ought to buy articles where they can be procured the



cheapest; in order to attain to the highest degree of national



prosperity, we have simply to follow the maxim of letting things



alone (laisser faire et laisser aller).' Smith and Say compare a



nation which seeks to promote its industry by protective duties, to



a tailor who wants to make his own boots, and to a bootmaker who



would impose a toll on those who enter his door, in order to



promote his prosperity. As in all errors of the popular school, so



also in this one does Thomas Cooper go to extremes in his book(2*)



which is directed against the American system of protection.



'Political economy,' he alleges, 'is almost synonymous with the



private economy of all individuals; politics are no essential



ingredient of political economy; it is folly to suppose that the



community is something quite different from the individuals of whom



it is composed. Every individual knows best how to invest his



labour and his capital. The wealth of the community is nothing else



than the aggregate of the wealth of all its individual members; and



if every individual can provide best for himself, that nation must



be the richest in which every individual is most left to himself.'



The adherents of the American system of protection had opposed



themselves to this argument, which had formerly been adduced by



importing merchants in favour of free trade; the American



navigation laws had greatly increased the carrying trade, the



foreign commerce, and fisheries of the United States; and for the



mere protection of their mercantile marine millions had been



annually expended on their fleet; according to his theory those



laws and this expense also would be as reprehensible as protective



duties. ' In any case,' exclaims Mr Cooper, 'no commerce by sea is



worth a naval war; the merchants may be left to protect



themselves.'



    Thus the popular school, which had begun by ignoring the



principles of nationality and national interests, finally comes to



the point of altogether denying their existence, and of leaving



individuals to defend them as they may solely by their own



individual powers.



    How? Is the wisdom of private economy, also wisdom in national



economy? Is it in the nature of individuals to take into



consideration the wants of future centuries, as those concern the



nature of the nation and the State? Let us consider only the first



beginning of an American town; every individual left to himself



would care merely for his own wants, or at the most for those of



his nearest successors, whereas all individuals united in one



community provide for the convenience and the wants of the most



distant generations; they subject the present generation for this



object to privations and sacrifices which no reasonable person



could expect from individuals. Can the individual further take into



consideration in promoting his private economy, the defence of the



country, public security and the thousand other objects which can



only be attained by the aid of the whole community? Does not the



State require individuals to limit their private liberty according



to what these objects require? Does it not even require that they



should sacrifice for these some part of their earnings, of their



mental and bodily labour, nay, even their own life? We must first



root out, as Cooper does, the very ideas of 'State' and 'nation'



before this opinion can be entertained.



    No; that may be wisdom in national economy which would be folly



in private economy, and vice versâ; and owing to the very simple



reason, that a tailor is no nation and a nation no tailor, that one



family is something very different from a community of millions of



families, that one house is something very different from a large



national territory. Nor does the individual merely by understanding



his own interests best, and by striving to further them, if left to



his own devices, always further the interests of the community. We



ask those who occupy the benches of justice, whether they do not



frequently have to send individuals to the tread-mill on account of



their excess of inventive power, and of their all too great



industry. Robbers, thieves, smugglers, and cheats know their own



local and personal circumstances and conditions extremely well, and



pay the most active attention to their business; but it by no means



follows therefrom, that society is in the best condition where such



individuals are least restrained in the exercise of their private



industry.



    In a thousand cases the power of the State is compelled to



impose restrictions on private industry. It prevents the shipowner



from taking on board slaves on the west coast of Africa, and taking



them over to America. It imposes regulations as to the building of



steamers and the rules of navigation at sea, in order that



passengers and sailors may not be sacrificed to the avarice and



caprice of the captains. In England certain rules have recently



been enacted with regard to shipbuilding, because an infernal union



between assurance companies and shipowners has been brought to



light, whereby yearly thousands of human lives and millions in



value were sacrificed to the avarice of a few persons. In North



America millers are bound under a penalty to pack into each cask



not less than 198 lbs. of good flour, and for all market goods



market inspectors are appointed, although in no other country is



individual liberty more highly prized. Everywhere does the State



consider it to be its duty to guard the public against danger and



loss, as in the sale of necessaries of life, so also in the sale of



medicines, &c.



    But the cases which we have mentioned (the school will reply)



concern unlawful damages to property and to the person, not the



honourable exchange of useful objects, not the harmless and useful



industry of private individuals; to impose restrictions on these



latter the State has no right whatever. Of course not, so long as



they remain harmless and useful; that which, however, is harmless



and useful in itself, in general commerce with the world, can



become dangerous and injurious in national internal commerce, and



vice versâ. In time of peace, and considered from a cosmopolitan



point of view, privateering is an injurious profession; in time of



war, Governments favour it. The deliberate killing of a human being



is a crime in time of peace, in war it becomes a duty. Trading in



gunpowder, lead, and arms in time of peace is allowed; but whoever



provides the enemy with them in time of war, is punished as a



traitor.



    For similar reasons the State is not merely justified in



imposing, but bound to impose, certain regulations and restrictions



on commerce (which is in itself harmless) for the best interests of



the nation. By prohibitions and protective duties it does not give



directions to individuals how to employ their productive powers and



capital (as the popular school sophistically alleges); it does not



tell the one, 'You must invest your money in the building of a



ship, or in the erection of a manufactory;' or the other, 'You must



be a naval captain or a civil engineer;' it leaves it to the



judgment of every individual how and where to invest his capital,



or to what vocation he will devote himself. It merely says, 'It is



to the advantage of our nation that we manufacture these or the



other goods ourselves; but as by free competition with foreign



countries we can never obtain possession of this advantage, we have



imposed restrictions on that competition, so far as in our opinion



is necessary, to give those among us who invest their capital in



these new branches of industry, and those who devote their bodily



and mental powers to them, the requisite guarantees that they shall



not lose their capital and shall not miss their vocation in life;



and further to stimulate foreigners to come over to our side with



their productive powers. In this manner, it does not in the least



degree restrain private industry; on the contrary, it secures to



the personal, natural, and moneyed powers of the nation a greater



and wider field of activity. It does not thereby do something which



its individual citizens could understand better and do better than



it; on the contrary it does something which the individuals, even



if they understood it, would not be able to do for themselves.



    The allegation of the school, that the system of protection



occasions unjust and anti-economical encroachments by the power of



the State against the employment of the capital and industry of



private individuals, appears in the least favourable light if we



consider that it is the foreign commercial regulations which allow



such encroachments on our private industry to take place, and that



only by the aid of the system of protection are we enabled to



counteract those injurious operations of the foreign commercial



policy. If the English shut out our corn from their markets, what



else are they doing than compelling our agriculturists to grow so



much less corn than they would have sent out to England under



systems of free importation? If they put such heavy duties on our



wool, our wines, or our timber, that our export trade to England



wholly or in great measure ceases, what else is thereby effected



than that the power of the English nation restricts proportionately



our branches of production? In these cases a direction is evidently



given by foreign legislation to our capital and our personal



productive powers, which but for the regulations made by it they



would scarcely have followed. It follows from this, that were we to



disown giving, by means of our own legislation, a direction to our



own national industry in accordance with our own national



interests, we could not prevent foreign nations from regulating our



national industry after a fashion which corresponds with their own



real or presumed advantage, and which in any case operates



disadvantageously to the development of our own productive powers.



But can it possibly be wiser on our part, and more to the advantage



of those who nationally belong to us, for us to allow our private



industry to be regulated by a foreign national Legislature, in



accordance with foreign national interests, rather than regulate it



by means of our own Legislature and in accordance with our own



interests? Does the German or American agriculturist feel himself



less restricted if he has to study every year the English Acts of



Parliament, in order to ascertain whether that body deems it



advantageous to encourage or to impose restrictions on his



production of corn or wool, than if his own Legislature imposes



certain restrictions on him in respect of foreign manufactured



goods, but at the same time insures him a market for all his



products, of which he can never again be deprived by foreign



legislation?



    If the school maintains that protective duties secure to the



home manufacturers a monopoly to the disadvantage of the home



consumers, in so doing it makes use of a weak argument. For as



every individual in the nation is free to share in the profits of



the home market which is thus secured to native industry, this is



in no respect a private monopoly, but a privilege, secured to all



those who belong to our nation, as against those who nationally



belong to foreign nations, and which is the more righteous and just



inasmuch as those who nationally belong to foreign nations possess



themselves the very same monopoly, and those who belong to us are



merely thereby put on the same footing with them. It is neither a



privilege to the exclusive advantage of the producers, nor to the



exclusive disadvantage of the consumers; for if the producers at



first obtain higher prices, they run great risks, and have to



contend against those considerable losses and sacrifices which are



always connected with all beginnings in manufacturing industry. But



the consumers have ample security that these extraordinary profits



shall not reach unreasonable limits, or become perpetual, by means



of the competition at home which follows later on, and which, as a



rule, always lowers prices further than the level at which they had



steadily ranged under the free competition of the foreigner. If the



agriculturists, who are the most important consumers to the



manufacturers, must also pay higher prices, this disadvantage will



be amply repaid to them by increased demands for agricultural



products, and by increased prices obtained for the latter.



    It is a further sophism, arrived at by confounding the theory



of mere values with that of the powers of production, when the



popular school infers from the doctrine, 'that the wealth of the



nation is merely the aggregate of the wealth of all individuals in



it, and that the private interest of every individual is better



able than all State regulations to incite to production and



accumulation of wealth,' the conclusion that the national industry



would prosper best if only every individual were left undisturbed



in the occupation of accumulating wealth. That doctrine can be



conceded without the conclusion resulting from it at which the



school desires thus to arrive; for the point in question is not (as



we have shown in a previous chapter) that of immediately increasing



by commercial restrictions the amount of the values of exchange in



the nation, but of increasing the amount of its productive powers.



But that the aggregate of the productive powers of the nation is



not synonymous with the aggregate of the productive powers of all



individuals, each considered separately -- that the total amount of



these powers depends chiefly on social and Political conditions,



but especially on the degree in which the nation has rendered



effectual the division of labour and the confederation of the



powers of production within itself -- we believe we have



sufficiently demonstrated in the preceding chapters.



    This system everywhere takes into its consideration only



individuals who are in free unrestrained intercourse among



themselves, and who are contented if we leave everyone to pursue



his own private interests according to his own private natural



inclination. This is evidently not a system of national economy,



but a system of the private economy of the human race, as that



would constitute itself were there no interference on the part of



any Government, were there no wars, no hostile foreign tariff



restrictions. Nowhere do the advocates of that system care to point



out by what means those nations which are now prosperous have



raised themselves to that stage of power and prosperity which we



see them maintain, and from what causes others have lost that



degree of prosperity and power which they formerly maintained. We



can only learn from it how in private industry, natural ability,



labour and capital, are combined in order to bring into exchange



valuable products, and in what manner these latter are distributed



among the human race and consumed by it. But what means are to be



adopted in order to bring the natural powers belonging to any



individual nation into activity and value, to raise a poor and weak



nation to prosperity and power, cannot be gathered from it, because



the school totally ignoring politics, ignores the special



conditions of the nation, and concerns itself merely about the



prosperity of the whole human race. Wherever international commerce



is in question, the native individual is throughout simply pitted



against the foreign individual; examples from the private dealings



of separate merchants are throughout the only ones adduced -- goods



are spoken of in general terms (without considering whether the



question is one of raw products or of manufactured articles) -- in



order to prove that it is equally for the benefit of the nation



whether its exports and imports consist of money, of raw materials,



or of manufactured goods, and whether or not they balance one



another. If we, for example, terrified at the commercial crises



which prevail in the United States of North America like native



epidemics, consult this theory as to the means of averting or



diminishing them, it leaves us utterly without comfort or



instruction; nay, it is indeed impossible for us to investigate



these phenomena scientifically, because, under the penalty of being



taken for muddleheads and ignoramuses, we must not even utter the



term 'balance of trade,' while this term is, notwithstanding, made



use of in all legislative assemblies, in all bureaux of



administration, on every exchange. For the sake of the welfare of



humanity, the belief is inculcated on us that exports always



balance themselves spontaneously by imports; notwithstanding that



we read in public accounts how the Bank of England comes to the



assistance of the nature of things; notwithstanding that corn laws



exist, which make it somewhat difficult for the agriculturist of



those countries which deal with England to pay with his own produce



for the manufactured goods which he consumes.



    The school recognises no distinction between nations which have



attained a higher degree of economical development, and those which



occupy a lower stage. Everywhere it seeks to exclude the action of



the power of the State; everywhere, according to it, will the



individual be so much better able to produce, the less the power of



the State concerns itself for him. In fact, according to this



doctrine savage nations ought to be the most productive and wealthy



of the earth, for nowhere is the individual left more to himself



than in the savage state, nowhere is the action of the power of the



State less perceptible.



    Statistics and history, however, teach, on the contrary, that



the necessity for the intervention of legislative power and



administration is everywhere more apparent, the further the economy



of the nation is developed. As individual liberty is in general a



good thing so long only as it does not run counter to the interests



of society, so is it reasonable to hold that private industry can



only lay claim to unrestricted action so long as the latter



consists with the well-being of the nation. But whenever the



enterprise and activity of individuals does not suffice for this



purpose, or in any case where these might become injurious to the



nation, there does private industry rightly require support from



the whole power of the nation, there ought it for the sake of its



own interests to submit to legal restrictions.



    If the school represents the free competition of all producers



as the most effectual means for promoting the prosperity of the



human race, it is quite right from the point of view which it



assumes. On the hypothesis of a universal union, every restriction



on the honest exchange of goods between various countries seems



unreasonable and injurious. But so long as other nations



Subordinate the interests of the human race as a whole to their



national interests, it is folly to speak of free competition among



the individuals of various nations. The arguments of the school in



favour of free competition are thus only applicable to the exchange



between those who belong to one and the same nation. Every great



nation, therefore, must endeavour to form an aggregate within



itself, which will enter into commercial intercourse with other



similar aggregates so far only as that intercourse is Suitable to



the interests of its own special community. These interests of the



community are, however, infinitely different from the private



interests of all the separate individuals of the nation, if each



individual is to be regarded as existing for himself alone and not



in the character of a member of the national community, if we



regard (as Smith and Say do) individuals as mere producers and



consumers, not citizens of states or members of nations; for as



such, mere individuals do not concern themselves for the prosperity



of future generations -- they deem it foolish (as Mr Cooper really



demonstrates to us) to make certain and present sacrifices in order



to endeavour to obtain a benefit which is as yet uncertain and



lying in the vast field of the future (if even it possess any value



at all); they care but little for the continuance of the nation --



they would expose the ships of their merchants to become the prey



of every bold pirate -- they trouble themselves but little about



the power, the honour, or the glory of the nation, at the most they



can persuade themselves to make some material sacrifices for the



education of their children, and to give them the opportunity of



learning a trade, provided always that after the lapse of a few



years the learners are placed in a position to earn their own



bread.



    Indeed, according to the prevailing theory, so analogous is



national economy to private economy that J. B. Say, where



(exceptionally) he allows that internal industry may be protected



by the State, makes it a condition of so doing, that every



probability must exist that after the lapse of a few years it will



attain independence, just as a shoemaker's apprentice is allowed



only a few years' time in order to perfect himself so far in his



trade as to do without parental assistance.







NOTES:







1. Wealth of Nations, Book IV. chap. ii.







2. Lectures on Political Economy, by Thomas Cooper, pp. 1, 15, 19,



117.







Chapter 15







Nationality and the Economy of the Nation







    The system of the school suffers, as we have already shown in



the preceding chapters, from three main defects: firstly, from



boundless cosmopolitanism, which neither recognises the principle



of nationality, nor takes into consideration the satisfaction of



its interests; secondly, from a dead materialism, which everywhere



regards chiefly the mere exchangeable value of things without



taking into consideration the mental and political, the present and



the future interests, and the productive powers of the nation;



thirdly, from a disorganising particularism and individualism,



which, ignoring the nature and character of social labour and the



operation of the union of powers in their higher consequences,



considers private industry only as it would develop itself under a



state of free interchange with society (i.e. with the whole human



race) were that race not divided into separate national societies.



    Between each individual and entire humanity, however, stands



THE NATION, with its special language and literature, with its



peculiar origin and history, with its special manners and customs,



laws and institutions, with the claims of all these for existence,



independence, perfection, and continuance for the future, and with



its separate territory; a society which, united by a thousand ties



of mind and of interests, combines itself into one independent



whole, which recognises the law of right for and within itself, and



in its united character is still opposed to other societies of a



similar kind in their national liberty, and consequently can only



under the existing conditions of the world maintain self-existence



and independence by its own power and resources. As the individual



chiefly obtains by means of the nation and in the nation mental



culture, power of production, security, and prosperity, so is the



civilisation of the human race only conceivable and possible by



means of the civilisation and development of the individual



nations.



    Meanwhile, however, an infinite difference exists in the



condition and circumstances of the various nations: we observe



among them giants and dwarfs, well-formed bodies and cripples,



civilised, half-civilised, and barbarous nations; but in all of



them, as in the individual human being, exists the impulse of



self-preservation, the striving for improvement which is implanted



by nature. It is the task of politics to civilise the barbarous



nationalities, to make the small and weak ones great and strong,



but, above all, to secure to them existence and continuance. It is



the task of national economy to accomplish the economical



development of the nation, and to prepare it for admission into the



universal society of the future.



    A nation in its normal state possesses one common language and



literature, a territory endowed with manifold natural resources,



extensive, and with convenient frontiers and a numerous population.



Agriculture, manufactures, commerce, and navigation must be all



developed in it proportionately. arts and sciences, educational



establishments, and universal, cultivation must stand in it on an



equal footing with material production. Its constitution, laws, and



institutions must afford to those who belong to it a high degree of



security and liberty, and must promote religion, morality, and



prosperity; in a word, must have the well-being of its citizens as



their object. It must possess sufficient power on land and at sea



to defend its independence and to protect its foreign commerce. It



will possess the power of beneficially affecting the civilisation



of less advanced nations, and by means of its own surplus



population and of their mental and material capital to found



colonies and beget new nations.



    A large population, and an extensive territory endowed with



manifold national resources, are essential requirements of the



normal nationality; they are the fundamental conditions of mental



cultivation as well as of material development and political power.



A nation restricted in the number of its population and in



territory, especially if it has a separate language, can only



possess a crippled literature, crippled institutions for promoting



art and science. A small State can never bring to complete



perfection within its territory the various branches of production.



In it all protection becomes mere private monopoly. Only through



alliances with more powerful nations, by partly sacrificing the



advantages of nationality, and by excessive energy, can it maintain



with difficulty its independence.



    A nation which possesses no coasts, mercantile marine, or naval



power, or has not under its dominion and control the mouths of its



rivers, is in its foreign commerce dependent on other countries; it



can neither establish colonies of its own nor form new nations; all



surplus population, mental and material means, which flows from



such a nation to uncultivated countries, is lost to its own



literature, civilisation and industry, and goes to the benefit of



other nationalities.



    A nation not bounded by seas and chains of mountains lies open



to the attacks of foreign nations, and can only by great



sacrifices, and in any case only very imperfectly, establish and



maintain a separate tariff system of its own.



    Territorial deficiencies of the nation can be remedied either



by means of hereditary succession, as in the case of England and



Scotland; or by purchase, as in the case of Florida and Louisiana;



or by conquests, as in the case of Great Britain and Ireland.



    In modern times a fourth means has been adopted, which leads to



this object in a manner much more in accordance with justice and



with the prosperity of nations than conquest, and which is not so



dependent on accidents as hereditary succession, namely, the union



of the interests of various States by means of free conventions.



    By its Zollverein, the German nation first obtained one of the



most important attributes of its nationality. But this measure



cannot be considered complete so long as it does not extend over



the whole coast, from the mouth of the Rhine to the frontier of



Poland, including Holland and Denmark. A natural consequence of



this union must be the admission of both these countries into the



German Bund, and consequently into the German nationality, whereby



the latter will at once obtain what it is now in need of, namely,



fisheries and naval power, maritime commerce and colonies. Besides,



both these nations belong, as respects their descent and whole



character, to the German nationality. The burden of debt with which



they are oppressed is merely a consequence of their unnatural



endeavours to maintain themselves as independent nationalities, and



it is in the nature of things that this evil should rise to a point



when it will become intolerable to those two nations themselves,



and when incorporation with a larger nationality must seem



desirable and necessary to them.



    Belgium can only remedy by means of confederation with a



neighbouring larger nation her needs which are inseparable from her



restricted territory and population. The United States and Canada,



the more their population increases, and the more the protective



system of the United States is developed, so much the more will



they feel themselves drawn towards one another, and the less will



it be possible for England to prevent a union between them.



    As respects their economy, nations have to pass through the



following stages of development: original barbarism, pastoral



condition, agricultural condition, agricultural-manufacturing



condition, and agricultural-manufacturing-commercial condition.



    The industrial history of nations, and of none more clearly



than that of England, proves that the transition from the savage



state to the pastoral one, from the pastoral to the agricultural,



and from agriculture to the first beginnings in manufacture and



navigation, is effected most speedily and advantageously by means



of free commerce with further advanced towns and countries, but



that a perfectly developed manufacturing industry, an important



mercantile marine, and foreign trade on a really large scale, can



only be attained by means of the interposition of the power of the



State.



    The less any nation's agriculture has been perfected, and the



more its foreign trade is in want of opportunities of exchanging



the excess of native agricultural products and raw materials for



foreign manufactured goods, the deeper that the nation is still



sunk in barbarism and fitted only for an absolute monarchical form



of government and legislation, the more will free trade (i.e. the



exportation of agricultural products and the importation of



manufactured goods) promote its prosperity and civilisation.



    On the other hand, the more that the agriculture of a nation,



its industries, and its social, political, and municipal



conditions, are thoroughly developed, the less advantage will it be



able to derive for the improvement of its social conditions, from



the exchange of native agricultural products and raw materials for



foreign manufactured goods, and the greater disadvantages will it



experience from the successful competition of a foreign



manufacturing power superior to its own.



    Solely in nations of the latter kind, namely, those which



possess all the necessary mental and material conditions and means



for establishing a manufacturing power of their own, and of thereby



attaining the highest degree of civilisation, and development of



material prosperity and political power, but which are retarded in



their progress by the competition of a foreign manufacturing power



which is already farther advanced than their own -- only in such



nations are commercial restrictions justifiable for the purpose of



establishing and protecting their own manufacturing power; and even



in them it is justifiable only until that manufacturing power is



strong enough no longer to have any reason to fear foreign



competition, and thenceforth only so far as may be necessary for



protecting the inland manufacturing power in its very roots.



    The system of protection would not merely be contrary to the



principles of cosmopolitical economy, but also to the rightly



understood advantage of the nation itself, were it to exclude



foreign competition at once and altogether, and thus isolate from



other nations the nation which is thus protected. If the



manufacturing power to be protected be still in the first period of



its development, the protective duties must be very moderate, they



must only rise gradually with the increase of the mental and



material capital, of the technical abilities and spirit of



enterprise of the nation. Neither is it at all necessary that all



branches of industry should be protected in the same degree. Only



the most important branches require special protection, for the



working of which much outlay of capital in building and management,



much machinery, and therefore much technical knowledge, skill, and



experience, and many workmen are required, and whose products



belong to the category of the first necessaries of life, and



consequently are of the greatest importance as regards their total



value as well as regards national independence (as, for example,



cotton, woollen and linen manufactories, &c.). If these main



branches are suitably protected and developed, all other less



important branches of manufacture will rise up around them under a



less degree of protection. It will be to the advantage of nations



in which wages are high, and whose population is not yet great in



proportion to the extent of their territory, e.g. in the United



States of North America, to give less protection to manufactures in



which machinery does not play an important part, than to those in



which machinery does the greater part of the work, providing that



those nations which supply them with similar goods allow in return



free importation to their agricultural products.



    The popular school betrays an utter misconception of the nature



of national economical conditions if it believes that such nations



can promote and further their civilisation, their prosperity, and



especially their social progress, equally well by the exchange of



agricultural products for manufactured goods, as by establishing a



manufacturing power of their own. A mere agricultural nation can



never develop to any considerable extent its home and foreign



commerce, its inland means of transport, and its foreign



navigation, increase its population in due proportion to their



wellbeing, or make notable progress in its moral, intellectual,



social, and political development: it will never acquire important



political power, or be placed in a position to influence the



cultivation and progress of less advanced nations and to form



colonies of its own. A mere agricultural State is an infinitely



less perfect institution than an agricultural manufacturing State.



The former is always more or less economically and politically



dependent on those foreign nations which take from it agricultural



products in exchange for manufactured goods. It cannot determine



for itself how much it will produce; it must wait and see how much



others will buy from it. These latter, on the contrary (the



agricultural-manufacturing States), produce for themselves large



quantities of raw materials and provisions, and supply merely the



deficiency by importation from the purely agricultural nations. The



purely agricultural nations are thus in the first place dependent



for their power of effecting sales on the chances of a more or less



plentiful harvest in the agricultural-manufacturing nations; in the



next place they have to compete in these sales with other purely



agricultural nations, whereby their power of sale, in itself very



uncertain, thus becomes still more uncertain. Lastly, they are



exposed to the danger of being totally ruined in their trading with



foreign manufacturing nations by wars, or new foreign tariff



regulations whereby they suffer the double disadvantage of finding



no buyers for their surplus agricultural products, and of failing



to obtain supplies of the manufactured goods which they require. An



agricultural nation is, as we have already stated, an individual



with one arm, who makes use of a foreign arm, but who cannot make



sure of the use of it in all cases; an agricultural-manufacturing



nation is an individual who has two arms of his own always at his



disposal.



    It is a fundamental error of the school when it represents the



system of protection as a mere device of speculative politicians



which is contrary to nature. History is there to prove that



protective regulations originated either in the natural efforts of



nations to attain to prosperity, independence, and power, or in



consequence of wars and of the hostile commercial legislation of



predominating manufacturing nations.



    The idea of independence and power originates in the very idea



of 'the nation.' The school never takes this into consideration,



because it does not make the economy of the separate nation, but



the economy of society generally, i.e. of the whole human race, the



object of its investigations. If we imagine, for instance, that all



nations were united by means of a universal confederation, their



individual independence and power would cease to be an object of



regard. The security for the independence of every nation would in



such a case rest on the legal provisions of the universal society,



just as e.g. the security of the independence of the states of



Rhode Island and Delaware lies in the union of all the free states



constituting the American Union. Since the first foundation of that



Union it has never yet occurred to any of these smaller states to



care for the enlargement of its own political power, or to consider



its independence less secured than is that of the largest states of



the Union.



    In proportion, however, as the principle of a universal



confederation of nations is reasonable, in just the same degree



would a given nation act contrary to reason if, in anticipation of



the great advantages to be expected from such a union, and from a



state of universal and perpetual peace, it were to regulate the



principles of its national policy as though this universal



confederation of nations existed already. We ask, would not every



sane person consider a government to be insane which, in



consideration of the benefits and the reasonableness of a state of



universal and perpetual peace, proposed to disband its armies,



destroy its fleet, and demolish its fortresses? But such a



government would be doing nothing different in principle from what



the popular school requires from governments when, because of the



advantages which would be derivable from general free trade, it



urges that they should abandon the advantages derivable from



protection.



    War has a ruinous effect on the reciprocal commercial relations



between nation and nation. The agriculturist living in one country



is by it forcibly separated from the manufacturer living in another



country. While, however, the manufacturer (especially if he belongs



to a nation powerful at sea, and carrying on extensive commerce)



readily finds compensation from the agriculturists of his own



country, or from those of other accessible agricultural countries,



the inhabitant of the purely agricultural country suffers doubly



through this interruption of intercourse.



    The market for his agricultural products will fail him



entirely, and he will consequently lose the means of paying for



those manufactured goods which have become necessaries to him owing



to previously existing trade; his power both of production and



consumption will be diminished.



    If, however, one agricultural nation whose production and



consumption are thus diminished by war has already made



considerable advances in population, civilisation, and agriculture,



manufactures and factories will spring up in it in consequence of



the interruption of international commerce by war. War acts on it



like a prohibitive tariff system. It thereby becomes acquainted



with the great advantages of a manufacturing power of its own, it



becomes convinced by practical experience that it has gained more



than it has lost by the commercial interruptions which war has



occasioned. The conviction gains ground in it, that it is called to



pass from the condition of a mere agricultural State to the



condition of an agricultural-manufacturing State, and in



consequence of this transition, to attain to the highest degree of



prosperity, Civilisation, and power. But if after such a nation has



already made considerable progress in the manufacturing career



which was opened to it by war, peace is again established, and



should both nations then contemplate the resumption of their



previously existing commercial intercourse, they will both find



that during the war new interests have been formed, which would be



destroyed by re-establishing the former commercial interchange.(1*)



The former agricultural nation will feel, that in order to resume



the sale of its agricultural products to the foreigner, it would



have to sacrifice its own manufacturing industry which has in the



meanwhile been created; the manufacturing nation will feel that a



portion of its home agricultural production, which has been formed



during the war, would again be destroyed by free importation. Both,



therefore, try to protect these interests by means of imposing



duties on imports. This is the history of commercial politics



during the last fifty years.



    It is war that has called into existence the more recent



systems of protection; and we do not hesitate to assert, that it



would have been to the interest of the manufacturing nations of the



second and third rank to retain a protective policy and further



develop it, even if England after the conclusion of peace had not



committed the monstrous mistake of imposing restrictions on the



importation of necessaries of life and of raw materials, and



consequently of allowing the motives which had led to the system of



protection in the time of the war, to continue during peace. As an



uncivilised nation, having a barbarous system of agriculture, can



make progress only by commerce with civilised manufacturing



nations, so after it has attained to a certain degree of culture,



in no other way can it reach the highest grade of prosperity,



civilisation, and power, than by possessing a manufacturing



industry of its own. A war which leads to the change of the purely



agricultural State into an agricultural-manufacturing State is



therefore a blessing to a nation, just as the War of Independence



of the United States of North America, in spite of the enormous



sacrifices which it required, has become a blessing to all future



generations. But a peace which throws back into a purely



agricultural condition a nation which is fitted to develop a



manufacturing power of its own, becomes a curse to it, and is



incomparably more injurious to it than a war.



    It is fortunate for the manufacturing powers of the second and



third rank, that England after the restoration of the general peace



has herself imposed a limit to her main tendency (of monopolising



the manufacturing market of the whole earth), by imposing



restrictions on the importation of foreign means of subsistence and



raw materials. Certainly the English agriculturists, who had



enjoyed a monopoly of supplying the English market with products



during the war, would of course have painfully felt the foreign



competition, but that only at first; at a later period (as we will



show more particularly elsewhere), these losses would have been



made up to them tenfold by the fact that England had obtained a



monopoly of manufacturing for the whole world. But it would have



been still more injudicious if the manufacturing nations of the



second and third rank, after their own manufacturing power had just



been called into existence, in consequence of wars lasting for



twenty-five years, and after (in consequence of twenty-five years'



exclusion of their agricultural products from the English market)



that power has been strengthened so far that possibly it only



required another ten or fifteen years of strict protection in order



to sustain successfully free competition with English manufactures



-- if (we say) these nations, after having endured the sacrifices



of half a century, were to give up the immense advantages of



possessing a manufacturing power of their own, and were to descend



once more from the high state of culture, prosperity, and



independence, which is peculiar to agricultural-manufacturing



countries, to the low position of dependent agricultural nations,



merely because it now pleases the English nation to perceive its



error and the closely impending advances of the Continental nations



which enter into competition with it.



    Supposing also that the manufacturing interest of England



should obtain sufficient influence to force the House of Lords,



which chiefly consists of large landed proprietors, and the House



of Commons, composed mostly of country squires, to make concessions



in respect of the importation of agricultural products, who would



guarantee that after a lapse of a few years a new Tory ministry



would not under different circumstances again pass a new Corn Law?



Who can guarantee that a new naval war or a new Continental system



may not separate the agriculturists of the Continent from the



manufacturers of the island kingdom, and compel the Continental



nations to recommence their manufacturing career, and to spend



their best energies in overcoming its primary difficulties, merely



in order, at a later period to sacrifice everything again at the



conclusion of peace.



    In this manner the school would condemn the Continental nations



for ever to be rolling the stone of Sisyphus, for ever to erect



manufactories in time of war in order to allow them to fall to ruin



in time of peace.



    To results so absurd as these the school could never have



arrived had it not (in spite of the name which it gives to the



science which it professes) completely excluded politics from that



science, had it not completely ignored the very existence of



nationality, and left entirely out of consideration the effects of



war on the commercial intercourse between separate nations.



    How utterly different is the relation of the agriculturist to



the manufacturer if both live in one and the same country, and are



consequently really connected with one another by perpetual peace.



Under those circumstances, every extension or improvement of an



already existing manufactory increases the demand for agricultural



products. This demand is no uncertain one; it is not dependent on



foreign commercial regulations or foreign commercial fluctuations,



on foreign political commotions or wars, on foreign inventions and



improvements, or on foreign harvests; the native agriculturist has



not to share it with other nations, it is certain to him every



year. However the crops of other nations may turn out, whatever



misunderstandings may spring up in the political world, he can



depend on the sale of his own produce, and on obtaining the



manufactured goods which he needs at suitable and regular prices.



On the other hand, every improvement of the native agriculture,



every new method of culture, acts as a stimulant on the native



manufacture, because every augmentation of native agricultural



production must result in a proportionate augmentation of native



manufacturing production. Thus, by means of this reciprocal action,



progress is insured for all time to both these main sources of the



nation's strength and support.



    Political power not merely secures to the nation the increase



of its prosperity by foreign commerce and by colonies abroad, it



also secures to it the possession of internal prosperity, and



secures to it its own existence, which is far more important to it



than mere material wealth. England has obtained political power by



means of her navigation laws; and by means of political power she



has been placed in a position to extend her manufacturing power



over other nations. Poland, however, was struck out of the list of



nations because she did not possess a vigorous middle class, which



could only have been called into existence by the establishment of



an internal manufacturing power.



    The school cannot deny that the internal market of a nation is



ten times more important to it than its external one, even where



the latter is in the most flourishing condition; but it has omitted



to draw from this the conclusion, which is very obvious, that it is



ten times more important to cultivate and secure the home market,



than to seek for wealth abroad, and that only in those nations



which have developed their internal industry to a high degree can



foreign commerce attain importance.



    The school has formed its estimate of the nature and character



of the market only from a cosmopolitical, but not from a political



point of view. Most of the maritime countries of the European



continent are situated in the natural market district of the



manufacturers of London, Liverpool, or Manchester; only very few of



the inland manufacturers of other nations can, under free trade,



maintain in their own seaports the same prices as the English



manufacturers. The possession of larger capital, a larger home



market of their own, which enables them to manufacture on a larger



scale and consequently more cheaply, greater progress in



manufacture itself, and finally cheaper sea transport, give at the



present time to the English manufacturers advantages over the



manufacturers of other countries, which can only be gradually



diverted to the native industry of the latter by means of long and



continuous protection of their home market, and through perfection



of their inland means of transport. The market of the inhabitants



of its coasts is, however, of great importance to every nation,



both with reference to the home market, and to foreign commerce;



and a nation the market of whose coasts belongs more to the



foreigner than to itself, is a divided nation not merely in



economical respects, but also in political ones. Indeed, there can



be no more injurious position for a nation, whether in its



economical or political aspect, than if its seaports sympathise



more with the foreigner than with itself.



    Science must not deny the nature of special national



circumstances, nor ignore and misrepresent it, in order to promote



cosmopolitical objects. Those objects can only be attained by



paying regard to nature, and by trying to lead the Separate nations



in accordance with it to a higher aim. We may see what small



success has hitherto attended the doctrines of the school in



practice. This is not so much the fault of practical statesmen, by



whom the character of the national circumstances has been



comprehended tolerably correctly, as the fault of the theories



themselves, the practice of which (inasmuch as they are opposed to



all experience) must necessarily err. Have those theories prevented



nations (like those of South America) from introducing the



protectionist system, which is contrary to the requirements of



their national circumstances? Or have they prevented the extension



of protectionism to the production of provisions and raw materials,



which, however, needs no protection, and in which the restriction



of commercial intercourse must be disadvantageous under all



circumstances to both nations -- to that which imposes, as well as



to that which suffers from such restrictions? Has this theory



prevented the finer manufactured goods, which are essentially



articles of luxury, from being comprehended among objects requiring



protection, while it is nevertheless clear that these can be



exposed to competition without the least danger to the prosperity



of the nation? No; the theory has till now not effected any



thorough reform, and further will never effect any, so long as it



stands opposed to the very nature of things. But it can and must



effect great reforms as soon as it consents to base itself on that



nature.



    It will first of all establish a benefit extending to all



nations, to the prosperity and progress of the whole human race, if



it shows that the prevention of free trade in natural products and



raw materials causes to the nation itself which prevents it the



greatest disadvantage, and that the system of protection can be



justified solely and only for the purpose of the industrial



development of the nation. It may then, by thus basing the system



of protection as regards manufactures on correct principles, induce



nations which at present adopt a rigidly prohibitive system, as



e.g. the French, to give up the prohibitive system by degrees. The



manufacturers will not oppose such a change as soon as they become



convinced that the theorists, very far from planning the ruin of



existing manufactures, consider their preservation and their



further development as the basis of every sensible commercial



policy.



    If the theory will teach the Germans, that they can further



their manufacturing power advantageously only by protective duties



previously fixed, and on a gradually increasing scale at first, but



afterwards gradually diminishing, and that under all circumstances



partial but carefully limited foreign competition is really



beneficial to their own manufacturing progress, it will render far



better service in the end to the cause of free trade than if it



simply helps to strangle German industry.



    The theory must not expect from the United States of North



America that they are to sacrifice to free competition from the



foreigner, those manufactures in which they are protected by cheap



raw materials and provisions, and by machine power. It will,



however, meet no contradiction if it maintains that the United



States, as long as wages are disproportionately higher there than



in the older civilised States, can best promote the development of



their productive powers, their civilisation and political power, by



allowing the free import as much as possible of those manufactured



articles in the cost of which wages are a principal element,



provided that other countries admit their agricultural products and



raw materials.



    The theory of free trade will then find admission into Spain,



Portugal, Naples, Turkey Egypt, and all barbarous and



half-civilised or hot countries. In such countries as these the



foolish idea will not be held any longer, of wanting to establish



(in their present state of culture) a manufacturing power of their



own by means of the system of protection.



    England will then give up the idea that she is designed to



monopolise the manufacturing power of the whole world. She will no



longer require that France, Germany, and North America should



sacrifice their own manufactures in consideration of the concession



by England of permitting the import, duty free, of agricultural



products and raw materials. She will recognise the legitimacy of



protective systems in those nations, although she will herself more



and more favour free trade; the theory having taught her that a



nation which has already attained manufacturing supremacy, can only



protect its own manufacturers and merchants against retrogression



and indolence, by the free importation of means of subsistence and



raw materials, and by the competition of foreign manufactured



goods.



    England will then follow a practice totally opposed to her



present commercial policy, instead of lecturing, as hitherto, other



nations to adopt free trade, whilst herself maintaining the



strictest prohibitory system; she will herself permit competition



without regard to the foreign systems of protection. She will defer



her hopes of the general adoption of free trade, until other



nations have no longer to fear that the ruin of their manufactories



would result from free competition.



    Meanwhile, and until that period has arrived, England will be



able to compensate herself for the losses which she suffers from



foreign systems of protection, in respect of her export trade in



manufactures of every-day use, by a greater export of goods of



finer quality, and by opening, establishing, and cultivating new



markets for her manufactures.



    She will endeavour to bring about peace in Spain, in the East,



and in the states of Central and South America, and will use her



influence in all the barbarous and half-civilised countries of



Central and South America, of Asia and Africa, in order that



powerful and civilised governments may be formed in them, that



security of persons and of property may be introduced into them,



for the construction in them of roads and canals, the promotion of



education and civilisation, morality and industry, and for rooting



out fanaticism, superstition, and idleness. If concurrently with



these endeavours she abolishes her restrictions on the importation



of provisions and raw materials, she will increase her exports of



manufactures immensely, and much more successfully than by



continually speculating on the ruin of the Continental



manufactories.



    If, however, these operations of civilisation on the part of



England are to be successful as respects barbarous and



half-civilised nations, she must not act in an exclusive manner,



she must not endeavour by special commercial privileges, such as,



for instance, she has managed to procure in Brazil, to monopolise



these markets, and to shut out other nations from them. Such a



policy as the latter will always excite the just jealousy of other



nations, and give them a motive for opposing the exertions of



England. It is evident that this selfish policy is the cause why



the influence of the civilised powers on the civilisation of such



countries as we have specified has been hitherto so unimportant.



England ought therefore to introduce into the law of nations the



maxim: that in all such countries the commerce of all manufacturing



nations should have equal rights. England would thereby not merely



secure the aid of all civilised powers in her own work of



civilisation, but also no disadvantage would result to her own



commerce if similar experiments of civilisation were undertaken by



other manufacturing nations. On account of their superiority in all



branches of manufacture and commerce, the English would everywhere



always obtain the greatest share of the exports to such markets.



    The striving and ceaseless intrigues of the English against the



manufactures of other nations might still be justified, if a



world-manufacturing monopoly were indispensable for the prosperity



of England, if it could not be proved by evidence that the nations



which aspire, after the example of England, to attain to a large



manufacturing power can very well attain their object without the



humiliation of England; that England need not become poorer than



she is because others become richer; and that nature offers



sufficient means for the creation in Germany, France, and North



America (without detriment to the prosperity of England), of a



manufacturing power equal to that of the English.



    With regard to this, it must further be remarked, that every



nation which gains entire possession of its own home market for



manufactures, gains in the course of time, by its home production



and consumption of manufactured goods, infinitely more than the



nation which has hitherto provided the former with manufactured



goods loses by being excluded; because a nation which manufactures



for itself, and which is perfectly developed in its economical



conditions, becomes more than proportionately richer and more



populous, consequently is enabled to consume infinitely more



fabrics, than it could import while depending on a foreign



manufacturing nation for its supply.



    As respects the exportation of manufactured goods, however, the



countries of the temperate zone (being specially fitted By nature



for manufacturing) have a special field for their efforts in



supplying the consumption of the countries of the torrid zone,



which latter provide the former with colonial produce in exchange



for their manufactured goods. The consumption of manufactured goods



by the countries of the torrid zone, however, is partly determined



by their ability to produce a surplus of the articles peculiar to



their climate, and partly according to the proportion in which the



countries of the temperate zone augment their demand for the



products of the torrid zone.



    If it can now be proved, that in the course of time the



countries of the torrid zone can produce sugar, rice, cotton,



coffee, &c. to an extent five or ten times greater than hitherto,



and that the countries of the temperate zone can consume five or



ten times more of these articles than hitherto, it will be



simultaneously proved that the countries of the temperate zone can



increase their exportation of manufactured goods to the countries



of the torrid zone by from five to ten times their present total



quantity.



    The capability of the Continental nations to increase their



consumption of colonial produce thus considerably, is indicated by



the increase of consumption in England for the last fifty years; in



reference to which it must further be borne in mind, that that



increase would probably have become very much greater still were it



not for the excessive taxes on consumption.



    Of the possibility of augmenting the productions of the torrid



zone, Holland in Sumatra and Java, and England in the East Indies,



have given us during the last five years irrefragable proofs.



England has quadrupled her importation of sugar from the East



Indies from 1835 to 1839; her importation of coffee has increased



even in a still larger proportion, while the importation of East



India cotton is also greatly increasing. In one word, the latest



English papers (February, 1840) announced with great rejoicing that



the capability of the East Indies for the production of these



articles is unlimited, and that the time is not far distant when



England will make herself independent of the importation of these



articles from America and the West Indies. Holland on her part is



already embarrassed for means of sale of her colonial products, and



seeks actively for new markets. Let us further remember that North



America continues to augment her cotton production -- that in Texas



a State has risen up which without doubt will become possessed of



the whole of Mexico, and will make out of that fertile country a



territory such as the Southern States of the North American Union



now are. We may well imagine that order and law, industry and



intelligence, will extend themselves gradually over the South



American States from Panama to Cape Horn, then over the whole of



Africa and Asia, and augment everywhere production and a surplus of



products; and we may then comprehend without difficulty that here



there is room enough for more than one nation for the sale of



manufactured goods.



    By calculating the area of the land which has up to this time



been actually used for the production of colonial produce, and



comparing it with the entire area which is fitted By nature for



such production, we shall find that at present scarcely the



fiftieth part of the land fitted for this production is actually



used.



    How, then, could England be able to monopolise the



manufacturing markets of all countries which yield colonial



produce, if she is able to supply her own entire requirements of



such produce by means of importation from the East Indies alone?



How can England indulge the hope of selling manufactured goods to



countries whose colonial products she cannot take in exchange? Or



how can a great demand for colonial produce spring up in the



continent of Europe, if the Continent is not enabled by its



manufacturing production to pay for, and thus to consume, these



goods?



    It is therefore evident, that keeping down the manufacturing



industry of the Continent, though it certainly hinders the progress



of the Continental nations, does not in the least further the



prosperity of England.



    It is further clear, that, at present, as well as for some long



time to come, the countries of the torrid zone will offer to all



nations which are fitted for manufacturing production abundant



materials for exchange.



    Lastly, it is evident that a world-manufacturing monopoly such



as is at present established by the free competition of English



manufactured goods on the European and American continents is not



in the least more conducive to the welfare of the human race than



the system of protection, which aims at developing the



manufacturing power of the whole temperate zone, for the benefit of



the agriculture of the whole torrid zone.



    The advance which England has made in manufactures, navigation,



and commerce, need therefore not discourage any other nation which



is fitted for manufacturing production, by the possession of



suitable territory, of national power and intelligence, from



entering into the lists with England's manufacturing supremacy. A



future is approaching for manufactures, commerce, and navigation



which will surpass the present as much as the present surpasses the



past. Let us only have the courage to believe in a great national



future, and in that belief to march onward. But above all things we



must have enough national spirit at once to plant and protect the



tree, which will yield its first richest fruits only to future



generations. We must first gain possession of the home market of



our own nation, at least as respects articles of general necessity,



and try to procure the products of tropical countries direct from



those countries which allow us to pay for them with our own



manufactured goods. This is especially the task which the German



commercial union has to solve, if the German nation is not to



remain far behind the French and North Americans, nay, far behind



even the Russians.







NOTES:











1. Vide Wealth of Nations, Book IV. chap. ii. (TR.)







Chapter 16







Popular and State Financial Administration, Political and National



Economy







    That which has reference to the raising, the expending, and the



administration of the material means of government of a community



(the financial economy of the State), must necessarily be



distinguished everywhere from those institutions, regulations,



laws, and conditions on which the economy of the individual



subjects of a State is dependent, and by which it is regulated;



i.e. from the economy of the people. The necessity for this



distinction is apparent in reference to all political communities,



whether these comprise a whole nation or merely fractions of a



nation, and whether they are small or large.



    In a confederated State, the financial economy of the State is



again divided into the financial economy of the separate states and



the financial economy of the entire union.



    The economy of the people becomes identical with national



economy where the State or the confederated State embraces a whole



nation fitted for independence by the number of its population, the



extent of its territory, by its political institutions,



civilisation, wealth, and power, and thus fitted for stability and



political influence. The economy of the people and national economy



are, under these circumstances, one and the same. They constitute



with the financial economy of the State the political economy of



the nation.



    But, on the other hand, in States whose population and



territory merely consist of the fraction of a nation or of a



national territory, which neither by complete and direct union, nor



by means of a federal union with other fractions, constitutes a



whole, we can only take into consideration an 'economy of the



people' which is directly opposed to 'private economy' or to



'financial economy of the State.'



    In such an imperfect political condition, the objects and



requirements of a great nationality cannot be taken into



consideration; especially is it impossible to regulate the economy



of the people with reference to the development of a nation



complete in itself, and with a view to its independence,



permanence, and power. Here politics must necessarily remain



excluded from economy, here can one only take account of the



natural laws of social economy, as these would develop and shape



themselves if no large united nationality or national economy



existed anywhere.



    It is from this standpoint that that science has been



cultivated in Germany which was formerly called 'State



administration,' then 'national economy,' then 'political economy,'



then 'popular administration,' without anyone having clearly



apprehended the fundamental error of these systems.



    The true conception and real character of national economy



could not be recognised because no economically united nation was



in existence, and because for the distinct and definite term



'nation' men had everywhere substituted the general and vague term



'society', an idea which is as applicable to entire humanity, or to



a small country, or to a single town, as to the nation.







Chapter 17







The Manufacturing Power and the Personal, Social, and Political



Productive Powers of the Nation







    In a country devoted to mere raw agriculture, dullness of mind,



awkwardness of body, obstinate adherence to old notions, customs,



methods, and processes, want of culture, of prosperity, and of



liberty prevail. The spirit of striving for a steady increase in



mental and bodily acquirements, of emulation, and of liberty,



characterise, on the contrary, a State devoted to manufactures and



commerce.



    The cause of this difference lies partly in the different kind



of social habits and of education which respectively characterise



these two classes of people, partly in the different character of



their occupation and in the things which are requisite for it. The



agricultural population lives dispersed over the whole surface of



the country; and also, in respect to mental and material



intercourse, agriculturists are widely separated from one another.



One agriculturist does almost precisely what the other does; the



one produces, as a rule, what the other produces. The surplus



produce and the requirements of all are almost alike; everybody is



himself the best consumer of his own products; here, therefore,



little inducement exists for mental intercourse or material



exchange. The agriculturist has to deal less with his fellow-men



than with inanimate nature. Accustomed to reap only after a long



lapse of time where he has sown, and to leave the success of his



exertions to the will of a higher power, contentment with little,



patience, resignation, but also negligence and mental laziness,



become to him a second nature. As his occupation keeps him apart



from intercourse with his fellow-men, so also does the conduct of



his ordinary business require but little mental exertion and bodily



skill on his part. He learns it by imitation in the narrow circle



of the family in which he was born, and the idea that it might be



conducted differently and better seldom occurs to him. From the



cradle to the grave he moves always in the same limited circle of



men and of circumstances. Examples of special prosperity in



consequence of extraordinary mental and bodily exertions are seldom



brought before his eyes. The possession of means or a state of



poverty are transmitted by inheritance in the occupation of mere



agriculture from generation to generation, and almost all that



power which originates in emulation lies dead.



    The nature of manufactures is fundamentally different from that



of agriculture. Drawn towards one another by their business,



manufacturers live only in society, and consequently only in



commercial intercourse and by means of that intercourse. The



manufacturer procures from the market all that he requires of the



necessaries of life and raw materials, and only the smallest part



of his own products is destined for his own consumption. If the



agriculturist expects a blessing on his exertions chiefly from



nature, the prosperity and existence of the manufacturer mainly



depend on his commercial intercourse. While the agriculturist does



not know the purchasers of his produce, or at any rate need have



little anxiety as to disposing of it, the very existence of the



manufacturer depends on his customers. The prices of raw materials,



of the necessaries of life and wages, of goods and of money, vary



incessantly; the manufacturer is never certain how his profits will



turn out. The favour of nature and mere ordinary industry do not



guarantee to him existence and prosperity as they do to the



agriculturist; both these depend entirely upon his own intelligence



and activity. He must strive to gain more than enough in order to



be certain of having enough of what is absolutely necessary; he



must endeavour to become rich in order not to be reduced to



poverty. If he goes on somewhat faster than others, he thrives; if



he goes slower, he is certain of ruin. He must always buy and sell,



exchange and make bargains. Everywhere he has to deal with men,



with changing circumstances, with laws and regulations; he has a



hundred times more opportunity for developing his mind than the



agriculturist. In order to qualify himself for conducting his



business, he must become acquainted with foreign men and foreign



countries; in order to establish that business, he must make



unusual efforts, While the agriculturist simply has to do with his



own neighbourhood, the trade of the manufacturer extends itself



over all countries and parts of the world. The desire to gain the



respect of his fellow-citizens or to retain it, and the continual



competition of his rivals, which perpetually threaten his existence



and prosperity, are to him a sharp stimulus to uninterrupted



activity, to ceaseless progress. Thousands of examples prove to



him, that by extraordinary performances and exertions it is



possible for a man to raise himself from the lowest degree of



well-being and position to the highest social rank, but that, on



the other hand, by mental inactivity and negligence, he can sink



from the most respectable to the meanest position. These



circumstances produce in the manufacturer an energy which is not



observable in the mere agriculturist.



    If we regard manufacturing occupations as a whole, it must be



evident at the first glance that they develop and bring into action



an incomparably greater variety and higher type of mental qualities



and abilities than agriculture does. Adam Smith certainly expressed



one of those paradoxical opinions which (according to Dugald



Stewart, his biographer) he was very fond of, when he maintained



that agriculture requires more skill than manufactures and



commerce. Without entering into the investigation whether the



construction of a clock requires more skill than the management of



a farm, we have merely to observe that all agricultural occupations



are of the same kind, while in manufactures a thousand fold variety



exists. It must also not be forgotten, that for the purpose of the



present comparison, agriculture must be regarded as it exists in



the primitive state, and not as it has been improved by the



influence of manufactures. If the condition of English



agriculturists appeared to Adam Smith much nobler than the



condition of English manufacturers, he had forgotten that the



condition of the former has been thus ennobled through the



influence of manufactures and commerce.



    It is evident that by agriculture merely personal qualities of



the same kind are put into requisition, and merely those which



combine bodily power and perseverance in executing raw and manual



labour with the simple idea of order; while manufactures require a



thousand fold variety of mental ability skill, and experience. The



demand for such a variety of talents makes it easy for every



individual in a manufacturing State to find an occupation and



vocation corresponding with his individual abilities and taste,



while in an agricultural State but little choice exists. In the



former mental gifts are infinitely more prized than in the latter,



where as a rule the usefulness of a man is determined according to



his bodily strength. The labour of the weak and the cripple in the



former is not unfrequently valued at a much higher rate than that



of the strongest man is in the latter. Every power, even the



smallest, that of children and women, of cripples and old men,



finds in manufactures employment and remuneration.



    Manufactures are at once the offspring, and at the same time



the supporters and the nurses, of science and the arts. We may



observe how little the condition of raw agriculture puts sciences



and arts into requisition, how little of either is necessary to



prepare the rude implements which it employs. It is true that



agriculture at first had, by yielding rents of land, made it



possible for men to devote themselves to science and art; but



without manufactures they have always remained private treasures,



and have only extended their beneficial effects in a very slight



degree to the masses. In the manufacturing State the industry of



the masses is enlightened by science, and the sciences and arts are



supported by the industry of the masses. There scarcely exists a



manufacturing business which has not relations to physics,



mechanics, chemistry, mathematics, or to the art of design, &c. No



progress, no new discoveries and inventions, can be made in these



sciences by which a hundred industries and processes could not be



improved or altered. In the manufacturing State, therefore,



sciences and arts must necessarily become popular. The necessity



for education and instruction, through writings and lectures by a



number of persons who have to bring into practice the results of



scientific investigations, induces men of special talents to devote



themselves to instruction and authorship. The competition of such



talents, owing to the large demand for their efforts, creates both



a division and co-operation of scientific activity, which has a



most beneficial influence not merely on the further progress of



science itself, but also on the further perfection of the arts and



of industries. The effects of these improvements are soon



afterwards extended even to agriculture. Nowhere can more perfect



agricultural machines and implements be found, nowhere is



agriculture carried on with so much intelligence, as in countries



where industry flourishes. Under the influence of manufactures,



agriculture itself is raised to a skilled industry, an art, a



science.



    The sciences and industry in combination have produced that



great material power which in the new state of society has replaced



with tenfold benefits the slave labour of ancient times, and which



is destined to exercise on the condition of the masses, on the



civilisation of barbarous countries, on the peopling of uninhabited



lands, and on the power of the nations of primitive culture, such



an immeasurable influence-namely, the power of machinery.



    A manufacturing nation has a hundred times more opportunities



of applying the power of machinery than an agricultural nation. A



cripple can accomplish by directing a steam engine a hundred times



more than the strongest man can with his mere hand.



    The power of machinery, combined with the perfection of



transport facilities in modern times, affords to the manufacturing



State an immense superiority over the mere agricultural State. It



is evident that canals, railways, and steam navigation are called



into existence only by means of the manufacturing power, and can



only by means of it be extended over the whole surface of the



country. In the mere agricultural State, where everybody produces



for himself the greater part of what he requires, and consumes



himself the greater part of what he produces, where the individuals



among themselves can only carry on a small amount of goods and



passenger traffic, it is impossible that a sufficiently large



traffic in either goods or passengers can take place to defray the



costs of the erection and maintenance of the machinery of



transport.



    New inventions and improvements in the mere agricultural State



are of but little value. Those who occupy themselves with such



things in such a State fall themselves, as a rule, a sacrifice to



their investigations and endeavours, while in the manufacturing



State there is no path which leads more rapidly to wealth and



position than that of invention and discovery. Thus, in the



manufacturing State genius is valued and rewarded more highly than



skill, and skill more highly than mere physical force. In the



agricultural State, however, excepting in the public service, the



reverse is almost the rule.



    As, however, manufactures operate beneficially on the



development of the mental powers of the nation, so also do they act



on the development of the physical power of labour, by affording to



the labourers means of enjoyment, inducements to exert their



powers, and opportunities for making use of them. It is an



undisputed observation, that in flourishing manufacturing States



the workman, irrespective of the aid which he obtains from better



machinery and tools, accomplishes a far larger day's work than in



mere agricultural countries.



    Moreover, the circumstance that in manufacturing States the



value of time is recognised much more than in agricultural States,



affords proof of the higher standing in the former of the power of



labour. The degree of civilisation of a nation and the value of its



labour power cannot be estimated more accurately than according to



the degree of the value which it attributes to time. The savage



lies for days idle in his hut. How can the shepherd learn to



estimate the value of time, to whom time is simply a burden which



his pastoral pipe or sleep alone makes tolerable to him? How can a



slave, a serf, a peasant, subject to tributes of forced labour,



learn to value time, he to whom labour is penalty, and idleness



gain? Nations only arrive at the recognition of the value of time



through industry. At present time gained brings gain of profit;



loss of time, loss of profit. The zeal of the manufacturer to



utilise his time in the highest possible degree imparts itself to



the agriculturist. Through the increased demand for agricultural



products caused by manufactures, the rent and therefore the value



of land is raised, larger capital is employed in cultivating it,



profits are increased, a larger produce must be obtained from the



soil in order to be able to provide for the increased rent and



interest of capital, and for the increased consumption. One is in



a position to offer higher wages, but one also requires more work



to be done. The workman begins to feel that he possesses in his



bodily powers, and in the skill with which he uses them, the means



of improving his condition. He begins to comprehend why the



Englishman says, 'Time is money.'



    Owing to the isolation in which the agriculturist lives, and to



his limited education, he is but little capable of adding anything



to general civilisation or learning to estimate the value of



political institutions, and much less still to take an active part



in the administration of public affairs and of justice, or to



defend his liberty and rights. Hence he is mostly in a state of



dependence on the landed proprietor. Everywhere merely agricultural



nations have lived in slavery, or oppressed by despotism,



feudalism, or priestcraft. The mere exclusive possession of the



soil gave the despot, the oligarchy, or the priestly caste a power



over the mass of the agricultural population, of which the latter



could not rid themselves of their own accord.



    Under the powerful influence of habit, everywhere among merely



agricultural nations has the yoke which brute force or superstition



and priestcraft imposed upon them so grown into their very flesh,



that they come to regard it as a necessary constituent of their own



body, as a condition of their very existence.



    On the other hand, the separation and variety of the operations



of business, and the confederation of the productive powers, press



with irresistible force the various manufacturers towards one



another. Friction produces sparks of the mind, as well as those of



natural fire. Mental friction, however, only exists where people



live together closely, where frequent contact in commercial,



scientific, social, civil, and political matters exists, where



there is large interchange both of goods and ideas. The more men



live together in one and the same place, the more every One of



these men depends in his business on the co-operation of all



others, the more the business of every one of these individuals



requires knowledge, circumspection, education, and the less that



obstinacy, lawlessness, oppression and arrogant opposition to



justice interfere with the exertions of all these individuals and



with the objects at which they aim, so much the more perfect will



the civil institutions be found, so much larger will be the degree



of liberty enjoyed, so much more opportunity will be given for



self-improvement and for co-operation in the improvement of others.



Therefore liberty and civilisation have everywhere and at all times



emanated from towns; in ancient times in Greece and Italy; in the



Middle Ages in Italy, Germany, belgium, and Holland; later on in



England, and still more recently in North America and France.



    But there are two kinds of towns, one of which we may term the



productive, the other the consuming kind. There are towns which



work up raw materials, and pay the country districts for these, as



well as for the means of subsistence which they require, by means



of manufactured goods. These are the manufacturing towns, the



productive ones. The more that these prosper, the more the



agriculture of the country prospers, and the more powers that



agriculture unfolds, so much the greater do those manufacturing



towns become. But there are also towns where those live who simply



consume the rents of the land. In all countries which are civilised



to some extent, a large portion of the national income is consumed



as rent in the towns. It would be false, however, were we to



maintain as a general principle that this consumption is injurious



to production, or does not tend to promote it. For the possibility



of securing to oneself an independent life by the acquisition of



rents, is a powerful stimulus to economy and to the utilisation of



savings in agriculture and in agricultural improvements. Moreover



the man who lives on rents, stimulated by the inclination to



distinguish himself before his fellow-citizens, supported by his



education and his independent position, will promote civilisation,



the efficiency of public institutions, of State administration,



science and art. But the degree in which rent influences in this



manner the industry, prosperity, and civilisation of the nation



will always depend on the degree of liberty which that nation has



already obtained. That inclination to become useful to the



commonwealth by voluntary activity, and to distinguish oneself



before one's fellow-citizens, will only develop itself in countries



where this activity leads to public recognition, to public esteem,



and to offices of honour, but not in countries where every attempt



to gain public esteem and every manifestation of independence is



regarded by the ruling power with a jealous eye. In such countries



the man of independent income will give himself up to debauchery



and idleness, and because in this manner he brings useful industry



into contempt, and injures the morality as well as the industrious



impulse of the nation, he will radically imperil the nation's



productive power. Even if under such conditions the manufactures of



towns are to some extent promoted by the consumption of the



rentier, such manufactures are nevertheless to be regarded as



barren and unsound fruits, and especially they will aid very little



in promoting the civilisation, prosperity, and liberty of the



nation. Inasmuch as a sound manufacturing industry especially tends



to produce liberty and civilisation, it may also be said that



through it rent itself is redeemed from forming a fund for



idleness, debauchery, and immorality, and is converted into a fund



for promoting mental culture, and consequently that through it the



merely consuming towns are changed into productive towns. Another



element by which the consuming towns are supported is, the



consumption of the public servants and of the State administration.



These also may occasion some apparent prosperity in a town; but



whether such consumption especially promotes or is injurious to the



productive power, prosperity and institutions of the nation,



depends altogether on the question how far the functions of the



consumers tend to promote or to injure those powers.



    From this the reason is evident why in mere agricultural States



large towns can exist, which, although they contain a large number



of wealthy inhabitants and manifold trades, exercise only a very



inconsiderable influence on the civilisation, liberty, and



productive power of the nation. The persons engaged in those trades



necessarily participate in the views of their customers; they are



to be regarded in a great measure as mere domestic servants of the



rentiers and public employees. In contrast to great luxury in those



towns, poverty, misery, narrow-mindedness, and a slavish



disposition are found among the inhabitants of the surrounding



country districts. A prosperous effect of manufactures on the



civilisation, the improvement of public institutions, and the



liberty of the nation, is only perceptible if in a country a



manufacturing power is established which, quite independently of



the rentiers and public servants, works for the large mass of the



agricultural population or for export trade, and consumes the



products of that population in large quantities for working up in



manufacture and for subsistence. The more such a sound and healthy



manufacturing power increases in strength, the more will it draw to



its side the manufacturing power which originated in the



consumption above named, and also the rentiers and public servants,



and the more also will the public institutions be regulated with a



view to the interest of the commonwealth.



    Let us consider the condition of a large town in which the



manufacturers are numerous, independent, lovers of liberty,



educated, and wealthy where the merchants participate in their



interests and position, where the rentiers feel themselves



compelled to gain the respect of the public, where the public



servants are subject to the control of public opinion, where the



men of science and art work for the public at large, and draw from



it their means of subsistence; let us consider the mass of mental



and material means which are combined together in such a narrow



space, and further how closely this mass of power is united through



the law of the division of the operations of business and the



confederation of powers; we may note again how quickly every



improvement, every progress in public institutions, and in social



and economical conditions, on the one hand, and how, on the other



hand, every retrogression, every injury of the public interests,



must be felt by this mass; then, again, how easily this mass,



living in one and the same place, can come to an agreement as to



their common objects and regulations, and what enormous means it



can concentrate on the spot for these purposes; and finally, in



what a close union a community so powerful, enlightened, and



liberty-loving, stands in relation to other similar communities in



the same nation -- if we duly consider all these things, we shall



easily be convinced that the influence on the maintenance and



improvement of the public welfare exercised by an agricultural



population living dispersed over the whole surface of the country



(however large its aggregate number may be) will be but slight in



comparison with that of towns, whose whole power (as we have shown)



depends upon the prosperity of their manufactures and of those



trades which are allied to and dependent on them.



    The predominating influence of the towns on the political and



municipal conditions of the nation, far from being disadvantageous



to the rural population, is of inestimable advantage to it. The



advantages which the towns enjoy make them feel it a duty to raise



the agriculturists to the enjoyment of similar liberty,



cultivation, and prosperity; for the larger the sum of these



mental; and social advantages is among the rural population, the



larger will be the amount of the provisions and raw materials which



they send into the towns, the greater also will be the quantity of



the manufactured goods which they purchase from the towns, and



consequently the prosperity of the towns. The country derives



energy, civilisation, liberty, and good institutions from the



towns, but the towns insure to themselves the possession of liberty



and good institutions by raising the country people to be partakers



of these acquisitions. Agriculture, which hitherto merely supported



landowners and their servants, now furnishes the commonwealth with



the most independent and sturdy defenders of its liberty. In the



culture of the soil, also, every class is now able to improve its



position. The labourer can raise himself to become a farmer, the



farmer to become a landed proprietor. The capital and the means of



transport which industry creates and establishes now give



prosperity to agriculture everywhere. Serfdom, feudal burdens, laws



and regulations which injure industry and liberty disappear. The



landed proprietor will now derive a hundred times more income from



his forest possessions than from his hunting. Those who formerly



from the miserable produce of serf labour scarcely obtained the



means of leading a rude country life, whose sole pleasure consisted



in the keeping of horses and dogs and chasing game, who therefore



resented every infringement of these pleasures as a crime against



their dignity as lords of the soil, are now enabled by the



augmentation of their rents (the produce of free labour) to spend



a portion of the year in the towns. There, through the drama and



music, through art and reading, their manners are softened; they



learn by intercourse with artists and learned men to esteem mind



and talents. From mere Nimrods they become cultivated men. The



aspect of an industrious community, in which everybody is striving



to improve his condition, awakens in them also the spirit of



improvement. They pursue instruction and new ideas instead of stags



and hares. Returning to the country, they offer to the middle and



small farmer examples worthy of imitation, and they gain his



respect instead of his curse.



    The more industry and agriculture flourish, the less can the



human mind be held in chains, and the more are we compelled to give



way to the spirit of toleration, and to put real morality and



religious influence in the place of compulsion of conscience.



Everywhere has industry given birth to tolerance; everywhere has it



converted the priests into teachers of the people and into learned



men. Everywhere have the cultivation of national language and



literature, have the civilising arts, and the perfection of



municipal institutions kept equal pace with the development of



manufactures and commerce. It is from manufactures that the



nation's capability originates of carrying on foreign trade with



less civilised nations, of increasing its mercantile marine, of



establishing a naval power, and by founding colonies, of utilising



its surplus population for the further augmentation of the national



prosperity and the national power.



    Comparative statistics show that by the complete and relatively



equal cultivation of manufactures and agriculture in a nation



endowed with a sufficiently large and fertile territory, a



population twice or three times as large can be maintained, and



maintained, moreover, in a far higher degree of well-being than in



a country devoted exclusively to agriculture. From this it follows



that all the mental powers of a nation, its State revenues, its



material and mental means of defence, and its security for national



independence, are increased in equal proportion by establishing in



it a manufacturing power.



    At a time where technical and mechanical science exercise such



immense influence on the methods of warfare, where all warlike



operations depend so much on the condition of the national revenue,



where successful defence greatly depends on the questions, whether



the mass of the nation is rich or poor, intelligent or stupid,



energetic or sunk in apathy; whether its sympathies are given



exclusively to the fatherland or partly to foreign countries;



whether it can muster many or but few defenders of the country --



at such a time, more than ever before, must the value of



manufactures be estimated from a political point of view.







Chapter 18







The Manufacturing Power and the Natural Productive Powers of the



Nation.







    The more that man and the community perfect themselves, the



more are they enabled to make use of the natural powers which are



within their reach for the accomplishment of their objects, and the



more does the sphere of what is within their reach extend itself.



    The hunter does not employ the thousandth part, the shepherd



not the hundredth part, of those natural advantages which surround



him. The sea, foreign climates and countries, yield him either



none, or at least only an inconsiderable amount of enjoyment,



assistance, or stimulants to exertion.



    In the case of a people in a primitive agricultural condition,



a large portion of the existing natural resources lies yet



unutilised, and man still continues limited to his nearest



surroundings. The greater part of the water power and wind power



which exists, or can be obtained, is unemployed; the various



mineral products which the manufacturers so well understand how to



utilise profitably, lie dead; various sorts of fuel are wasted or



regarded (as, for instance, peat turf) as a mere hindrance to



cultivation; stone, sand, and lime are used but little as building



materials; the rivers, instead of being means of freight and



transport for man, or of fertilising the neighbouring fields, are



allowed to devastate the country by floods; warmer climates and the



sea yield to the agricultural country but few of their products.



    In fact, in the agricultural State, that power of nature on



which production especially depends, the natural fertility of the



soil, can only be utilised to a smaller extent so long as



agriculture is not supported by manufacturing industry.



    Every district in the agricultural State must itself produce as



much of the things necessary to it as it requires to use, for it



can neither effect considerable sales of that which it has in



excess to other districts, nor procure that which it requires from



other districts. A district may be ever so fertile and adapted for



the culture of plants yielding oil, dyeing materials, and fodder,



yet it must plant forests for fuel, because to procure fuel from



distant mountain districts, over wretched country roads, would be



too expensive. Land which if utilised for the cultivation of the



vine and for garden produce could be made to yield three to four



times more returns must be used for cultivating corn and fodder. He



who could most profitably devote himself solely to the breeding of



cattle must also fatten them: on the other hand, he who could most



profitably devote himself merely to fattening stock, must also



carry on cattle breeding. How advantageous it would be to make use



of mineral manures (gypsum, lime, marl), or to burn peat, coal, &c.



instead of wood, and to bring the forest lands under cultivation;



but in such a State there exists no means of transport by means of



which these articles can be conveyed with advantage for more than



very short distances. What rich returns would the meadows in the



valleys yield, if irrigation works on a large scale were



established -- the rivers now merely serve to wash down and carry



away the fertile soil.



    Through the establishment of manufacturing power in an



agricultural State, roads are made, railways constructed, canals



excavated, rivers rendered navigable, and lines of steamers



established. By these not merely is the surplus produce of the



agricultural land converted into machinery for yielding income, not



merely are the powers of labour of those who are employed by it



brought into activity, not only is the agricultural population



enabled to obtain from the natural resources which it possesses an



infinitely greater return than before, but all minerals, all



metals, which heretofore were lying idle in the earth are now



rendered useful and valuable. Articles which could formerly only



bear a freight of a few miles, such as salt, coals, stone, marble,



slate, gypsum, lime, timber, bark, &c., can now be distributed over



the surface of an entire kingdom. Hence such articles, formerly



quite valueless, can now assume a degree of importance in the



statistical returns of the national produce, which far surpasses



the total of the entire agricultural production in previous times.



Not a cubic foot of water-fall will then exist which is not made to



perform some service; even in the most distant districts of a



manufacturing country, timber and fuel will now become valuable, of



which previously no one knew how to make any use.



    Through the introduction of manufactures, a demand for a



quantity of articles of food and raw materials is created, to the



production of which certain districts can be far more profitably



devoted than to the growth of corn (the usual staple article of



rude agricultural countries). The demand which now springs up for



milk, butter, and meat adds a higher value to the existing pasture



land, and leads to the breaking up of fallows and the erection of



works of irrigation. The demand for fruit and garden produce



converts the former bare agricultural land into vegetable gardens



and orchards.



    The loss which the mere agricultural State sustains by not



making use of these natural powers, is so much the greater the more



it is fitted by nature for carrying on manufactures, and the more



its territory is adapted for the production of raw materials and



natural powers which manufacturers specially require; that loss



will therefore be the greatest in mountainous and hilly countries



less suitable for agriculture on the whole, but which offer to



manufactures plenty of water power, of minerals, timber, and stone,



and to the farmer the opportunity of cultivating the products which



are specially required by the manufacturer.



    Countries with a temperate climate are (almost without



exception) adapted for factories and manufacturing industry. The



moderate temperature of the air promotes the development and



exertion of power far more than a hot temperature. But the severe



season of the year, which appears to the superficial observer as an



unfavourable effect of nature, is the most powerful promoter of



habits of energetic activity, of forethought, order, and economy.



A man who has the prospect before him of six months in which he is



not merely unable to obtain any fruits from the earth, but also



requires special provisions and clothing materials for the



sustenance of himself and his cattle, and for protection against



the effects of cold, must necessarily become far more industrious



and economical than the one who merely requires protection from the



rain, and into whose mouth the fruits are ready to drop during the



whole year. Diligence, economy, order, and forethought are at first



produced by necessity afterwards by habit, and by the steady



cultivation of those virtues. Morality goes hand in hand with the



exertion of one's powers and economy, and immorality with idleness



and extravagance: each are reciprocally fertile sources, the one of



power, the other of weakness.



    An agricultural nation, which inhabits a country of temperate



climate, leaves therefore the richest part of its natural resources



unutilised.



    The school, inasmuch as, in judging the influences of climate



on the production of wealth, it has not distinguished between



agriculture and manufacturing industry, has fallen into the gravest



errors in respect to the advantages and disadvantages of protective



regulations, which we cannot here omit thoroughly to expose,



although we have already made mention of them in general terms



elsewhere.



    In order to prove that it is foolish to seek to produce



everything in one and the same country, the school asks the



question: whether it would be reasonable if we sought to produce



wine by growing grapes in Scottish and English greenhouses? It is



of course possible to produce wine in this manner, only lt would be



of much worse quality and more expensive than that which England



and Scotland could procure in exchange for their manufactured



goods. To anyone who either is unwilling or unable to penetrate



more deeply into the nature of things, this argument is a striking



one, and the school is indebted to it for a large portion of its



popularity; at any rate among the French vine growers and silk



manufacturers, and among the North American cotton planters and



cotton merchants. Regarded in the light of day, however, it is



fundamentally false, since restrictions on commercial intercourse



operate quite differently on the productive power of agriculture



than they do on the productive power of manufacturing industry.



    Let us first see how they operate on agriculture.



    If France rejects from her frontiers German fat cattle, or



corn, what will she effect thereby? In the first place, Germany



will thereby be unable to buy French wines. France will therefore



have to use those portions of her soil which are fitted for the



cultivation of the vine less profitably in proportion as this



destruction of commercial interchange lessens her exportation of



wines. So many fewer persons will be exclusively occupied with the



cultivation of the vine, and therefore so much less native



agricultural products will be required, which these persons would



have consumed, who would have otherwise devoted themselves



exclusively to vine culture. This will be the case in the



production of oil as well as in that of wine. France will therefore



always lose in her agricultural power on other points much more



than she gains on one single point, because by her exclusion of the



German cattle she protects a trade in the rearing and fattening of



cattle which had not been spontaneously developed, and for which,



therefore, probably the agriculture of those districts where this



branch of industry has had to be artificially developed is not



adapted. Thus will it be if we consider France merely as an



agricultural State opposed to Germany as a merely agricultural



State, and if we also assume that Germany will not retaliate on



that policy by a similar one. This policy, however, appears still



more injurious if we assume that Germany, as she will be compelled



to out of regard to her own interests, adopts similarly restrictive



measures, and if we consider that France is not merely an



agricultural, but also a manufacturing State. Germany will, namely,



not merely impose higher duties on French wines, but on all those



French products which Germany either produces herself, or can more



or less do without, or procure elsewhere; she will further restrict



the importation of those manufactured goods which she cannot at



present produce with special benefit, but which she can procure



from other places than from France. The disadvantage which France



has brought upon herself by those restrictions, thus appears twice



or three times greater than the advantage. It is evident that in



France only so many persons can be employed in the cultivation of



the vine, in the cultivation of olives, and in manufacturing



industry, as the means of subsistence, and raw materials which



France either produces herself or procures from abroad, are able to



support and employ. But we have seen that the restriction of



importation has not increased the agricultural production, but has



merely transferred it from one district to another. If free course



had been permitted to the interchange of products, the importation



of products and raw materials, and consequently the sale of wine,



oil, and manufactured goods, would have continually increased, and



consequently the number of persons employed in the cultivation of



the vine and olives, and in manufactures; while with the increasing



traffic, on the one hand, the means of subsistence and raw



materials, and, on the other hand, the demand for her manufactured



products, would have augmented. The augmentation of this population



would have produced a larger demand for those provisions and raw



materials which cannot easily be imported from abroad, and for



which the native agriculture possesses a natural monopoly; the



native agriculture therefore would thus have obtained a far greater



profit. The demand for those agricultural products for which the



character of the French soil is specially adapted, would be much



more considerable under this free interchange than that produced



artificially by restriction. One agriculturist would not have lost



what another gained; the whole agriculture of the country would



have gained, but still more the manufacturing industry. Through



restriction, the agricultural power of the country therefore is not



increased, but limited; and besides this, that manufacturing power



is annihilated which would have grown up from the augmentation of



the internal agriculture, as well as from the foreign importation



of provisions and raw materials. All that has been attained through



the restriction is an increase of prices in favour of the



agriculturists of one district at the expense of the agriculturists



of another district, but above all, at the expense of the total



productive force of the country.



    The disadvantages of such restrictions on the interchange of



products are still more clearly brought to light in the case of



England than in that of France. Through the corn laws, on doubt, a



quantity of unfertile land is brought under cultivation; but it is



a question whether these lands would not have been brought under



cultivation without them. The more wool, timber, cattle, and corn



that England would have imported, the more manufactured goods would



she have sold, the greater number of workmen would have been



enabled to live in England, the higher would the prosperity of the



working classes have risen. England would probably have doubled the



number of her workmen. Every single workman would have lived



better, would have been better able to cultivate a garden for his



pleasure and for the production of useful vegetables, and would



have supported himself and his family much better. It is evident



that such a large augmentation of the working population, as well



as of its prosperity and of the amount of what it consumed, would



have produced an enormous demand for those products for which the



island possesses a natural monopoly, and it is more than probable



that thereby double and three times as much land could have been



brought into cultivation than by unnatural restrictions. The proof



of this may be seen in the vicinity of every large town. However



large the mass of products may be which is brought into this town



from distant districts for miles around it, one cannot discover a



single tract of land uncultivated, however much that land may have



been neglected by nature. If you forbid the importation into such



a town of corn from distant districts, you thereby merely effect a



diminution of its population, of its manufacturing industry, and



its prosperity, and compel the farmer who lives near the town to



devote himself to less profitable culture.



    It will be perceived that thus far we are quite in accord with



the prevailing theory. With regard to the interchange of raw



products, the school is perfectly correct in supposing that the



most extensive liberty of commerce is, under all circumstances,



most advantageous to the individual as well as to the entire State.



One can, indeed, augment this production by restrictions; but the



advantage obtained thereby is merely apparent. We only thereby



divert, as the school says, capital and labour into another and



less useful channel. But the manufacturing productive power, on the



contrary, is governed by other laws, which have, unfortunately,



entirely escaped the observation of the school.



    If restriction on the importation of raw products hinder (as we



have seen) the utilisation of the natural resources and powers of



a State, restrictions on the importation of manufactured goods, on



the contrary, call into life and activity (in the case of a



populous country already far advanced in agriculture and



civilisation) a mass of natural powers; indeed, without doubt, the



greater half of all natural powers, which in the merely



agricultural State lie idle and dead for ever. If, on the one hand,



restrictions on the importation of raw products are a hindrance to



the development not only of the manufacturing, but also of the



agricultural productive, powers of a State, on the other hand, an



internal manufacturing productive power produced by restrictions on



the importation of foreign manufactures, stimulates the whole



agricultural productive powers of a State to a degree which the



most flourishing foreign trade is never able to do. If the



importation of raw products makes the foreign country dependent on



us and takes from it the means of manufacturing for itself, so in



like manner, by the importation of foreign manufactures, are we



rendered dependent on the foreign country, and the means are taken



from us of manufacturing for ourselves. If the importation of



products and raw materials withdraws from the foreign country the



material for the employment and support of its population and



diverts it to our nation, so does the importation of manufactured



fabrics take from us the opportunity of increasing our own



population and of providing it with employment. If the importation



of natural products and raw materials increases the influence of



our nation on the affairs of the world and gives us the means of



carrying on commerce with all other nations and countries, so by



the importation of manufactured fabrics are we chained to the most



advanced manufacturing nation, which can rule over us almost as it



pleases, as England rules over Portugal. In short, history and



statistics alike prove the correctness of the dictum expressed by



the ministers of George I: that nations are richer and more



powerful the more they export manufactured goods, and import the



means of subsistence and raw materials. In fact, it may be proved



that entire nations have been ruined merely because they have



exported only means of subsistence and raw materials, and have



imported only manufactured goods. Montesquieu,(1*) who understood



better than anyone either before or after him how to learn from



History the lessons which she imparts to the legislator and



politician, has well perceived this, although it was impossible for



him in his times, when political economy was as yet but little



studied, clearly to unfold the causes of it. In contradiction to



the groundless system of the physiocratic school, he maintained



that Poland would be more prosperous if she gave up altogether



foreign commerce, i.e. if she established a manufacturing power of



her own, and worked up and consumed her own raw materials and means



of subsistence. Only by the development of an internal



manufacturing power, by free, populous, and industrious cities,



could Poland obtain a strong internal organisation, national



industry, liberty, and wealth; only thus could she maintain her



independence and political superiority over less cultivated



neighbours. Instead of foreign manufactured goods she should have



introduced (as England did at one time, when she was on the same



footing as regards culture with Poland) foreign manufacturers and



foreign manufacturing capital. Her aristocracy, however, preferred



to export the paltry fruits of serf labour to foreign markets, and



to obtain in return the cheap and fine goods made by foreign



countries. Their successors now may answer the question: whether it



is advisable for a nation to buy the fabrics of a foreign country



so long as its own native manufactures are not yet sufficiently



strengthened to be able to compete in prices and quality with the



foreigner. The aristocracy of other countries may bear her fate in



mind whenever they are instigated by feudal inclinations; they may



then cast a glance at the English aristocracy in order to inform



themselves as to what is the value to the great landed proprietors



of a strengthened manufacturing power, of free municipal



institutions, and of wealthy towns.



    Without here entering on an inquiry whether it would have been



possible for the elective kings of Poland, under the circumstances



under which they were placed, to introduce such a commercial system



as the hereditary kings of England have gradually developed and



established, let us imagine that it had been done by them: can we



not perceive what rich fruits such a system would have yielded to



the Polish nation? By the aid of large and industrious towns, the



crown would have been rendered hereditary, the nobility would have



been obliged to make it convenient to take part in legislation in



a House of Peers, and to emancipate their serfs; agriculture would



have developed itself, as it has developed itself in England; the



Polish nobility would now be rich and respected; the Polish nation



would, even if not so respected and influential in the affairs of



the world as the English nation is, would have long ago become so



civilised and powerful as to extend its influence over the less



cultivated East. Without a manufacturing power she has become



ruined and partitioned, and were she not so already she must have



become so. Of its own accord and spontaneously no manufacturing



power was developed in her; it could not be so, because its efforts



would have been always frustrated by further advanced nations.



Without a system of protection, and under a system of free trade



with further advanced nations, even if Poland had retained her



independence up to the present time, she could never have carried



on anything more than a crippled agriculture; she could never have



become rich, powerful, and outwardly influential.



    By the circumstance that so many natural resources and natural



powers are converted by the manufacturing power into productive



capital is the fact chiefly to be accounted for, that protective



regulations act so powerfully on the augmentation of national



wealth. This prosperity is not a false appearance, like the effects



of restrictions on the trade in mere natural products, it is a



reality. They are natural powers which are otherwise quite dead --



natural resources which are otherwise quite valueless, which an



agricultural nation calls to life and renders valuable by



establishing a manufacturing power of its own.







    It is an old observation, that the human race, like the various



breeds of animals, is improved mentally and bodily by crossings;



that man, if a few families always intermarry amongst one another,



just as the plant if the seed is always sown in the same soil,



gradually degenerates. We seem obliged to attribute to this law of



nature the circumstance that among many wild or half-wild tribes in



Africa and Asia, whose numbers are limited, the men choose their



wives from foreign tribes. The fact which experience shows, that



the oligarchies of small municipal republics, who continually



intermarry among themselves, gradually die out or visibly



degenerate, appears similarly attributable to such a natural law.



It is undeniable that the mixing of two quite different races



results, almost without exception, in a powerful and fine future



progeny; and this observation extends to the mixing of the white



race with the black in the third and the fourth generation. This



observation seems to confirm more than any other thing the fact,



that those nations which have emanated from a crossing of race



frequently repeated and comprising the whole nation, have surpassed



all other nations in power and energy of the mind and character, in



intelligence, bodily strength, and personal beauty.(2*)



    We think we may conclude from this that men need not



necessarily be such dull, clumsy, and unintellectual beings as we



perceive them to be when occupied in crippled agriculture in small



villages, where a few families have for thousands of years



intermarried only with one another; where for centuries it has



occurred to no one to make use of an implement of a new form, or to



adopt a new method of culture, to alter the style of a single



article of clothing, or to adopt a new idea; where the greatest art



consisted, not in exerting one's bodily and mental powers in order



to obtain as much enjoyment as possible, but to dispense with as



much of it as possible.



    This condition of things is entirely changed (and for the best



purposes of the improvement of race of a whole nation) by



establishing a manufacturing power. While a large portion of the



increase of the agricultural population goes over into the



manufacturing community, while the agricultural population of



various districts becomes mixed by marriages between one another



and with the manufacturing population, the mental, moral, and



physical stagnation of the population is broken up. The intercourse



which manufactures and the commerce between various nations and



districts which is based upon them bring about, brings new blood



into the whole nation as well as into separate communities and



families.



    The development of the manufacturing power has no less



important an influence on the improvement of the breeds of cattle.



Everywhere, where woollen manufactures have been established, the



race of sheep has quickly been improved. Owing to a greater demand



for good meat, which a numerous manufacturing population creates,



the agriculturist will endeavour to introduce better breeds of



cattle. The greater demand for 'horses of luxury' is followed by



the improvement of the breeds of horses. We shall then no longer



see those wretched primitive breeds of cattle, horses, and sheep,



which having resulted from the crippled state of agriculture and



everywhere from neglect of crossing of breeds, exhibit a side



spectacle worthy of their clumsy owners.



    How much do the productive powers of the nations already owe to



the importation of foreign breeds of animals and to the improvement



of the native breeds; and how much has yet to be done in this



respect! All the silkworms of Europe are derived from a few eggs,



which (under Constantine) were brought to Constantinople in hollow



sticks, by Greek monks from China, where their exportation was



strictly prohibited. France is indebted to the importation of the



Thibet goat for a beautiful product of her industry. It is very



much to be regretted, that hitherto the breeding and improving of



animals has been chiefly carried on in order to satisfy the



requirements of luxury, and not in order to promote the welfare of



the large masses. The descriptions of travellers show that in some



countries of Asia a race of cattle has been seen which combines



considerable draught power with great swiftness of pace, so that



they can be used with almost the same advantage as horses for



riding and driving. What immense advantages would such a breed of



cattle confer on the smaller agriculturists of Europe! What an



increase in means of subsistence, productive power, and



convenience, would the working classes thereby obtain! But even far



more than by improved breeds, and importation from one country into



another of various animals, has the productive power of the human



race been increased by the improvement and importation of trees and



plants. This is at once evident, if we compare the original plants



as they have sprung from the bosom of nature, with their improved



species. How little do the primitive plants of the various species



of corn and of fruit trees, of edible vegetables and of the olive,



resemble in form and utility their improved offspring! What masses



of means of nourishment, of enjoyment, and comfort, and what



opportunities for the useful application of human powers, have been



derived from them! The potato, the beet-root, the cultivation of



root crops for cattle, together with the improved systems of



manuring and improved agricultural machines, have increased



ten-fold the returns of agriculture, as it is at present carried on



by the Asiatic tribes.



    Science has already done much with regard to the discovery of



new plants and the improvement of them; but governments have not



yet devoted to this important object so much attention as they



ought to have done, in the interests of economy. Quite recently,



species of grass are said to have been discovered in the savannas



of North America, which from the poorest soil yield a higher



produce than any fodder plants, which are as yet known to us, do



from the richest soil. It is very probable that in the wild regions



of America, Asia, Africa, and Australia, a quantity of plants still



vegetate uselessly, the transplantation and improvement of which



might infinitely augment the prosperity of the inhabitants of



temperate climates.



    It is clear that most of the improvements and transportations



of animals and vegetables, most of the new discoveries which are



made with respect to them, as well as all other progress,



inventions, and discoveries, are chiefly calculated to benefit the



countries of the temperate zone, and of those most of all, the



manufacturing countries.







NOTES:







1. Esprit des Lois, Livre xx. chap. xxiii.







2. According to Chardin, the Guebres, an unmixed tribe of the old



Persians, are an ugly, deformed, and clumsy race, like all nations



of Mongol descent, while the Persian nobility, which for centuries



has intermarried with Georgian and Circassian women, is



distinguished for beauty and strength. Dr Pritchard remarks that



the unmixed Celts of the Scottish highlands are far behind the



Scottish Lowlanders (descendants of Saxons and Celts) in height,



bodily power, and fine figure. Pallas makes similar observations



respecting the descendants of the Russians and Tartars in



comparison with the unmixed tribes to which they are related. Azara



affirms that the descendants of the Spaniards and the natives of



Paraguay are a much more handsome and powerful race of men than



their ancestors on both sides. The advantages of the crossing of



race are not only apparent in the mixing of different nations, but



also in the mixing of different family stocks in one and the same



nation. Thus the Creole negroes far surpass those negroes who have



sprung from unmixed tribes, and who have come direct from Africa to



America, in mental gifts as well as in bodily power. The



Caribbeans, the only Indian race which chooses regularly its women



From neighbouring tribes, are in every respect superior to all



other American tribes. If this is a law of nature, the rise and



progress which the cities of the Middle Ages displayed shortly



after their foundation, as well as the energy and fine bodily



appearance of the American people, are hence partly explained.







Chapter 19







The Manufacturing Power and the Instrumental Powers (Material



Capital) Of the Nation







    The nation derives its productive power from the mental and



physical powers of the individuals; from their social, municipal,



and political conditions and institutions; from the natural



resources placed at its disposal, or from the instruments it



possesses as the material products of former mental and bodily



exertions (material, agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial



capital). In the last two chapters we have dealt with the influence



of manufactures on the three first-named sources of the national



productive powers; the present and the following chapter are



devoted to the demonstration of its influence on the one last



named.



    That which we understand by the term 'instrumental powers' is



called 'capital' by the school. It matters but little by what word



an object is signified, but it matters very much (especially with



regard to scientific investigations) that the word selected should



always indicate one and the same object, and never more or less. As



often, therefore, as different branches of a matter are discussed,



the necessity for a distinction arises. The school now understands



by the term 'capital' not merely the material, but also all mental



and social means of and aids to production. It clearly ought,



therefore, to specify wherever it speaks of capital, whether the



material capital, the material instruments of production, or the



mental capital, the moral and physical powers which are inherent in



individuals, or which individuals derive from social, municipal,



and political conditions, are meant. The omission of this



distinction, where it ought to be drawn, must necessarily lead to



false reasoning, or else serve to conceal false reasoning.



Meanwhile, however, as it is not so much our business to found a



new nomenclature as to expose the errors committed under the cover



of an inexact and inadequate nomenclature, we will adopt the term



'capital,' but distinguish between mental and material capital,



between material, agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial



capital, between private and national capital.



    Adam Smith (by means of the common expression, capital) urges



the following argument against the protective commercial policy



which is adopted to the present day by all his followers: 'A



country can indeed by means of such (protective) regulations



produce a special description of manufactures sooner than without



them; and this special kind of manufactures will be able to yield



after some time as cheap or still cheaper productions than the



foreign country. But although in this manner we can succeed in



directing national industry sooner into those channels into which



it would later have flowed of its own accord, it does not in the



least follow that the total amount of industry or of the incomes of



the community can be increased by means of such measures. The



industry of the community can only be augmented in proportion as



its capital increases, and the capital of the community can only



increase in accordance with the savings which it gradually makes



from its income. Now, the immediate effect of these measures is to



decrease the income of the community. But it is certain that that



which decreases that income cannot increase the capital more



quickly than it would have been increased by itself, if it, as well



as industry, had been left free.'(1*)



    As a proof of this argument, the founder of the school adduces



the well-known example, refuted by us in the previous chapter, how



foolish it would be to plant the vine in Scotland.



    In the same chapter he states, the annual income of the



community is nothing else but the value in exchange of those



objects which the national industry produces annually.



    In the above-named argument lies the chief proof of the school



against the protective commercial policy. It admits that by



measures of protection manufactories can be established and enabled



to produce manufactured goods as cheap or even cheaper than they



can be obtained from abroad; but it maintains that the immediate



effect of these measures is to decrease the income of the community



(the value in exchange of those things which the national industry



produces annually). It thereby weakens its power of acquiring



capital, for capital is formed by the savings which the nation



makes out of its annual income; the total of the capital, however,



determines the total of the national industry, and the latter can



only increase in proportion to the former. It therefore weakens its



industry by means of those measures -- by producing an industry



which, in the nature of things, if they had been left to their own



free course would have originated of its own accord.



    It is firstly to be remarked in opposition to this reasoning,



that Adam Smith has merely taken the word capital in that sense in



which it is necessarily taken by rentiers or merchants in their



book-keeping and their balance-sheets, namely, as the grand total



of their values of exchange in contradistinction to the income



accruing therefrom.



    He has forgotten that he himself includes (in his definition of



capital) the mental and bodily abilities of the producers under



this term.



    He wrongly maintains that the revenues of the nation are



dependent only on the sum of its material capital. His own work, on



the contrary contains a thousand proofs that these revenues are



chiefly conditional on the sum of its mental and bodily powers, and



on the degree to which they are perfected, in social and political



respects (especially by means of more perfect division of labour



and confederation of the national productive powers), and that



although measures of protection require sacrifices of material



goods for a time, these sacrifices are made good a hundred-fold in



powers, in the ability to acquire values of exchange, and are



consequently merely reproductive outlay by the nation.



    He has forgotten that the ability of the whole nation to



increase the sum of its material capital consists mainly in the



possibility of converting unused natural powers into material



capital, into valuable and income-producing instruments, and that



in the case of the merely agricultural nation a mass of natural



powers lies idle or dead which can bequickened into activity only



by manufactures. He has not considered the influence of



manufactures on the internal and external commerce, on the



civilisation and power of the nation, and on the maintenance of its



independence, as well as on the capability arising from these of



gaining material wealth.



    He has e.g. not taken into consideration what a mass of capital



the English have obtained by means of colonisation (Martin



estimates the amount of this at more than two and a half milliards



of pounds sterling).



    He, who nevertheless elsewhere proves so clearly that the



capital employed in intermediate commerce is not to be regarded as



belonging to any given nation, so long as it is not equally



embodied in that nation's land, has here not duly considered that



the nationalisation of such capital is most effectually realised by



favouring the nation's inland manufactures.



    He has not taken into account, that by the policy of favouring



native manufacture a mass of foreign capital, mental as well as



material, is attracted into the country.



    He falsely maintains that these manufactures have originated in



the natural course of things and of their own accord;



notwithstanding that in every nation the political power interferes



to give to this so-called natural course an artificial direction



for the nation's own special advantage.



    He has illustrated his argument, founded on an ambiguous



expression and consequently fundamentally wrong, by a fundamentally



wrong example, in seeking to prove that because it would be foolish



to produce wine in Scotland by artificial methods, therefore it



would be foolish to establish manufactures by artificial methods.



    He reduces the process of the formation of capital in the



nation to the operation of a private rentier, whose income is



determined by the value of his material capital, and who can only



increase his income by savings which he again turns into capital.



    He does not consider that this theory of savings, which in the



merchant's office is quite correct, if followed by a whole nation



must lead to poverty, barbarism, powerlessness, and decay of



national progress. Where everyone saves and economises as much as



he possibly can, no motive can exist for production. Where everyone



merely takes thought for the accumulation of values of exchange,



the mental power required for production vanishes. A nation



consisting of such insane misers would give up the defence of the



nation from fear of the expenses of war, and would only learn the



truth after all its property had been sacrificed to foreign



extortion, that the wealth of nations is to be attained in a manner



different to that of the private rentier.



    The private rentier himself, as the father of a family, must



follow a totally different theory to the shopkeeper theory of the



material values of exchange which is here set up. He must at least



expend on the education of his heirs as much value of exchange as



will enable them to administer the property which is some day to



fall to their lot.



    The building up of the material national capital takes place in



quite another manner than by mere saving as in the case of the



rentier, namely, in the same manner as the building up of the



productive powers, chiefly by means of the reciprocal action



between the mental and material national capital, and between the



agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial capital.



    The augmentation of the national material capital is dependent



on the augmentation of the national mental capital, and vice versâ.



    The formation of the material agricultural capital is dependent



on the formation of the material manufacturing capital, and vice



versâ.



    The material commercial capital acts everywhere as an



intermediary, helping and compensating between both.



    In the uncivilised state, in the state of the hunter and the



fisher, the powers of nature yield almost everything, capital is



almost nil. Foreign commerce increases the latter, but also in so



doing (through fire-arms, powder, lead) totally destroys the



productiveness of the former. The theory of savings cannot profit



the hunter; he must be ruined or become a shepherd.



    In the pastoral state the material capital increases quickly,



but only so far as the powers of nature afford spontaneously



nourishment to the cattle. The increase of population, however,



follows closely upon the increase of flocks and herds and of the



means of subsistence. On the one hand, the flocks and herds as well



as pastures become divided into smaller shares; on the other hand,



foreign commerce offers inducements to consumption. It would be in



vain to preach to the pastoral nation the theory of savings; it



must sink into poverty or pass over into the agricultural State.



    To the agricultural nation is open an immense, but at the same



time limited, field for enriching itself by utilising the dormant



powers of nature.



    The agriculturist for himself alone can save provisions,



improve his fields, increase his cattle; but the increase of the



means of subsistence always follows the increase of population. The



material capital (namely, cultivated land and cattle), in



proportion as the former becomes more fertile and the latter



increase, becomes divided among a larger number of persons.



Inasmuch, however, as the surface of the land cannot be increased



by industry, and the land cannot be utilised up to the measure of



its natural capacity, for want of means of transport, which (as we



showed in the preceding chapter) must remain imperfect in such a



state of things owing to lack of intercourse; and as moreover the



merely agricultural nation is mostly in want of those instruments,



intelligence, motives to exertion, and also of that energy and



social development which are imparted to the nation through



manufactures and the commerce which originates from them, the mere



agricultural population soon reaches a point in which the increase



of material agricultural capital can no longer keep pace with the



increase of population, and where consequently individual poverty



increases more and more, notwithstanding that the total capital of



the nation is continually increasing.



    In such a condition the most important product of the nation



consists of men, who, as they cannot find sufficient support in



their own country, emigrate to other countries. It can be but



little consolation to such a country, that the school regards man



as an accumulated capital; for the exportation of men does not



occasion return freights, but, on the contrary, causes the



unproductive export of considerable amounts of material values(in



the shape of implements, utensils, money, &c.).



    It is clear that in such a state of things, where the national



division of labour is not properly developed, neither industry nor



economy can bring about the augmentation of the material capital



(material enrichment of individuals).



    The agricultural country is, of course, rarely quite without



any foreign commerce, and foreign commerce, as far as it extends,



also supplies the place of internal manufactures with regard to the



augmentation of capital, inasmuch as it places the manufacturer of



the foreign country in commercial relation with the agriculturist



of the home country. This, however, takes place only partially and



very imperfectly; firstly, because this commerce extends merely to



special staple products, and chiefly only to those districts which



are situated on the sea-coast and on navigable rivers; and



secondly, because it is in any case but a very irregular one, and



is liable to be frequently interrupted by wars, fluctuations in



trade and changes in commercial legislation, by specially rich



harvests, and by foreign importations.



    The augmentation of the material agricultural capital can only



take place on a large scale, with regularity and continuously, if



a completely developed manufacturing power is established in the



midst of the agriculturists.



    By far the greatest portion of the material capital of a nation



is bound to its land and soil. In every nation the value of landed



property, of dwelling houses in rural districts and in towns, of



workshops, manufactories, waterworks, mines, &c. amounts to from



two-thirds to nine-tenths of the entire property of the nation. It



must therefore be accepted as a rule, that all that increases or



decreases the value of the fixed property, increases or decreases



the total of the material capital of the nation. Now, it is evident



that the capital value of land of equal natural fertility is



incomparably larger in the proximity of a small town than in remote



districts; that this value is incomparably larger still in the



neighbourhood of a large town than in that of a small one; and that



in manufacturing nations these values are beyond all comparison



greater than in mere agricultural nations. We may observe



(inversely) that the value of the dwelling houses and manufacturing



buildings in towns, and that of building land, rises or falls (as



a rule) in the same ratio in which the commercial intercourse of



the town with the agriculturists is extended or restricted, or in



which the prosperity of these agriculturists progresses or recedes.



From this it is evident that the augmentation of the agricultural



capital is dependent on the augmentation of the manufacturing



capital; and (inversely) the latter on the former.(2*)



    This reciprocal action is, however, in the case of the change



from the agricultural state into the manufacturing state much



stronger on the part of manufacture than on the part of



agriculture. For as the increase of capital which results from the



change from the condition of the mere hunter to the pastoral



condition is chiefly effected by the rapid increase of flocks and



herds, as the increase of capital resulting from the change from



the pastoral condition into the agricultural condition is chiefly



effected by the rapid increase in cultivated land and in surplus



produce, so, in the event of a change from the agricultural



condition into the manufacturing condition, is the augmentation of



the material capital of the nation chiefly effected by those values



and powers which are devoted to the establishment of manufactures,



because thereby a mass of formerly unutilised natural and mental



powers are converted into mental and material capital. Far from



hindering the saving of material capital, the establishment of



manufactures is the first thing which affords to the nation the



means of employing its agricultural savings in an economical



manner, and it is the first means by which the nation can be



incited to agricultural economy.



    In the legislative bodies of North America it has often been



mentioned that corn there rots in the ear from want of sale,



because its value will not pay the expense of harvesting it. In



Hungary it is asserted that the agriculturist is almost choked with



excess of produce, while manufactured goods are three to four times



dearer there than in England. Germany even can remember such times.



In agricultural States, therefore, all surplus agricultural produce



is not material capital. By means of manufactures it first becomes



commercial capital by being warehoused, and then by being sold to



the manufacturers it is turned into manufacturing capital. What may



be unutilised stock in the hand of the agriculturist, becomes



productive capital in the hand of the manufacturer, and vice versâ.



    Production renders consumption possible, and the desire to



consume incites to production. The mere agricultural nation is in



its consumption dependent on foreign conditions, and if these are



not favourable to it, that production dies out which would have



arisen in consequence of the desire to consume. But in that nation



which combines manufactures with agriculture in its territory, the



reciprocal inducement continually exists, and therefore, also,



there will be continuous increase of production and with it



augmentation of capital on both sides.



    As the agricultural-manufacturing nation is (for the reasons



which we have already given) always incomparably richer in material



capital than the mere agricultural nation (which is evident at a



glance), so in the former the rate of interest is always much



lower, and larger capital and more favourable conditions are at the



disposal of men of enterprise, than in the purely agricultural



nation. It follows that the former can always victoriously compete



with the newly formed manufactories in the agricultural nation;



that the agricultural nation remains continually in debt to the



manufacturing nation, and that in the markets of the former



continual fluctuations in the prices of produce and manufactured



goods and in the value of money take place, whereby the



accumulation of material wealth in the purely agricultural nation



is no less endangered than its morality and its habits of economy.



    The school distinguishes fixed capital from circulating



capital, and classes under the former in a most remarkable manner



a multitude of things which are in circulation without making any



practical application whatever of this distinction. The only case



in which such a distinction can be of value, it passes by without



notice. The material as well as the mental capital is (namely)



bound in a great measure to agriculture, to manufactures, to



commerce, or to special branches of either -- nay often, indeed, to



special localities. Fruit trees, when cut down, are clearly not of



the same value to the manufacturer (if he uses them for woodwork)



as they are to the agriculturist (if he uses them for the



production of fruit). Sheep, if, as has already frequently happened



in Germany and North America, they have to be slaughtered in



masses, have evidently not the value which they would possess when



used for the production of wool. Vineyards have (as such) a value



which, if used as arable fields, they would lose. Ships, if used



for timber or for firewood, have a much lower value than when they



serve as means of transport. What use can be made of manufacturing



buildings, water-power, and machinery if the spinning industry is



ruined? In like manner individuals lose, as a rule, the greatest



part of their productive power, consisting in experience, habits,



and skill, when they are displaced. The school gives to all these



objects and properties the general name of capital, and would



transplant them (by virtue of this terminology) at its pleasure



from one field of employment to another. J. B. Say thus advises the



English to divert their manufacturing capital to agriculture. How



this wonder is to be accomplished he has not informed us, and it



has probably remained a secret to English statesmen to the present



day. Say has in this place evidently confounded private capital



with national capital. A manufacturer or merchant can withdraw his



capital from manufactures or from commerce by selling his works or



his ships and buying landed property with the proceeds. A whole



nation, however, could not effect this operation except by



sacrificing a large portion of its material and mental capital. The



reason why the school so deliberately obscures things which are so



clear is apparent enough. If things are called by their proper



names, it is easily comprehended that the transfer of the



productive powers of a nation from one field of employment to



another is subject to difficulties and hazards which do not always



speak in favour of 'free trade,' but very often in favour of



national protection.







NOTES:







1. Wealth of Nations, book IV. chap. ii.







2. Compare the following paragraph, which appeared in the Times



during 1883:



    'MANUFACTURES AND AGRICULTURE. The statistician of the



Agricultural Department of the United States has shown in a recent



report that the value of farm lands decreases in exact proportion



as the ratio of agriculture to other industries increases. That is,



where all the labour is devoted to agriculture, the land is worth



less than where only half of the people are farm labourers, and



where only a quarter of them are so engaged the farms and their



products are still more valuable. It is, in fact, proved by



statistics that diversified industries are of the greatest value to



a State, and that the presence of a manufactory near a farm



increases the value of the farm and its crops. It is further



established that, dividing the United States into four sections or



classes, with reference to the ratio of agricultural workers to the



whole population, and putting those States having less than 30 per



cent of agricultural labourers in the first class, all having over



30 and less than 50 in the second, those between 50 and 70 in the



third, and those having 70 or more in the fourth, the value of



farms is in inverse ratio to the agricultural population; and that,



whereas in the purely agricultural section, the fourth class, the



value of the farms per acre is only $5 28c, in the next class it is



$13 03c, in the third $22 21c, and in the manufacturing districts



$40 91c. This shows an enormous advantage for a mixed district. Yet



not only is the land more valuable -- the production per acre is



greater, and the wages paid to farm hands larger. Manufactures and



varied industries thus not only benefit the manufacturers, but are



of equal benefit and advantage to the farmers as well. The latter



would, therefore, do well to abandon their prejudice against



factories, which really increase the value of their property



instead of depreciating it.' -- TR.







Chapter 20







The Manufacturing Power and the Agricultural Interest











    If protective duties in favour of home manufactures proved



disadvantageous to the consumers of manufactured goods and served



only to enrich the manufacturer, this disadvantage would especially



be felt by the landed proprietor and the agriculturist, the most



numerous and important class of those consumers. But it can be



proved that even this class derives far greater advantages from the



establishment of manufactures, than the manufacturers themselves



do; for by means of these manufactures a demand for greater variety



and for larger quantities of agricultural products is created, the



value in exchange of these products is raised, the agriculturist is



placed in a position to utilise his land and his powers of labour



more profitably. Hence emanates an increase of rent, of profits,



and wages; and the augmentation of rents and capital is followed by



an increase in the selling value of land and in the wages of



labour.



    The selling value of landed property is nothing else than



capitalised rent; it is dependent, on the one hand, on the amount



and the value of the rent, but, on the other hand, and chiefly, on



the quantities of mental and material capital existing in the



nation.



    Every individual and social improvement, especially every



augmentation of productive power in the nation, but, most of all,



of the manufacturing power, raises the amount of rents, while at



the same time it lessens the proportion which rent bears to the



gross produce. In an agricultural nation little developed and



scantily peopled, e.g. in Poland, the proportion of rent amounts to



one-half or one third the gross produce. in a well-developed,



populous, and wealthy nation, e.g. England, it only amounts to



one-fourth or one-fifth part of that produce. Nevertheless, the



actual worth of this smaller proportion is disproportionately



greater than the worth of that larger proportion-in money value



especially, and still more in manufactured goods. For the fifth



part of twenty-five bushels (the average produce of wheat in



England) equals five bushels; the third part, however, of nine



bushels (the average produce of wheat in Poland) amounts only to



three bushels; further, these five bushels in England are worth on



an average 25s. to 30s.; while these three bushels in the interior



of Poland are at the most worth 8s. to 9s.; and finally, goods in



England are at least twice as cheap as in manufactured Poland:



consequently the English landed proprietor is able to buy for his



30s. of money-rent ten yards of cloth, but the Polish landowner for



his 9s. of rent can obtain scarcely two yards, from which it is



evident that the English landed proprietor by the fifth part of the



gross produce is as rentier three times, and as consumer of



manufactured goods five times, better off than the Polish landowner



is by the third part of his gross produce. But that farmers and



agricultural labourers also must in England (especially as



consumers of manufactured goods) be disproportionately better off



than in Poland, is shown by the fact that out of the produce of



twenty-five bushels in England twenty bushels go for sowing, for



cultivation of the field, wages, and profits: half of which (or ten



bushels) devoted to the last two items have an average value of



60s. or twenty yards of cloth (at 3s. per yard), while from the



produce of nine bushels in Poland only six bushels go for sowing,



cultivation of the field, profit, and wages, half of which, or



three bushels, devoted to the last two items, have merely a value



of 10s. to 12s. or three and a half yards of cloth.



    Rent is a chief means of usefully employing material capital.



Its price. therefore, depends also on the quantity of the capital



existing in the nation and the proportion of the supply of it to



the demand. By the surplus of the capital which accumulates in a



manufacturing nation as the result of its home and foreign



commerce, by the low rate of interest which there exists, and the



circumstance that in a manufacturing and commercial nation a number



of individuals who have become wealthy are always seeking to invest



their surplus capital in land, the selling price of a given amount



of rent of land is always disproportionately higher in such a



nation than in the mere agricultural nation. In Poland the rent of



land is sold at ten or twenty years' purchase; in England at thirty



or forty years' purchase. In the proportion in which the selling



value of the rent of land is higher in the manufacturing and



commercial nation than in the agricultural nation, so also is the



selling value of the land itself higher in the former than in the



latter. For land of equal natural fertility in each country, the



value is in England ten to twenty times higher than in Poland.



    That manufactures have an influence on the amount of rent, and



therefore on the value in exchange of the land, is a fact which



Adam Smith certainly notices at the conclusion of the ninth chapter



of his first book, but only incidentally and without bringing the



vast importance of manufactures in this respect properly to light.



He there distinguishes those causes which influence directly the



augmentation of rent (such as the improvement of the land itself,



the increase in the number and the value of the cattle maintained



upon it) from those causes which have only an indirect influence on



that augmentation, among which latter he classes manufactures. In



this manner he places the main cause of the augmentation of the



rent and of the value of land (namely, the manufactures) in the



background so that it is scarcely perceptible; while he places the



improvement of the land itself and the increase of cattle, which



are themselves for the most part the result of manufactures and of



the commerce proceeding from them, as the chief cause, or at least



as an equal cause, of that augmentation.



    Adam Smith and his followers have not recognised by any means



to its full extent the value of manufactures in this respect.



    We have remarked that in consequence of manufactures and of the



commerce connected with them, the value of land of equal natural



fertility in England is ten to twenty times greater than in Poland.



If we now compare the total produce of the English manufacturing



production and of the English manufacturing capital with the total



produce of the English agricultural production and of the English



agricultural capital, we shall find that the greatest part of the



wealth of the nation shows itself in the thus increased value of



landed property.



    MacQueen(1*) has prepared the following estimate of the



national wealth and national income of England:















        I. NATIONAL CAPITAL.







1. In agriculture, lands, mines, and fisheries....            



2,604 mill.



   Working capital in cattle, implements, stocks, and money.... 



655  "



   Household furniture and utensils of the agriculturists....    



52  "



                                                              



3,311  "







2. Invested in manufactures and commerce:



   Manufactures, and home trade in manufactured



                     goods.....                                178



1/2 "



   Trade in colonial goods...                                  11 



    "



   Foreign trade in manufactured goods.....                    16 



1/2 "



                                                              206 



    "



   To this add increase since 1835 (in which year this



        estimate was made)......                               12 



    "



                                                              218



mill.



   Then in town buildings of all kinds, and in manu-



        facturing buildings                                   605 



   "



   In ships........                                            33



1/2  "



   In bridges, canals, and railways...                        118 



    "



   In horses which are not used in agriculture...              20 



    "



                                                              776



1/2 mill.



   Amount of the whole national capital (exclusive of



      the capital invested in the colonies, in foreign loans,



      and in the English public funds)......                4,305



1/2 mill.











        II. GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCTION.







     1. Of agriculture, mines, and fisheries....              539



mill.



     2. Manufacturing production.......                       259



1/2 "



                                                              798



1/2 "







    From this estimate it may be seen:



    1. That the value of the land devoted to agriculture amounts to



26/43 of the whole English national, property, and is about twelve



times more than the value of the whole capital invested in



manufactures and in commerce.



    2. That the whole capital invested in agriculture amounts to



over three-fourths of the English national capital.



    3. That the value of the whole fixed property in England,



namely:







   Of the land, &c.                                          2,604



mill.



   Of houses in towns, and manufacturing buildings...          605 



"



   Of canals and railways.....                                 118 



"



                                                             3,327 



"







is therefore equal to more than three-fourths of the whole English



national capital.



    4. That the manufacturing and commercial capital, inclusive of



ships, does not altogether amount to more than 241 1/2 millions,



and therefore to only about 1/18 of the English national wealth.



    5. That the whole English agricultural capital, with 3,311



millions, yields a gross income of 539 millions, consequently about



16 per cent; while manufacturing and commercial capital, amounting



to 218 millions, gives a gross annual production of 259 1/2



millions or of 120 per cent.



    It must here, above all things, be noted that the 218 millions



manufacturing capital, with an annual production of 259 1/2



millions, constitute the chief reason why the English agricultural



capital could have attained to the enormous amount of 3,311



millions, and its annual produce to the sum of 539 millions. By far



the greatest part of the agricultural capital consists in the value



of land and cattle. Manufactures, by doubling and trebling the



population of the country, by furnishing the means for an immense



foreign commerce, for the acquisition and exploration of a number



of colonies, and for a large mercantile marine, have increased in



the same proportion the demand for means of subsistence and raw



materials, have afforded to the agriculturist at once the means and



the motive for satisfying this increased demand, have increased the



exchangeable value of these products, and thus caused the



proportionate increase in the amount and the selling value of the



rent of land, consequently of the land itself. Were these 218



millions of manufacturing and commercial capital destroyed, we



should see not merely the 259 1/2 millions manufacturing



production, but also the greatest part of the 3,311 millions



agricultural capital, and consequently of the 539 millions



agricultural production, disappear. The English national production



would not merely lose 259 1/2 millions (the value of its



manufacturing production), but the value of land would decline to



the value which it has in Poland, i.e. to the tenth or twentieth



part of its present value.



    From this it follows that all capital which is devoted by the



agricultural nation in a profitable manner to manufactures,



increases in the course of time the value of the land tenfold.



Experience and statistics everywhere confirm this statement.



Everywhere it has been seen that in consequence of the



establishment of manufactures the value of land and also that of



the stock of capital rapidly increases. Let anyone compare these



values in France (in 1789 and in 1840), in North America (in 1820



and in 1830), or in Germany (in 1830 and in 1840), how they have



corresponded with a less developed or a more fully developed



condition of manufactures, and he will find our observation



everywhere confirmed.



    The reason for this appearance lies in the increased power of



production in the nation, which emanates from the regular division



of labour and from the strengthened confederation of the national



powers, also from a better use of the mental and natural powers



placed at the disposal of the nation, and from foreign commerce.



    These are the very same causes and effects which we may



perceive in respect to improved means of transport; which not



merely yield in themselves a revenue, and through it a return for



the capital spent upon them, but also powerfully promote the



development of manufactures and agriculture, whereby they increase



in the course of time the value of the landed property within their



districts to tenfold the value of the actual material capital which



has been employed in creating them. The agriculturist, in



comparison with the undertaker of such works (improved means of



transport), has the great advantage of being quite sure of his



tenfold gain on his invested capital and of obtaining this profit



without malting any sacrifices, while the contractor for the works



must stake his whole capital. The position of the agriculturist is



equally favourable as compared with that of the erector of new



manufactories.



    If, however, this effect of manufactures on agricultural



production, on rent, and therefore on the value of landed property,



is so considerable and advantageous for all who are interested in



agriculture; how, then, can it be maintained that protective



measures would favour manufactures merely at the cost of the



agriculturists?



    The material prosperity of agriculturists, as well as of all



other private persons, principally depends on the point that the



value of what they produce shall exceed the value of what they



consume. It, therefore, is not so important to them that



manufactured goods should be cheap, as especially that a large



demand for various agricultural products should exist, and that



these should bear a high value in exchange. Now, if measures of



protection operate so that the agriculturist gains more by the



improvement of the market for his own produce than he loses by the



increase of the prices of such manufactured goods as he requires to



buy, he cannot rightly be described as making a sacrifice in favour



of the manufacturer. This effect is, however, always observable in



the case of all nations who are capable of establishing a



manufacturing power of their own, and in their case is most



apparent during the first period of the rise of the native



manufacturing industry; since just at that time most of the capital



transferred to manufacturing industry is spent on the erection of



dwelling houses and manufactories, the application of water power,



&c., an expenditure which chiefly benefits the agriculturist.



However much in the beginning the advantages of the greater sale of



agricultural produce and of its increased value outweighs the



disadvantage of the increased price of manufactured goods, so must



this favourable condition always increase further to the advantage



of the agriculturists, because the flourishing of the manufactories



always tends in the course of time continually more and more to



increase the prices obtainable for agricultural produce and to



lessen the prices of manufactured goods.



    Further, the prosperity of the agriculturist and landed



proprietor is especially dependent on the circumstance that the



value of the instrument from which his income is derived, namely,



his landed property, at least maintains its former position. This



is not merely the chief condition of his prosperity, but frequently



of his entire economical existence. For instance, it frequently



happens that the annual production of the agriculturist exceeds his



consumption, and nevertheless he finds himself ruined. This occurs



if while his landed property is encumbered with money debts, the



general credit becomes fluctuating; if on one side the demand for



money capital exceeds the supply of it, and on the other hand the



supply of land exceeds the demand. In such cases a general



withdrawal of money loans and a general offer of land for sale



arises, and consequently land becomes almost valueless, and a large



number of the most enterprising, active, and economical land



cultivators are ruined, not because their consumption has exceeded



their production, but because the instrument of their production,



their landed property, has lost in their hands a considerable



portion of its value, in consequence of causes over which they had



no control; further, because their credit has thereby become



destroyed; and finally, because the amount of the money debts with



which their landed property is encumbered is no longer in



proportion to the money value of their possessions, which has



become depressed by the general worthlessness of landed property.



Such crises have occurred in Germany and North America during the



last fifty years more than once, and in this manner a large



proportion of the German nobility find themselves no longer in



possession of property or landed estate, without having clearly



perceived that they really owe this fate to the policy adopted by



their brothers in England, the Tories whom they regard as so well



disposed. The condition of the agriculturist and landed proprietor



is, however, totally different in countries where manufactures



flourish vigorously. There, while the productive capabilities of



the land and the prices of produce are increased, he not merely



gains the amount by which the value of his production exceeds the



value of his consumption; he gains, as landed proprietor, not only



an increase of annual rent, but the amount of capital represented



by the increase of rent. His property doubles and trebles itself in



value, not because he works more, improves his fields more, or



saves more, but because the value of his property has been



increased in consequence of the establishment of manufactures. This



effect affords to him means and inducement for greater mental and



bodily exertions, for improvement of his land, for the increase of



his live stock, and for greater economy, notwithstanding increased



consumption. With the increase in the value of his land his credit



is raised, and with it the capability of procuring the material



capital required for his improvements.



    Adam Smith passes over these conditions of the exchangeable



value of land in silence. J. B. Say, on the contrary, believes that



the exchangeable value of land is of little importance, inasmuch



as, whether its value be high or low, it always serves equally well



for production. It is sad to read from an author whom his German



translators regard as a universal national authority, such



fundamentally wrong views about a matter which affects so deeply



the prosperity of nations. We, on the contrary, believe it



essential to maintain that there is no surer test of national



prosperity than the rising and falling of the value of the land,



and that fluctuations and crises in that are to be classed among



the most ruinous of all plagues that can befall a country.



    Into this erroneous view the school has also been led by its



predilection for the theory of free trade (as it desires the latter



term to be understood). For nowhere are fluctuations and crises in



the value and price of land greater than in those purely



agricultural nations which are in unrestricted commercial



intercourse with rich and powerful manufacturing and commercial



nations.



    Foreign commerce also, it is true, acts on the increase of rent



and the value of land, but it does so incomparably less decidedly,



uniformly, and permanently, than the establishment of home



manufactures, the continuous regular increase of manufacturing



production, and the exchange of home manufacturing products for



home agricultural products.



    So long as the agricultural nation still possesses a large



quantity of uncultivated or badly cultivated land, so long as it



produces staple articles which are readily taken by the richer



manufacturing nation in exchange for manufactured goods, so long as



these articles are easy of transport, so long also as the demand



for them is lasting and capable of annual increase at a rate



corresponding with the growth of the productive powers of the



agricultural nation, and so long as it is not interrupted by wars



or foreign tariff regulations, under such circumstances foreign



commerce has a powerful effect on the increase of rents and on the



exchangeable value of land. But as soon as any one of these



conditions fails or ceases to operate, foreign commerce may become



the cause of national stagnation, nay frequently of considerable



and long-continued retrogression.



    The fickleness of foreign demand has the most baneful effect of



all in this respect, if in consequence of wars, failure of crops,



diminution of importation from other parts, or owing to any other



circumstances and occurrences, the manufacturing nation requires



larger quantities especially of the necessaries of life or raw



materials, or of the special staple articles referred to, and then



if this demand again to a great extent ceases, in consequence of



the restoration of peace, of rich harvests, of larger importation



from other countries, or in consequence of political measures. If



the demand lasts merely for a short time, some benefit may result



from it to the agricultural nation; but if it last for years or a



series of years then all the circumstances of the agricultural



nation, the scale of expenditure of all private establishments,



will have become regulated by it. The producer becomes accustomed



to a certain scale of consumption; and certain enjoyments, which



under other circumstances he would have regarded as luxuries,



become necessaries to him. Relying on the increased yield and value



of his landed property, he undertakes improvements in cultivation,



in buildings, and makes purchases which otherwise he would never



have done. Purchases and sales, contracts of letting land, loans,



are concluded according to the scale of increased rents and values.



The State itself does not hesitate to increase its expenses in



accordance with the increased prosperity of private persons. But if



this demand afterwards suddenly ceases, disproportion between



production and consumption follows; disproportion between the



decreased values of land and the money encumbrances upon it which



continue undiminished in amount; disproportion between the money



rent payable under the leases, and the money produce of the land



which has been taken on lease; disproportion between national



income and national expenditure; and in consequence of these



disproportions, bankruptcy, embarrassment, discouragement,



retrogression in the economical as well as in the mental and



political development of the nation. Agricultural prosperity would



under these circumstances act like the stimulant of opium or strong



drink, stimulating merely for a moment, but weakening for a whole



lifetime. It would be like Franklin's flash of lightning, which for



a moment displayed the objects in a shining light, but only to



throw them back into deeper darkness.



    A period of temporary and passing prosperity in agriculture is



a far greater misfortune than uniform and lasting poverty. If



prosperity is to bring real benefit to individuals and nations, it



must be continuous. It, however, becomes continuous only in case it



increases gradually, and in case the nation possesses guarantees



for this increase and for its duration. A lower value of land is



incomparably better than fluctuations in its value; it is only a



gradual but steady increase in that value that affords to the



nation lasting prosperity. And only by the possession of a



manufacturing power of their own, can well-developed nations



possess any guarantee for the steady and permanent increase of that



value.



    To how very small an extent clear ideas prevail as to the



effect of a home manufacturing power on the rent and value of land



in comparison with the effect which foreign trade has on them, is



shown most plainly by the circumstance that the proprietors of



vineyards in France still always believe that they are injuriously



affected by the French system of protection, and demand the



greatest possible freedom of commerce with England in hopes of



thereby increasing their rents.



    Dr Bowring, in his report of the commercial relations existing



between England and France, the fundamental tendency of which is to



show the benefit to France which a larger importation of English



fabrics and a consequently increasing exportation of French wines



would occasion, has adduced facts from which the most striking



proof against his own argument can be brought. Dr Bowring quotes



the importation of French wines into the Netherlands (2,515,193



gallons, 1829) against the annual importation into England (431,509



gallons) to prove how greatly the sale of French wines in England



could be increased by freer commercial interchange between the two



countries.



    Now supposing (although it is more than improbable that the



sale of French wines in England would not find obstacles in the



predilection existing there for spirituous liquors, for strong



beer, and for the strong and cheap wines of Portugal, Spain,



Sicily, Teneriffe, Madeira, and the Cape) -- supposing that England



really was to extend her consumption of French wines to the same



proportion as that of the Netherlands, she would certainly



(calculating according to her population) be able to increase her



consumption to five or six million gallons (i.e. to from ten to



fifteen fold her present amount); and from a superficial point of



view this certainly appears to promise great advantage to France,



and to the French vineyard proprietors.



    If, however, we investigate this matter to the bottom, we



obtain another result. By as much freedom of trade as is possible



-- we will not say complete freedom of trade, although the latter



would have to be accepted according to the principle enunciated,



and to Bowring's arguments -- it can scarcely be doubted that the



English would draw to themselves a large part of the French market



for manufactured goods (especially as regards the manufactures of



woollens, cotton, linen, iron, and pottery). On the most moderate



estimate we must assume, that in consequence of this decreased



French manufacturing production one million fewer inhabitants would



live in the French towns, and that one million fewer persons would



be employed in agriculture for the purpose of supplying the



citizens of those towns with raw material and necessaries of life.



Now, Dr Bowring himself estimates the consumption of the country



population in France at 16 1/2 gallons per head, and that of the



town population at double that quantity, or 33 gallons per head.



Thus in consequence of the diminution of the home manufacturing



power effected by free trade, the internal consumption of wines



would decrease by 50 million gallons, while the exportation of wine



could only increase by 5 or 6 million gallons. Such a result could



scarcely be to the special advantage of the French proprietors of



vineyards, since the internal demand for wines would necessarily



suffer ten times more than the external demand could possibly gain.



    In one word: it is evident as respects the production of wine,



as also in that of meat, of corn, and of raw materials and



provisions generally, that in the case of a great nation well



fitted to establish a manufacturing power of its own, the internal



manufacturing production occasions ten to twenty times more demand



for the agricultural products of temperate climates, consequently



acts ten to twenty times more effectually on the increase of the



rent and exchangeable value of real estate, than the most



flourishing exportation of such products can do. The most



convincing proof of this may also be seen in the amount of rents



and the exchangeable value of land near large towns, as compared



with their amount and value in distant provinces, even though these



latter are connected with the capital by good roads and



conveniences for commercial intercourse.



    The doctrine of rent can either be considered from the point of



view of values or from the point of view of productive powers; it



can further be considered with respect merely to private relations,



namely, the relations between landed proprietor, farmer, and



labourer, or with especial regard to the social and national



relations and conditions. The school has taken up this doctrine



chiefly from the sole point of view of private economy. So far as



we know, for instance, nothing has been adduced by it to show how



the consumption of the rents of the nation is the more advantageous



the more it takes place in the proximity of the place whence it is



derived, but how nevertheless in the various States that



consumption takes place principally at the seat of the sovereign



(e.g. in absolute monarchies mostly in the national metropolis),



far away from the provinces where it is produced, and therefore in



a manner the least advantageous to agriculture, to the most useful



industries, and to the development of the mental powers of the



nation. Where the landowning aristocracy possess no rights and no



political influence unless they live at the Court, or occupy



offices of State, and where all public power and influence is



centralised in the national metropolis, landowners are attracted to



that central point, where almost exclusively they can find the



means of satisfying their ambition, and opportunities for spending



the income of their landed property in a pleasant manner; and the



more that most landowners get accustomed to live in the capital,



and the less that a residence in the provinces offers to each



individual opportunities for social intercourse and for mental and



material enjoyments of a more refined character, the more will



provincial life repel him and the metropolis attract him. The



province thereby loses and the metropolis gains almost all those



means of mental improvement which result from the spending of



rents, especially those manufactures and mental producers which



would have been maintained by the rent. The metropolis under those



circumstances, indeed, appears extremely attractive because it



unites in itself all the talents of the intellectual workers and



the greatest part of the material trades which produce articles of



luxury. But the provinces are thereby deprived of those mental



powers, of those material means, and especially of those



industries, which chiefly enable the agriculturist to undertake



agricultural improvements, and stimulate him to effect them.



    In these circumstances lies to a great extent the reason why in



France, especially under absolute monarchy, alongside of a



metropolis surpassing in intellect and splendour all towns of the



European continent, agriculture made but slight progress, and the



provinces were deficient in mental culture and in useful



industries. But the more that the landed aristocracy gains in



independence of the Court, and in influence in legislation and



administration, the more that the representative system and the



system of administration grants to the towns and provinces the



right of administering their own local affairs and of taking part



in the legislation and government of the State, and consequently



the more that respect and influence can be attained in the



provinces and by living there, so much the more will the landed



aristocracy, and the educated and well-to-do citizens, be drawn to



those localities from which they derived their rents, the greater



also will be the influence of the expenditure of those rents on the



development of the mental powers and social institutions, on the



promotion of agriculture, and on the development of those



industries which are useful to the great masses of the people in



the province.



    The economical conditions of England afford proof of this



observation. The fact that the English landed proprietor lives for



the greatest portion of the year on his estates, promotes in



manifold ways the improvement of English agriculture: directly,



because the resident landowner devotes a portion of his rent to



undertaking on his own account improvements in agriculture, or to



supporting such improvements when undertaken by his tenants;



indirectly, because his own consumption tends to support the



manufactures and agencies of mental improvement and Civilisation



existing in the neighbourhood. From these circumstances it can



further partly be explained why in Germany and in Switzerland, in



spite of the want of large towns, of important means of transport,



and of national institutions, agriculture and Civilisation in



general are in a much higher condition than in France.



    But the great error into which in this matter Adam Smith and



his school have fallen is that which we have already before



indicated, but which can be here more clearly shown, viz. that he



did not clearly recognise the influence of manufactures on the



increase of rents, on the market value of landed property itself,



and on the agricultural capital, and did not state this by any



means to its full extent, but, on the contrary, has drawn a



comparison between agriculture and manufactures in such a manner



that he would to a make it appear that agriculture is far more



valuable and important nation than manufactures, and that the



prosperity resulting from it is far more lasting than the



prosperity resulting from the latter. Adam Smith in so doing merely



sanctioned the erroneous view of the physiocratic school, although



in a somewhat modified manner. He was evidently misled by the



circumstance that -- as we have already demonstrated by the



statistical conditions of England -- the material agricultural



capital is (even in the richest manufacturing country) ten to



twenty times more important than the material manufacturing



capital; in fact, even the annual agricultural productiOn far



exceeds in value the total manufacturing capital. The same



circumstance may also have induced the physiocratic school to



over-estimate the value of agriculture in comparison with



manufactures. Superficially considered, it certainly appears as if



agriculture enriches a country ten times more, and consequently



deserves ten times more consideration, and is ten times more



important to the State than manufactures. This, however, is merely



apparent. If we investigate the causes of this agricultural



prosperity to their basis, we find them principally in the



existence of manufactures. It is those 218 millions of



manufacturing capital which have principally called into existence



those 3,311 millions of agricultural capital. The same



consideration holds good as respects means of transport; it is the



money expended in constructing them which has made those lands



which are within the reach of the canals more valuable. If the



means of transport along a canal be destroyed, we may use the water



which has been hitherto employed for transport, for irrigating



meadows -- apparently, therefore, for increasing agricultural



capital and agricultural rents, &c.; but even supposing that by



such a process the value of these meadows rose to millions, this



alteration, apparently profitable to agriculture, will nevertheless



lower the total value of the landed property which is within reach



of the canal ten times more.



    Considered from this point of view, from the circumstance that



the total manufacturing capital of a country is so small in



comparison with its total agricultural capital, conclusions must be



drawn of a totally different character from those which the present



and preceding school have drawn from it. The maintenance and



augmentation of the manufacturing power seem now, even to the



agriculturist, the more valuable, the less capital as compared with



agriculture it requires to absorb in itself and to put into



circulation. Yes, it must now become evident to the agriculturist,



and especially to the rent-owners and the landed proprietors of a



country, that it would be to their interest to maintain and develop



an internal manufacturing power, even had they to procure the



requisite capital without hope of direct recompense; just as it is



to their interest to construct canals, railways, and roads even if



these undertakings yield no real nett profit. Let us apply the



foregoing considerations to those industries which lie nearest and



are most necessary to agriculture, e.g. flour mills; and there will



be no room for doubt as to the correctness of our views. Compare,



on the one hand, the value of landed property and rent in a



district where a mill is not within reach of the agriculturist,



with their value in those districts where this industry is carried



on in their very midst, and we shall find that already this single



industry has a considerable effect on the value of land and on



rent; that there, under similar conditions of natural fertility,



the total value of the land has not merely increased to double, but



to ten or twenty times more than the cost of erecting the mill



amounted to; and that the landed proprietors would have obtained



considerable advantage by the erection of the mill, even if they



had built it at their common expense and presented it to the



miller. The latter circumstance, in fact, takes place every day in



the backwoods of North America, where, in cases when an individual



has not adequate capital to erect such works entirely at his own



expense, the landowner gladly helps him by contributing labour, by



team work, free gifts of timber, &c. In fact, the same thing also



occurred, although in another form, in countries of earlier



civilisation; here must undoubtedly be sought the origin of many



ancient feudal 'common mill' rights.



    As it is in the case of the corn mill, so is it in those of



saw, oil, and plaster mills, so is it in that of iron works;



everywhere it can be proved that the rent and the value of landed



property rise in proportion as the property lies nearer to these



industries, and especially according as they are in closer or less



close commercial relations with agriculture.



    And why should this not be the case with woollen, flax, hemp,



paper, and cotton mills? Why not with all manufacturing industries?



We see, at least, everywhere that rent and value of landed property



rise in exactly the same proportion with the proximity of that



property to the town, and with the degree in which the town is



populous and industrious. If in such comparatively small districts



we calculate the value of the landed property and the capital



expended thereon, and, on the other hand, the value of the capital



employed in various industries, and compare their total amount, we



shall find everywhere that the former is at least ten times larger



than the latter. But it would be folly to conclude from this that



a nation obtains greater advantages by investing its material



capital in agriculture than in manufactures, and that the former is



in itself more favourable to the augmentation of capital than the



latter. The increase of the material agricultural capital depends



for the most part on the increase of the material manufacturing



capital; and nations which do not recognise this truth, however



much they may be favoured by nature in agriculture, will not only



not progress, but will retrograde in wealth, population, culture,



and power.



    We see, nevertheless, how the proprietors of rent and of landed



property not unfrequently regard those fiscal and political



regulations which aim at the establishment of a native



manufacturing power as privileges which serve merely to enrich the



manufacturers, the burden of which they (the landed interest) have



exclusively to bear. They, who at the beginning of their



agricultural operations so clearly perceived what great advantages



they might obtain if a corn mill, a saw mill, or an iron work were



established in their neighbourhood, that they themselves submitted



to the greatest sacrifices in order to contribute towards the



erection of such works, can no longer, when their interests as



agriculturists have somewhat improved, comprehend what immense



advantages the total agricultural interest of the country would



derive from a perfectly developed national industry of its own, and



how its own advantage demands that it should submit to those



sacrifices without which this object cannot be attained. It



therefore happens, that, only in a few and only in very



well-educated nations, the mind of each separate landed proprietor,



though it is generally keenly enough alive to those interests which



lie close at hand, is sagacious enough to appreciate those greater



ones which are manifest to a more extended view.



    It must not, moreover, be forgotten that the popular theory has



materially contributed to confuse the opinions of landed



proprietors. Smith and Say endeavoured everywhere to represent the



exertions of manufacturers to obtain measures of protection as



inspirations of mere self-interest, and to praise, on the contrary,



the generosity and disinterestedness of the landed proprietors, who



are far from claiming any such measures for themselves. It appears,



however, that the landed proprietors have merely become mindful of



and been stimulated to the virtue of disinterestedness, which is so



highly attributed to them, in order to rid themselves of it. For in



the greatest number of, and in the most important, manufacturing



states, these landowners have also recently demanded and obtained



measures of protection, although (as we have shown in another



place) it is to their own greatest injury. If the landed



proprietors formerly made sacrifices to establish a national



manufacturing power of their own, they did what the agriculturist



in a country place does when he makes sacrifices in order that a



corn mill or an iron forge may be established in his vicinity. If



the landed proprietors now require protection also for their



agriculture, they do what those former landed proprietors would



have done if, after the mill has been erected by their aid, they



required the miller to help in cultivating their fields. Without



doubt that would be a foolish demand. Agriculture can only



progress, the rent and value of land can only increase, in the



ratio in which manufactures and commerce flourish; and manufactures



cannot flourish if the importation of raw materials and provisions



is restricted. This the manufacturers everywhere felt. For the



fact, however, that the landed proprietors notwithstanding obtained



measures of protection in most large states, there is a double



reason. Firstly, in states having representative government, the



landowner's influence is paramount in legislation, and the



manufacturers did not venture to oppose themselves perseveringly to



the foolish demand of the landowners, fearing lest they might



thereby incline the latter to favour the principles of free trade;



they preferred to agree with the landed proprietors.



    It was then insinuated by the school to the landed proprietors



that it is just as foolish to establish manufactures by artificial



means as it would be to produce wine in cold climates in



greenhouses; that manufactures would originate in the natural



course of things of their own accord; that agriculture affords



incomparably more opportunity for the increase of capital than



manufactures; that the capital of the nation is not to be augmented



by artificial measures; that laws and State regulations can only



induce a condition of things less favourable to the augmentation of



wealth. Finally, where the admission could not be avoided that



manufactures had an influence over agriculture, it was sought at



least to represent that influence to be as little and as uncertain



as possible. In any case (it was said) if manufactures had an



influence over agriculture, at least everything is injurious to



agriculture that is injurious to manufactures, and accordingly



manufactures also had an influence on the increase of the rent of



land, but merely an indirect one. But, on the other hand, the



increase of population and of cattle, the improvements in



agriculture, the perfection of the means of transport, &c. had a



direct influence on the increase of rent. The case is the same here



in reference to this distinction between direct and indirect



influence as on many other points where the school draws this



distinction (e.g. in respect of the results of mental culture), and



here also is the example already mentioned by us applicable; it is



like the fruit of the tree, which clearly (in the sense of the



school) is an indirect result, inasmuch as it grows on the twig,



which again is a fruit of the branch, this again is a fruit of the



trunk, and the latter a fruit of the root, which alone is a direct



product of the soil. Or would it not be just as sophistical to



speak of the population, the stock of cattle, the means of



transport, &c. as direct causes; but of manufactures, on the



contrary, as an indirect cause of the augmentation of rents, while,



nevertheless, one's very eyesight teaches one in every large



manufacturing country that manufactures themselves are a chief



cause of the augmentation of population, of the stock of cattle,



and of means of transport, &c.? And would it be logical and just to



co-ordinate these effects of manufactures with their cause -- in



fact, to put these results of manufactures at the head as main



causes, and to put the manufactures themselves as an indirect



(consequently, almost as a secondary) cause behind the former? And



what else can have induced so deeply investigating a genius as Adam



Smith to make use of an argument so perverted and so little in



accordance with the actual nature of things, than a desire to put



especially into the shade manufactures, and their influence on the



prosperity and the power of the nation, and on the augmentation of



the rent and the value of the land? And from what other motive can



this have taken place than a wish to avoid explanations whose



results would speak too loudly in favour of the system of



protection? The school has been especially unfortunate since the



time of Adam Smith in its investigations as to the nature of rent.



Ricardo, and after him Mill, M'Culloch, and others, are of opinion



that rent is paid on account of the natural productive fertility



inherent in the land itself. Ricardo has based a whole system on



this notion. If he had made an excursion to Canada, he would have



been able to make observations there in every valley, on every



hill, which would have convinced him that his theory is based on



sand. As he, however, only took into account the circumstances of



England, he fell into the erroneous idea that these English fields



and meadows for whose pretended natural productive capability such



handsome rents are now paid, have at all times been the same fields



and meadows. The original natural productive capability of land is



evidently so unimportant, and affords to the person using it so



small an excess of products, that the rent derivable from it alone



is not worth mentioning. All Canada in its original state



(inhabited merely by hunters) would yield in meat and skins



scarcely enough income to pay the salary of a single Oxonian



professor of political economy. The natural productive capability



of the soil in Malta consists of rocks, which would scarcely have



yielded a rent at any time. If we follow up with the mind's eye the



course of the civilisation of whole nations, and of their



conversion from the condition of hunters to the pastoral condition,



and from this to that of agriculturists, &c., we may easily



convince ourselves that the rent everywhere was originally nil, and



that it rose everywhere with the progress of civilisation, of



population, and with the increase of mental and material capital.



By comparing the mere agricultural nation with the agricultural,



manufacturing, and commercial nation, it will be seen that in the



latter twenty times more people live on rents than in the former.



According to Marshal's statistics of Great britain, for example, in



England and Scotland 16,537,398 human beings were living in 1831,



among whom were 1,116,398 rentiers. We could scarcely find in



Poland on an equal space of land the twentieth part of this number.



If we descend from generals to particulars and investigate the



origin and cause of the rental of separate estates, we find



everywhere that it is the result of a productive capability which



has been bestowed on it not spontaneously by nature, but chiefly



(directly or indirectly) through the mental and material labour and



capital employed thereon and through the development of society. We



see, indeed, how pieces of land yield rents which the hand of men



has never stirred by cultivation, as, for instance, quarries, sand



pits, pasture grounds; but this rent is merely the effect of the



increase of culture, capital, and population in the vicinity. We



see, on the other hand, that those pieces of land bring most rent



whose natural productive capability has been totally destroyed, and



which serve for no other use than for men to eat and drink, sit,



sleep, or walk, work, or enjoy themselves, teach or be taught upon,



viz. building sites.



    The basis of rent is the exclusive benefit or advantage which



the ground yields to that individual at whose exclusive disposal it



is placed, and the greatness of this benefit is determined



especially according to the amount of available mental and material



capital in the community in which he is placed, and also according



to the opportunity which the special situation and peculiar



character of the property and the utilisation of capital previously



invested therein affords to the person exclusively possessing the



property for obtaining material values, or for satisfying mental



and bodily requirements and enjoyments.



    Rent is the interest of a capital which is fixed to a natural



fund, or which is a capitalised natural fund. The territory,



however, of that nation which has merely capitalised the natural



funds devoted to agriculture, and which does so in that imperfect



manner which is the case in mere agriculture, yields incomparably



less rent than the territory of that nation which combines



agricultural and manufacturing industry on its territory. The



rentiers of such a country live mostly in the same nation which



supplies the manufactured goods. But when the nation which is far



advanced in agriculture and population establishes a manufacturing



industry of its own, it capitalises (as we have already proved in



a former chapter) not merely those powers of nature which are



specially serviceable for manufactures and were hitherto



unemployed, but also the greatest part of the manufacturing powers



serving for agriculture. The increase of rent in such a nation,



therefore, infinitely exceeds the interest of the material capital



required to develop the manufacturing power.







NOTES:







1. General Statistics of the British Empire London, 1836.







Chapter 21







The Manufacturing Power and Commerce







    We have hitherto merely spoken of the relations between



agriculture and manufactures, because they form the fundamental



ingredients of the national production, and because, before



obtaining a clear view of their mutual relations, it is impossible



to comprehend correctly the actual function and position of



commerce. Commerce is also certainly productive (as the school



maintains); but it is so in quite a different manner from



agriculture and manufactures. These latter actually produce goods,



commerce only brings about the exchange of the goods between



agriculturists and manufacturers, between producers and consumers.



From this it follows that commerce must be regulated according to



the interests and wants of agriculture and manufactures, not vice



versâ.



    But the school has exactly reversed this last dictum by



adopting as a favourite expression the saying of old Gourney,



'Laissez faire, laissez passer,' an expression which sounds no less



agreeably to robbers, cheats, and thieves than to the merchant, and



is on that account rather doubtful as a maxim. This perversity of



surrendering the interests of manufactures and agriculture to the



demands of commerce, without reservation, is a natural consequence



of that theory which everywhere merely takes into consideration



present values, but nowhere the powers that produce them, and



regards the whole world as but one indivisibie republic of



merchants. The school does not discern that the merchant may be



accomplishing his purpose (viz. gain of values by exchange) at the



expense of the agriculturists and manufacturers, at the expense of



the nation's productive powers, and indeed of its independence. It



is all the same to him; and according to the character of his



business and occupation, he need not trouble himself much



respecting the manner in which the goods imported or exported by



him act on the morality, the prosperity, or the power of the



nation. He imports poisons as readily as medicines. He enervates



whole nations through opium and spirituous liquors. Whether he by



his importations and smugglings brings occupation and sustenance to



hundreds of thousands, or whether they are thereby reduced to



beggary, does not signify to him as a man of business, if only his



own balance is increased thereby. Then if those who have been



reduced to want bread seek to escape the misery in their fatherland



by emigrating, he can still obtain profit by the business of



arranging their emigration. In the time of war he provides the



enemy with arms and ammunition. He would, if it were possible, sell



fields and meadows to foreign countries, and when he had sold the



last bit of land would place himself on board his ship and export



himself.



    It is therefore evident that the interest of individual



merchants and the interest of the commerce of a whole nation are



widely different things. In this sense Montesquieu has well said,



'If the State imposes restrictions on the individual merchant, it



does so in the interest of commerce, and his trade is nowhere more



restricted than in free and rich nations, and nowhere less so than



in nations governed by despots.'(1*) Commerce emanates from



manufactures and agriculture, and no nation which has not brought



within its own borders both these main branches of production to a



high state of development can attain (in our days) to any



considerable amount of internal and external commerce. In former



times there certainly existed separate cities or leagues of cities



which were enabled by means of foreign manufacturers and foreign



agriculturists to carry on a large exchange trade; but since the



great agricultural manufacturing commercial states have sprung up,



we can no longer think of originating a mere exchange trade such as



the Hanse Towns possessed. In any case such a trade is of so



precarious a character, that it hardly deserves consideration in



comparison with that which is based on the nation's own production.



    The most important objects of internal commerce are articles of



food, salt, fuel, and building material, clothing materials, then



agricultural and manufacturing utensils and implements, and the raw



materials of agricultural and mining production which are necessary



for manufactures. The extent of this internal inter change is



beyond all comparison greater in a nation in which manufacturing



industry has attained a high stage of development than in a merely



agricultural nation. At times in the latter the agriculturist lives



chiefly on his own productions. From want of much demand for



various products and lack of means of transport, he is obliged to



produce for himself all his requirements without regard to what his



land is more specially fitted to produce; from want of means of



exchange he must manufacture himself the greater part of the



manufactured articles which he requires. Fuel, building materials,



provisions, and mineral products can find only a very limited



market because of the absence of improved means of transport, and



hence cannot serve as articles for a distant trade.



    Owing to the limited market and the limited demand for such



products, no inducement for storing them or for the accumulation of



capital exists. Hence the capital devoted by mere agricultural



nations to internal commerce is almost nil; hence all articles of



production, which depend especially on good or bad weather, are



subject to extraordinary fluctuation in prices; hence the danger of



scarcity and famine is therefore greater the more any nation



restricts itself to agriculture.



    The internal commerce of a nation mainly arises in consequence



of and in proportion to the activity of its internal manufactures,



of the improved means of transport called forth by them, and of the



increase of population, and attains an importance which is ten to



twenty fold greater than the internal trade of a merely



agricultural nation, and five to ten fold that of the most



flourishing foreign trade. If anyone will compare the internal



commerce of England with that of Poland or Spain, he will find this



observation confirmed.



    The foreign commerce of agricultural nations of the temperate



zone, so long as it is limited to provisions and raw materials,



cannot attain to importance.



    Firstly, because the exports of the agricultural nation are



directed to a few manufacturing nations, which themselves carry on



agriculture, and which indeed, because of their manufactures and



their extended commerce, carry it on on a much more perfect system



than the mere agricultural nation; that export trade is therefore



neither certain nor uniform. The trade in mere products is always



a matter of extraordinary speculation, whose benefits fall mostly



to the speculating merchants, but not to the agriculturists or to



the productive power of the agricultural nation.



    Secondly, because the exchange of agricultural products for



foreign manufactured goods is liable to be greatly interrupted by



the commercial restrictions of foreign states and by wars.



    Thirdly, because the export of mere products chiefly benefits



countries which are situated near sea coasts and the banks of



navigable rivers, and does not benefit the inland territory, which



constitutes the greater part of the territory of the agricultural



nation.



    Fourthly and finally, because the foreign manufacturing nation



may find it to its interest to procure its means of subsistence and



raw materials from other countries and newly formed colonies.



    Thus the export of German wool to England is diminished by



importations into England from Australia; the exports of French and



German wines to England by importations from Spain, Portugal,



Sicily, the Spanish and Portuguese islands, and from the Cape; the



exports of Prussian timber by importations from Canada.



    In fact, preparations have already been made to supply England



with cotton chiefly from the East Indies. If the English succeed in



restoring the old commercial route, if the new State of Texas



becomes strong, if civilisation in Syria and Egypt, in Mexico and



the South American states progresses, the cotton planters of the



United States will also begin to perceive that their own internal



market will afford them the safest, most uniform, and constant



demand.



    In temperate climates, by far the largest part of a nation's



foreign commerce originates in its internal manufactures, and can



only be maintained and augmented by means of its own manufacturing



power.



    Those nations only which produce all kinds of manufactured



goods at the cheapest prices, can have commercial connections with



the people of all climates and of every degree of civilisation; can



supply all requirements, or if they cease, create new ones; can



take in exchange every kind of raw materials and means of



subsistence. Such nations only can freight ships with a variety of



objects, such as are required by a distant market which has no



internal manufactured goods of its own. Only when the export



freights themselves suffice to indemnify the voyage, can ships be



loaded with less valuable return freights.



    The most important articles of importation of the nations of



the temperate zone consist in the products of tropical climates, in



sugar, coffee, cotton, tobacco, tea, dye stuffs, cacao, spices, and



generally in those articles which are known under the name of



colonial produce. By far the greatest part of these products is



paid for with manufactured goods. In this interchange chiefly



consists the cause of the progress of industry in manufacturing



Countries of the temperate zone, and of the progress of



civilisation and production in the countries of the torrid zone.



This constitutes the division of labour, and combination of the



powers of production to their greatest extent, as these never



existed in ancient times, and as they first originated from the



Dutch and English.



    Before the discovery of the route round the Cape, the East



still far surpassed Europe in manufactures. Besides the precious



metals and small quantities of cloth, linen, arms, iron goods, and



some fabrics of luxury, European articles were but little used



there. The transport by land rendered both inward and outward



conveyance expensive. The export of ordinary agricultural products



and common manufactured goods, even if they had been produced in



excess, in exchange for the silks and cotton stuffs, sugar, and



spices, of the East, could not be hoped for. Whatever we may,



therefore, read of the importance of Oriental commerce in those



times, must always be understood relatively; it was important only



for that time, but unimportant compared with what it is now.



    The trade in the products of the torrid zone became more



important to Europe through the acquisition of larger quantities of



the precious metals in the interior and from America, and through



the direct intercourse with the East by the route round the Cape.



It could not, however, attain to universal importance as long as



the East produced more manufactured goods than she required.



    This commerce attained its present importance through the



colonisation of Europeans in the East and West Indies, and in North



and South America through the transplantation of the sugar cane, of



the coffee tree, of cotton, rice, indigo, &c., through the



transportation of negroes as slaves to America and the West Indies,



then through the successful competition of the European with the



East Indian manufacturers, and especially through the extension of



the Dutch and English sovereignty in foreign parts of the world,



while these nations, in contrast to the Spaniards and Portuguese,



sought and found their advantage more in the exchange of



manufactured goods for colonial goods, than in extortion.



    This commerce at present employs the most important part of the



large shipping trade and of the commercial and manufacturing



capital of Europe which is employed in foreign commerce; and all



the hundreds of millions in value of such products which are



transported annually from the countries of the torrid zone to those



of the temperate zone are, with but little exception, paid for in



manufactured goods.



    The exchange of colonial products for manufactured goods is of



manifold use to the productive powers of the countries of the



temperate zone. These articles serve either, as e.g. sugar, coffee,



tea, tobacco, partly as stimulants to agricultural and



manufacturing production, partly as actual means of nourishment;



the production of the manufactured goods which are required to pay



for the colonial products, occupies a larger number of



manufacturers; manufactories and manufacturing business can be



conducted on a much larger scale, and consequently more profitably;



this commerce, again, employs a larger number of ships, of seamen,



and merchants; and through the manifold increase of the population



thus occasioned, the demand for native agricultural products is



again very greatly increased.



    In consequence of the reciprocal operation which goes on



between manufacturing production and the productions of the torrid



zone, the English consume on an average two to three times more



colonial produce than the French, three to four times more than the



Germans, five to ten times more than the Poles.



    Moreover, the further extension of which colonial production is



still capable, may be recognised from a superficial calculation of



the area which is required for the production of those colonial



goods which are at present brought into commerce.



    If we take the present consumption of cotton at ten million



centners, and the average produce of an acre (40,000 square feet)



only at eight centners, this production requires not more than 1



1/4 million acres of land. If we estimate the quantity of sugar



brought into commerce at 14 million centners, and the produce of an



acre at 10 centners, this total production requires merely 1 1/2



million acres.



    If we assume for the remaining articles (coffee, rice, indigo,



spices, &c.) as much as for these two main articles, all the



colonial goods at present brought into commerce require no more



than seven to eight million acres, an area which is probably not



the fiftieth part of the surface of the earth which is suitable for



the culture of such articles.



    The English in the East Indies, the French in the Antilles, the



Dutch in Java and Sumatra, have recently afforded actual proof of



the possibility of increasing these productions in an extraordinary



manner. has increased her imports of cotton from England,



especially, the East Indies fourfold, and the English papers



confidently maintain that Great Britain (especially if she succeeds



in getting possession of the old commercial route to the East



Indies) could procure all her requirements of colonial products in



the course of a few years from India. This anticipation will not



appear exaggerated if we take into consideration the immense extent



of the English East Indian territory, its fertility, and the cheap



wages paid in those countries.



    While England in this manner gains advantage from the East



Indies, the progress in cultivation of the Dutch in the islands



will increase; in consequence of the dissolution of the Turkish



Empire a great portion of Africa and the west and middle of Asia



will become productive; the Texans will extend North American



cultivation over the whole of Mexico; orderly governments will



settle down in South America and promote the yield of the immense



productive capacity of these tropical countries.



    If thus the countries of the torrid zone produce enormously



greater quantities of colonial goods than heretofore, they will



supply themselves with the means of taking from the countries of



the temperate zone much larger quantities of manufactured goods;



and from the larger sale of manufactured goods the manufacturers



will be enabled to consume larger quantities of colonial goods. In



consequence of this increased production, and increase of the means



of exchange, the commercial intercourse between the agriculturists



of the torrid zone and the manufacturers of the temperate zone,



i.e. the great commerce of the world, will increase in future in a



far larger proportion than it has done in the course of the last



century.



    This present increase, and that yet to be anticipated, of the



now great commerce of the world, has its origin partly in the great



progress of the manufacturing powers of production, partly in the



perfection of the means of transport by water and by land, partly



in political events and developments.



    Through machinery and new inventions the imperfect



manufacturing industry of the East has been destroyed for the



benefit of the European manufacturing power, and the latter enabled



to supply the countries of the torrid zone with large quantities of



fabrics at the cheapest prices; and thus to give them motives for



augmenting their own powers of labour and production.



    In consequence of the great improvements in means of transport,



the countries of the torrid zone have been brought infinitely



nearer to the countries of the temperate zone; their mutual



commercial intercourse has infinitely increased through diminution



of risk, of time employed and of freights, and through greater



regularity; and it will increase infinitely more as soon as steam



navigation has become general, and the systems of railways extend



themselves to the interior of Asia, Africa, and South America.



    Through the secession of South America from Spain and Portugal,



and through the dissolution of the Turkish Empire, a mass of the



most fertile territories of the earth have been liberated, which



now await with longing desire for the civilised nations of the



earth to lead them in peaceful concord along the path of the



security of law and order, of civilisation and prosperity; and



which require nothing more than that manufactured goods should be



brought to them, and their own productions taken in exchange.



    One may see that there is sufficient room here for all



countries of Europe and North America which are fitted to develop



a manufacturing power of their own, to bring their manufacturing



production into full activity, to augment their own consumption of



the products of tropical countries, and to extend in the same



proportion their direct commercial intercourse with the latter.











NOTES:







1. Esprit des Lois, Book xx. chap. xii.







Chapter 22







The manufacturing Power and Navigation, Naval Power and



Colonization







    Manufactures as the basis of a large home and foreign commerce



are also the fundamental conditions of the existence of any



considerable mercantile marine. Since the most important function



of inland transport consists in supplying manufacturers with fuel



and building materials, raw materials and means of subsistence, the



coast and river navigation cannot well prosper in a merely



agricultural State. The coast navigation, however, is the school



and the depôt of sailors, ships' captains, and of shipbuilding, and



hence in merely agricultural countries the main foundation for any



large maritime navigation is lacking.



    International commerce consists principally (as we have shown



in the previous chapter) in the interchange of manufactured goods



for raw materials and natural products, and especially for the



products of tropical countries. But the agricultural countries of



the temperate zone have merely to offer to the countries of the



torrid zone what they themselves produce, or what they cannot make



use of, namely, raw materials and articles of food; hence direct



commercial intercourse between them and the countries of the torrid



zone, and the ocean transport which arises from it, is not to be



expected. Their consumption of colonial produce must be limited to



those quantities for which they can pay by the sale of agricultural



products and raw materials to the manufacturing and commercial



nations; they must consequently procure these articles second-hand.



In the commercial intercourse between an agricultural nation and a



manufacturing commercial nation, however, the greatest part of the



sea transport must fall to the latter, even if it is not in its



power by means of navigation laws to secure the lion's share to



itself.



    Besides internal and international commerce, sea fisheries



occupy a considerable number of ships; but again from this branch



of industry, as a rule, nothing or very little falls to the



agricultural nation; as there cannot exist in it much demand for



the produce of the sea, and the manufacturing commercial nations



are, out of regard to the maintenance of their naval power,



accustomed to protect their home market exclusively for their own



sea fisheries.



    The fleet recruits its sailors and pilots from the private



mercantile marine, and experience has as yet always taught that



able sailors cannot be quickly drilled like land troops, but must



be trained up by serving in the coasting and international



navigation and in sea fisheries. The naval power of nations will



therefore always be on the same footing with these branches of



maritime industry, it will consequently in the case of the mere



agricultural nation be almost nil.



    The highest means of development of the manufacturing power, of



the internal and external commerce proceeding from it, of any



considerable coast and sea navigation, of extensive sea fisheries,



and consequently of a respectable naval power, are colonies.



    The mother nation supplies the colonies with manufactured



goods, and obtains in return their surplus produce of agricultural



products and raw materials; this interchange gives activity to its



manufactures, augments thereby its population and the demand for



its internal agricultural products, and enlarges its mercantile



marine and naval power. The superior power of the mother country in



population, capital, and enterprising spirit, obtains through



colonisation an advantageous outlet, which is again made good with



interest by the fact that a considerable portion of those who have



enriched themselves in the colony bring back the capital which they



have acquired there, and pour it into the lap of the mother nation,



or expend their income in it.



    Agricultural nations, which already need the means of forming



colonies, also do not possess the power of utilising and



maintaining them. What the colonies require, cannot be offered by



them, and what they can offer the colony itself possesses.



    The exchange of manufactured goods for natural products is the



fundamental condition on which the position of the present colonies



continues. On that account the United States of North America



seceded from England as soon as they felt the necessity and the



power of manufacturing for themselves, of carrying on for



themselves navigation and commerce with the countries of the torrid



zone; on that account Canada will also secede after she has reached



the same point, on that account independent agricultural



manufacturing commercial States will also arise in the countries of



temperate climate in Australia in the course of time.



    But this exchange between the countries of the temperate zone



and the countries of the torrid zone is based upon natural causes,



and will be so for all time. Hence India has given up her



manufacturing power with her independence to England; hence all



Asiatic countries of the torrid zone will pass gradually under the



dominion of the manufacturing commercial nations of the temperate



zone; hence the islands of the torrid zone which are at present



dependent colonies can hardly ever liberate themselves from that



condition; and the States of South America will always remain



dependent to a certain degree on the manufacturing commercial



nations.



    England owes her immense colonial possessions solely to her



surpassing manufacturing power. If the other European nations wish



also to partake of the profitable business of cultivating waste



territories and civilising barbarous nations, or nations once



civilised but which are again sunk in barbarism, they must commence



with the development of their own internal manufacturing powers, of



their mercantile marine, and of their naval power. And should they



be hindered in these endeavours by England's manufacturing,



commercial, and naval supremacy, in the union of their powers lies



the only means of reducing such unreasonable pretensions to



reasonable ones.







Chapter 23







The Manufacturing Power and the Instrument of Circulation







    If the experience of the last twenty-five years has confirmed,



as being partly correct, the principles which have been set up by



the prevailing theory in contradiction to the ideas of the



so-called 'mercantile' system on the circulation of the precious



metals and on the balance of trade, it has, on the other hand,



brought to light important weak points in that theory respecting



those subjects.



    Experience has proved repeatedly (and especially in Russia and



North America) that in agricultural nations, whose manufacturing



market is exposed to the free competition of a nation which has



attained manufacturing supremacy, the value of the importation of



manufactured goods exceeds frequently to an enormous extent the



value of the agricultural products which are exported, and that



thereby at times suddenly an extraordinary exportation of precious



metals is occasioned, whereby the economy of the agricultural



nation, especially if its internal interchange is chiefly based on



paper circulation, falls into confusion, and national calamities



are the result.



    The popular theory maintains that if we provide ourselves with



the precious metals in the same manner as every other article, it



is in the main indifferent whether large or small quantities of



precious metals are in circulation, as it merely depends on the



relation of the price of any article in exchange whether that



article shall be cheap or dear; a derangement in the rate of



exchange acts simply like a premium on a larger exportation of



goods from that country, in favour of which it oscillates from time



to time: consequently the stock of metallic money and the balance



between the imports and exports, as well as all the other



economical circumstances of the nation, would regulate themselves



in the safest and best manner by the operation of the natural



course of things.



    This argument is perfectly correct as respects the internal



interchange of a nation; it is demonstrated in the commercial



intercourse between town and town, between town and country



districts, between province and province, as in the union between



State and State. Any political economist would be deserving of pity



who believed that the balance of the mutual imports and exports



between the various states of the American Union or the German



Zollverein, or between England, Scotland, and Ireland, can be



regulated better through State regulations and laws than through



free interchange. On the hypothesis that a similar union existed



between the various states and nations of the earth, the argument



of the theory of trusting to the natural course of things would be



quite consistent. Nothing, however, is more contrary to experience



than to suppose under the existing conditions of the world that in



international exchange things act with similar effect.



    The imports and exports of independent nations are regulated



and controlled at present not by what the popular theory calls the



natural course of things, but mostly by the commercial policy and



the power of the nation, by the influence of these on the



conditions of the world and on foreign countries and peoples, by



colonial possessions and internal credit establishments, or by war



and peace. Here, accordingly, all conditions shape themselves in an



entirely different manner than between societies which are united



by political, legal, and administrative bonds in a state of



unbroken peace and of perfect unity of interests.



    Let us take into consideration as an example the conditions



between England and North America. If England from time to time



throws large masses of manufactured goods on to the North American



market; if the Bank of England stimulates or restricts, in an



extraordinary degree, the exports to North America and the credit



granted to her by its raising or lowering its discount rates; if,



in addition to and as a consequence of this extraordinary glut of



the American market for manufactured goods, it happens that the



English manufactured goods can be obtained cheaper in North America



than in England, nay, sometimes much below the cost price of



production; if thus North America gets into a state of perpetual



indebtedness and of an unfavourable condition of exchange towards



England, yet would this disorganised state of things readily



rectify itself under a state of perfectly unrestricted exchange



between the two countries. North America produces tobacco, timber,



corn, and all sorts of means of subsistence very much cheaper than



England does. The more English manufactured goods go to North



America, the greater are the means and inducements to the American



planter to produce commodities of value sufficient to exchange for



them; the more credit is given to him the greater is the impulse to



procure for himself the means of discharging his liabilities; the



more the rate of exchange on England is to the disadvantage of



North America, the greater is the inducement to export American



agricultural products, and hence the more successful will be the



competition of the American agriculturist in the English produce



market.



    In consequence of these exportations the adverse rate of



exchange would speedily rectify itself; indeed, it could not even



reach any very unfavourable point, because the certain anticipation



in North America that the indebtedness which had been contracted



through the large importation of manufactured goods in the course



of the present year, would equalise itself through the surplus



production and increased exports of the coming year, would be



followed by easier accommodation in the money market and in credit.



    Such would be the state of things if the interchange between



the English manufacturer and the American agriculturist were as



little restricted as the interchange between the English



manufacturer and the Irish agriculturist is. But they are and must



be different: if England imposes a duty on American tobacco of from



five hundred to one thousand per cent; if she renders the



importation of American timber impossible by her tariffs, and



admits the American means of subsistence only in the event of



famine, for at present the American agricultural production cannot



balance itself with the American consumption of English



manufactured goods, nor can the debt incurred for those goods be



liquidated by agricultural products; at present the American



exports to England are limited by narrow bounds, while the English



exports to North America are practically unlimited; the rate of



exchange between both countries under such circumstances cannot



equalise itself, and the indebtedness of America towards England



must be discharged by exports of bullion to the latter country.



    These exports of bullion, however, as they undermine the



American system of paper circulation, necessarily lead to the ruin



of the credit of the American banks, and therewith to general



revolutions in the prices of landed property and of the goods in



circulation, and especially to those general confusions of prices



and credit which derange and overturn the economy of the nation,



and with which, we may observe, that the North American free States



are visited whenever they have found them selves unable to restore



a balance between their imports and their exports by S tate tariff



regulations.



    It cannot afford any great consolation to the North American



that in consequence of bankruptcies and diminished consumption, the



imports and exports between both countries are at a later period



restored to a tolerable proportion to one another. For the



destruction and convulsions of commerce and in credit, as well as



the reduction in consumption, are attended with disadvantages to



the welfare and happiness of individuals and to public order, from



which one cannot very quickly recover and the frequent repetition



of which must necessarily leave permanently, ruinous consequences.



    Still less can it afford any consolation to the North



Americans, if the popular theory maintains that it is an



indifferent matter whether large or small quantities of precious



metals are in circulation; that we exchange products merely for



products; whether this exchange is made by means of large or small



quantities of metallic circulation is of no importance to



individuals. To the producer or proprietor it certainly may be of



no consequence whether the object of his production or of his



possession is worth 100 centimes or 100 francs, provided always



that he can procure with the 100 centimes as large a quantity of



objects of necessity and of enjoyment as he can with the 100



francs. But low or high prices are thus a matter of indifference



only in case they remain on the same footing uninterruptedly for a



long period of time.



    If, however, they fluctuate frequently and violently,



disarrangements arise which throw the economy of every individual,



as well as that of society, into confusion. Whoever has purchased



raw materials at high prices, cannot under low prices, by the sale



of his manufactured article, realise again that sum in precious



metals which his raw materials have cost him. Whoever has bought at



high prices landed property and has left a portion of the purchase



money as a mortgage debt upon it, loses his ability of payment and



his property; because, under diminished prices, probably the value



of the entire property will scarcely equal the amount of the



mortgage. Whoever has taken leases of property under a state of



high prices, finds himself ruined by the decrease in prices, or at



least unable to fulfil the covenants of his leases. The greater the



rising and falling of prices, and the more frequently that



fluctuations occur, the more ruinous is their effect on the



economical conditions of the nation and especially on credit. But



nowhere are these disadvantageous effects of the unusual influx or



efflux of precious metals seen in a more glaring light than in



those countries which are entirely dependent on foreign nations in



respect of their manufacturing requirements and the sale of their



own products, and whose commercial transactions are chiefly based



on paper circulation.



    It is acknowledged that the quantity of bank notes which a



country is able to put into and to maintain in circulation, is



dependent on the largeness of the amount of metallic money which it



possesses. Every bank will endeavour to extend or limit its paper



circulation and its business in proportion to the amount of



precious metals lying in its vaults. If the increase in its own



money capital or in deposits is large, it will give more credit;



and through this credit, increase the credit given by its debtors,



and by so doing raise the amount of consumption and prices;



especially those of landed property. If, on the contrary, an efflux



of precious metals is perceptible, such a bank will limit its



credit, and thereby occasion restriction of credit and consumption



by its debtors, and by the debtors of its debtors, and so on to



those who by credit are engaged in bringing into consumption the



imported manufactured goods. In such countries, therefore, the



whole system of credit, the market for goods and products, and



especially the money value of all landed property, is thrown into



confusion by any unusual drain of metallic money.



    The cause of the latest as well as of former American



commercial crises, has been alleged to exist in the American



banking and paper system. The truth is that the banks have helped



to bring about these crises in the manner above named, but the main



cause of their occurrence is that since the introduction of the '



compromise, bill the value of the English manufactured goods has



far surpassed the value of the exported American products, and that



thereby the United States have become indebted to the English to



the amount of several hundreds of millions for which they could not



pay in products. The proof that these crises are occasioned by



disproportionate importation is, that they have always taken place



whenever (in consequence of peace having set in or of a reduction



being made in the American customs duties) importation of



manufactured goods into the United States has been unusually large,



and that they have never occurred as long as the imports of goods



have been prevented by customs duties on imports from exceeding the



value of the exports of produce.



    The blame for these crises has further been laid on the large



capital which has been expended in the United States in the



construction of canals and railways, and which has mostly been



procured from England by means of loans. The truth is that these in



loans have merely assisted in delaying the crises for several



years, and increasing it when it arose; but these very loans



themselves have evidently been incurred through the inequality



which had arisen between the imports and exports, and but for that



inequality would not have been made and could not have been made.



    While North America became indebted to the English for large



sums through the large importation of manufactured goods which



could not be paid for in produce, but only in the precious metals,



the English were enabled, and in consequence of the unequal rates



of exchange and interest found it to their advantage, to have this



balance paid for in American railway, canal and bank stocks, or in



American State paper.



    The more the import of manufactured goods into America



surpassed her exports in produce, and the greater that the demand



for such paper in England became, the more were the North Americans



incited to embark in public enterprises; and the more that capital



was invested in such enterprises in North America, the greater was



the demand for English manufactured goods, and at the same time the



disproportion between the American imports and exports.



    If on the one hand the importation of English manufactured



goods into North America was promoted by the credit given by the



American banks, the Bank of England on the other side through the



credit facilities which it gave and by its low rates of discount



operated in the same direction. It has been proved by an official



account of the English Committee on Trade and Manufactures, that



the Bank of England lessened (in consequence of these discounts)



the cash in its possession from eight million pounds to two



millions. It thereby on the one hand weakened the effect of the



American protective system to the advantage of the English



competition with the American manufactories; on the other hand it



thus offered facilities for, and stimulated, the placing of



American stocks and State paper in England. For as long as money



could be got in England at three per cent. the American contractors



and loan procurers who offered six per cent interest had no lack of



buyers of their paper in England.



    These conditions of exchange afforded the appearance of much



prosperity, although under them the American manufactories were



being gradually crushed. For the American agriculturists sold a



great part of that surplus produce which under free trade they



would have sold to England, or which under a moderate system of



protection of their own manufactories they would have sold to the



working men employed therein, to those workmen who were employed in



public works and who were paid with English capital. Such an



unnatural state of things could not, however, last long in the face



of opposing and divided national interests, and the break up of it



was the more disadvantageous to North America the longer it was



repressed. As a creditor can keep the debtor on his legs for a long



time by renewals of credit, but the bankruptcy of the debtor must



become so much the greater the longer he is enabled to prolong a



course of ruinous trading by means of continually augmented credit



from the creditor, so was it also in this case.



    The cause of the bankruptcy in America was the unusual export



of bullion which took place from England to foreign countries in



consequence of insufficient crops and in consequence of the



Continental protective systems. We say in consequence of the



Continental protective systems, because the English -- if the



European Continental markets had remained open to them -- would



have covered their extraordinary importations of corn from the



Continent chiefly by means of extraordinary export of English



manufactured goods to the Continent, and because the English



bullion -- even had it flown over for a time to the continent --



would again have found its way back to England in a short time in



consequence of the augmented export of manufactured goods. In such



a case the Continental manufactories would undoubtedly have fallen



a sacrifice to the English-American commercial operations.



    As matters stood, however, the Bank of England could only help



itself by limiting its credit and increasing its rate of discount.



In consequence of this measure not only the demand for more



American stocks and State paper fell off in England, but also such



paper as was already in circulation now forced itself more on the



market. The United States were thereby not merely deprived of the



means of covering their current deficit by the further sale of



paper, but payment of the whole debt they had contracted in the



course of many years with England by means of their sales of stocks



and State paper became liable to be demanded in money. It now



appeared that the cash circulation in America really belonged to



the English. It appeared yet further that the English could dispose



of that ready money on whose possession the whole bank and paper



system of the United States was based, according to their own



inclination. If, however, they disposed of it, the American bank



and paper system would tumble down like a house built of cards, and



with it the foundation would fall whereon rested the prices of



landed property, consequently the economical means of existence of



a great number of private persons.



    The American banks tried to avoid their fall by suspending



specie payments, and indeed this was the only means of at least



modifying it; on the one hand they tried by this means to gain time



so as to decrease the debt of the United States through the yield



of the new cotton crops and to pay it off by degrees in this



manner; on the other hand they hoped by means of the reduction of



credit occasioned by the suspension to lessen the imports of



English manufactured goods and to equalise them in future with



their own country's exports.



    How far the exportation of cotton can afford the means of



balancing the importation of manufactured goods is, however, very



doubtful. For more than twenty years the production of this article



has constantly outstripped the consumption, so that with the



increased production the prices have fallen more and more. Hence it



happens that, on the one hand, the cotton manufacturers are exposed



to severe competition with linen manufactures, perfected as these



are by greatly improved machinery; while the cotton planters, on



the other hand, are exposed to it from the planters of Texas,



Egypt, Brazil, and the East Indies.



    It must, in any case, be borne in mind that the exports of



cotton of North America benefit those States to the least extent



which consume most of the English manufactured goods.



    In these States, namely, those which derive from the



cultivation of corn and from cattle-breeding the chief means of



procuring manufactured goods, a crisis of another kind now



manifests itself. In consequence of the large importation of



English manufactured goods the American manufactures were



depressed. All increase in population and capital was thereby



forced to the new settlements in the west. Every new settlement



increases at the commencement the demand for agricultural products,



but yields after the lapse of a few years considerable surplus of



them. This has already taken place in those settlements. The



Western States will therefore pour, in the course of the next few



years, into the Eastern States considerable surplus produce, by the



newly constructed canals and railways; while in the Eastern States,



in consequence of their manufactories being depressed by foreign



competition, the number of consumers has decreased and must



continually decrease. From this, depreciation in the value of



produce and of land must necessarily result, and if the Union does



not soon prepare to stop up the sources from which the



above-described money crises emanate, a general bankruptcy of the



agriculturists in the corn-producing States is unavoidable.



    The commercial conditions between England and North America



which we have above explained, therefore teach:



    (1) That a nation which is far behind the English in capital



and manufacturing power cannot permit the English to obtain a



predominating competition on its manufacturing market without



becoming permanently indebted to them; without being rendered



dependent on their money institutions, and drawn into the whirlpool



of their agricultural, industrial, and commercial crises.



    (2) That the English national bank is able by its operations to



depress the prices of English manufactured goods in the American



markets which are placed under its influence -- to the advantage of



the English and to the disadvantage of the American manufactories.



    (3) That the English national bank could effect by its



operations the consumption by the North Americans, for a series of



years, of a much larger value of imported goods than they would be



able to repay by their exportation of products, and that the



Americans had to cover their deficit during several years by the



exportation of stocks and State paper.



    (4) That under such circumstances the Americans carried on



their internal interchange and their bank and paper-money system



with ready money, which the English bank was able to draw to itself



for the most part by its own operations whenever it felt inclined



so to do.



    (5) That the fluctuations in the money market under all



circumstances act on the economy of the nations in a highly



disadvantageous manner, especially in countries where an extensive



bank and paper-money system is based on the possession of certain



quantities of the precious metals.



    (6) That the fluctuations in the money market and the crises



which result therefrom can only be prevented, and that a solid



banking system can only be founded and maintained, if the imports



of the country are placed on a footing of equality to the exports.



    (7) That this equality can less easily be maintained in



proportion as foreign manufactured goods can successfully compete



in the home manufacturing markets, and in proportion as the



exportation of native agricultural products is limited by foreign



commercial restrictions; finally, that this equality can less



easily be disturbed in proportion as the nation is independent of



foreign nations for its supply of manufactured goods, and for the



disposal of its own produce.



    These doctrines are also confirmed by the experience of Russia.



We may remember to what convulsions public credit in the Russian



Empire was subjected as long as the market there was open to the



overwhelming consignments of English manufactured goods, and that



since the introduction of the tariff of 1821 no similar convulsion



has occurred in Russia.



    The popular theory has evidently fallen into the opposite



extreme to the errors of the so-called mercantile system. It would



be of course false if we maintained that the wealth of nations



consisted merely in precious metals; that a nation can only become



wealthy if it exports more goods than it imports, and if hence the



balance is discharged by the importation of precious metals. But it



is also erroneous if the popular theory maintains, under the



existing conditions of the world, that it does not signify how much



or how little precious metals circulate in a nation; that the fear



of possessing too little of the precious metals is a frivolous one,



that we ought rather to further their exportation than favour their



importation, &c. &c. This manner of reasoning would only be correct



in case we could consider all nations and countries as united under



one and the same system of law; if no commercial restrictions of



any kind against the exportation of our products existed in those



nations for whose manufactured goods we can only repay with the



productions of our agriculture; if the changes wrought by war and



peace caused no fluctuations in production and consumption, in



prices, and on the money market; if the great credit institutions



do not seek to extend their influence over other nations for the



special interest of the nation to which they belong. But as long as



separate national interests exist, a wise State policy will advise



every great nation to guard itself by its commercial system against



extraordinary money fluctuations and revolutions in prices which



overturn its whole internal economy, and it will attain this



purpose only by placing its internal manufacturing production in a



position of proper equality with its internal agricultural



production and its imports with its exports.



    The prevailing theory has evidently not sufficiently



discriminated between the mere possession of the precious metals



and the power of disposition of the precious metals in



international interchange. Even in private exchange, the necessity



of this distinction is clearly evident. No one wishes to keep money



by him, everyone tries to remove it from the house as soon as



possible; but everybody at the same time seeks to be able to



dispose at any time of the sums which he requires. The indifference



in regard to the actual possession of ready money is manifested



everywhere in proportion to wealth. The richer the individual is,



the less he cares about the actual possession of ready money if



only he is able at any hour to dispose of the ready cash lying in



the safes of other individuals; the poorer, however, the individual



is, and the smaller his power of disposing of the ready money lying



in other people's hands, the more anxiously must he take care to



have in readiness what is required. The same is the case with



nations which are rich in industry or poor in industry. If England



cares but little as a rule about how great or how small a quantity



of gold or silver bars are exported out of the country, she is



perfectly well aware that an extraordinary export of precious



metals occasions on the one hand a rise in the value of money and



in discount rates, on the other hand a fall in the prices of



fabrics, and that she can regain through larger exportation of



fabrics or through realisation of foreign stocks and State paper



speedy possession of the ready money required for her trade.



England resembles the rich banker who, without having a thaler in



his pocket, can draw for any sum he pleases on neighbouring or more



distant business connections. If, however, in the case of merely



agricultural nations extraordinary exports of coin take place, they



are not in the same favourable position, because their means of



procuring the ready money they require are very limited, not merely



on account of the small value in exchange of their products and



agricultural values, but also on account of the hindrances which



foreign laws put in the way of their exportation. They resemble the



poor man who can draw no bills on his business friends, but who is



drawn upon if the rich man gets into any difficulty; who can,



therefore, not even call what is actually in his hands, his own.



    A nation obtains the power of disposition of the amount of



ready money which is always required for its internal trade, mainly



through the possession or the production of those goods and values



whose facility of exchange approaches most nearly to that of the



precious metals.



    The diversity of this property of the facility of exchange in



respect to the various articles of commerce and of property, has



been as little taken into consideration by the popular school of



economists in judging of international commerce, as the power of



disposition of the precious metals. If we consider in this respect



the various articles of value existing in private interchange, we



perceive that many of them are fixed in such a way that their value



is exchangeable only on the spot where they are, and that even



there their exchange is attended with great costs and difficulties.



To that class belong more than three-fourths of all national



property-namely, immovable properties and fixed plant and



instruments. However large the landed property of an individual may



be, he cannot send his fields and meadows to town in order to



obtain money or goods for them. He can, indeed, raise mortgages on



such property, but he must first find a lender on them; and the



further from his estate that such an individual resides, the



smaller will be the probability of the borrower's requirements



being satisfied.



    Next after property thus fixed to the locality, the greatest



part of agricultural products (excepting colonial produce and a few



less valuable articles) have in regard to international intercourse



the least facility for exchange. The greatest part of these values,



as e.g. building materials and wood for fuel, bread stuffs, &c.,



fruit, and cattle, can only be sold within a reasonable distance of



the place where they are produced, and if a great surplus of them



exists they have to be warehoused in order to become realisable. So



far as such products can be exported to foreign countries their



sale again is limited to certain manufacturing and commercial



nations, and in these also their sale is generally limited by



duties on importation and is affected by the larger or smaller



produce of the purchasing nation's own harvests. The inland



territories of North America might be completely overstocked with



cattle and products, but it would not be possible for them to



procure through exportation of this excess considerable amounts of



the precious metals from South America, from England, or from the



European continent. The valuable manufactured goods of common use,



on the other hand, possess incomparably greater facilities for



exchange. They find at ordinary times a sale in all open markets of



the world; and at extraordinary crises they also find a sale (at



lower prices) in those markets whose protective tariffs are



calculated to operate adversely merely in ordinary times. The power



of exchange of these articles clearly approaches most nearly to



that of the precious metals, and the experience of England shows



that if in consequence of deficient harvests money crises occur,



the increased exportation of fabrics, and of foreign stocks and



State paper, quickly rectifies the balance. The latter, the foreign



stocks and State paper, which are evidently the results of former



favourable balances of exchange caused by exportations of fabrics,



constitute in the hands of the nation which is rich in



manufacturing industry so many bills which can be drawn on the



agricultural nation, which at the time of an extraordinary demand



for the precious metals are indeed drawn with loss to the



individual owner of them (like the manufactured goods at the time



of money crises), but, nevertheless, with immense advantage to the



maintenance of the economical conditions of that nation which is



rich in manufacturing industry.



    However much the doctrine of the balance of trade may have been



scorned by the popular school, observations like those above



described encourage us nevertheless to express the opinion that



between large and independent nations something of the nature of a



balance of trade must exist; that it is dangerous for great nations



to remain for a long period at very considerable disadvantage in



respect of this balance, and that a considerable and lasting efflux



of the precious metals must always be followed as a consequence by



important revolutions in the system of credit and in the condition



of prices in the interior of the nation. We are far from wishing in



these remarks to revive the doctrine of the balance of trade as it



existed under the so-called 'mercantile system,' and to maintain



that the nation ought to impose obstacles in the way of the



exportation of precious metals, or that we must keep a specially



exact account with each individual nation, or that in the commerce



between great nations a few millions difference between the imports



and exports is of great moment. What we deny is merely this: that



a great and independent nation, as Adam Smith maintains at the



conclusion of his chapter devoted to this subject,(1*) 'may



continually import every year considerably larger values in



products and fabrics than it exports; that the quantities of



precious metals existing in such a nation may decrease considerably



from year to year and be replaced by paper circulation in the



interior; moreover, that such a nation may allow its indebtedness



towards another nation continually to increase and expand, and at



the same time nevertheless make progress from year to year in



prosperity.



    This opinion, expressed by Adam Smith and maintained since that



time by his school, is alone that which we here characterise as one



that has been contradicted a hundred times by experience, as one



that is contrary in the very nature of things to common sense, in



one word (to retort upon Adam Smith his own energetic expression)



as 'an absurdity.'



    It must be well understood that we are not speaking here of



countries which carry on the production of the precious metals



themselves at a profit, from which therefore the export of these



articles has quite the character of an export of manufactured



goods. We are also not speaking of that difference in the balance



of trade which must necessarily arise if the nation rates its



exports and imports at those prices which they have in their own



seaport towns. That in such a case the amount of imports of every



nation must exceed its exports by the total amount of the nation's



own commercial profits (a circumstance which speaks to its



advantage rather than to its disadvantage), is clear and



indisputable. Still less do we mean to deny the extraordinary cases



where the greater exportation rather denotes loss of value than



gain, as e.g. if property is lost by shipwreck. The popular school



has made clever use of all those delusions arising from a



shopkeeper-like calculation and comparison of the value of the



exchanges arising from the exports and imports, in order to make us



disbelieve in the disadvantages which result from a real and



enormous disproportion between the exports and imports of any great



and independent nation, even though such disproportion be not



permanent, which shows itself in such immense sums as for instance



in the case of France in 1786 and 1789, in that of Russia in 1820



and 1821, and in that of the United States of North America after



the 'Compromise Bill.'



    Finally, we desire to speak (and this must be specially noted)



not of colonies, not of dependent countries, not of small states or



of single independent towns, but of entire, great, independent



nations, which possess a commercial system of their own, a national



system of agriculture and industry, a national system of money and



credit.



    It evidently consists with the character of colonies that their



exports can surpass their imports considerably and continuously,



without thereby involving any conclusion as to the decrease or



increase of their prosperity. The colony always prospers in the



proportion in which the total amount of its exports and imports



increases year by year. If its export of colonial produce exceeds



its imports of manufactured goods considerably and lastingly the



main cause of this may be that the landed proprietors of the colony



live in the mother country, and that they receive their income in



the shape of colonial goods, in produce, or in the money which has



been obtained for them. If, however, the exports of fabrics to the



colony exceed the imports of colonial goods considerably, this may



be chiefly due to the fact that by emigrations or loans from year



to year large masses of capital go to the colony. This latter



circumstance is, of course, of the utmost advantage to the



prosperity of the colony. It can continue for centuries and yet



commercial crises under such circumstances may be infrequent or



impossible, because the colony is endangered neither by wars nor by



hostile commercial measures, nor by operations of the national bank



of the mother country, because it possesses no independent system



of commerce, credit, and industry peculiar to itself, but is, on



the contrary, supported and constantly upheld by the institutions



of credit and political measures of the mother country.



    Such a condition existed for more than a century with advantage



between North America and England, exists still between England and



Canada, and will probably exist for centuries between England and



Australia.



    This condition becomes fundamentally changed, however, from the



moment in which the colony appears as an independent nation with



every claim to the attributes of a great and independent



nationality -- in order that it may develop a power and policy of



its own and its own special system of commerce and credit. The



former colony then enacts laws for the special benefit of its own



navigation and naval power -- it establishes in favour of its own



internal industry a customs tariff of its own; it establishes a



national bank of its own, &c., provided namely that the new nation



thus passing from the position of a colony to independence feels



itself capable, by reason of the mental, physical, and economical



endowments which it possesses, of becoming an industrial and



commercial nation. The mother country, in consequence, places



restrictions, on its side, on the navigation, commerce, and



agricultural production of the former colony, and acts, by its



institutions of credit, exclusively for the maintenance of its own



national economical conditions.



    But it is precisely the instance of the North American colonies



as they existed before the American War of Independence by which



Adam Smith seeks to prove the above-mentioned highly paradoxical



opinion: that a country can continually increase its exportation of



gold and silver, decrease its circulation of the precious metals,



extend its paper circulation, and increase its debts contracted



with other nations while enjoying simultaneously steadily



increasing prosperity. Adam Smith has been very careful not to cite



the example of two nations which have been independent of one



another for some time, and whose interests of navigation, commerce,



industry, and agriculture are in competition with those of other



rival nations, in proof of his opinion he merely shows us the



relation of a colony to its mother country. If he had lived to the



present time and only written his book now, he would have been very



careful not to cite the example of North America, as this example



proves in our days just the opposite of what he attempts by it to



demonstrate.



    Under such circumstances, however, it may be urged against us



that it would be incomparably more to the advantage of the United



States if they returned again to the position of an English colony.



To this we answer, yes, provided always that the United States do



not know how to utilise their national independence so as to



cultivate and develop a national industry of their own, and a



self-supporting system of commerce and credit which is independent



of the world outside. But (it may be urged) is it not evident that



if the United States had continued to exist as a British colony no



English corn law would ever have been passed; that England would



never have imposed such high duties on American tobacco; that



continual quantities of timber would have been exported from the



United States to England; that England, far from ever entertaining



the idea of promoting the production of cotton in other countries,



would have endeavoured to give the citizens of the United States a



monopoly in this article, and to maintain it; that consequently



commercial crises such as have occurred within the last decades in



North America, would have been impossible? Yes; if the United



States do not manufacture, if they do not found a durable system of



credit of their own; if they do not desire or are not able to



develop a naval power. But then, in that case, the citizens of



Boston have thrown the tea into the sea in vain; then all their



declamation as to independence and future national greatness is in



vain: then indeed would they do better if they re-enter as soon as



possible into dependence on England as her colony. In that event



England will favour them instead of imposing restrictions on them;



she will rather impose restrictions on those who compete with the



North Americans in cotton culture and corn production, &c. than



raise up with all possible energy competitors against them. The



Bank of England will then establish branch banks in the United



States, the English Government will promote emigration and the



export of capital to America, and through the entire destruction of



the American manufactories, as well as by favouring the export of



American raw materials and agricultural produce to England, take



maternal care to prevent commercial crises in North America, and to



keep the imports and exports of the colony always at a proper



balance with one another. In one word, the American slaveholders



and cotton planters will then realise the fulfilment of their



finest dreams. In fact, such a position has already for some time



past appeared to the patriotism, the interests, and requirements of



these planters more desirable than the national independence and



greatness of the United States. Only in the first emotions of



liberty and independence did they dream of industrial independence.



They soon, however, grew cooler, and for the last quarter of a



century the industrial prosperity of the middle and eastern states



is to them an abomination; they try to persuade the Congress that



the prosperity of America depends on the industrial sovereignty of



England over North America. What else can be meant by the assertion



that the United States would be richer and more prosperous if they



again went over to England as a colony?



    In general it appears to us that the defenders of free trade



would argue more consistently in regard to money crises and the



balance of trade, as well as to manufacturing industry, if they



openly advised all nations to prefer to subject themselves to the



English as dependencies of England, and to demand in exchange the



benefits of becoming English colonies, which condition of



dependence would be, in economical respects, clearly more



favourable to them than the condition of half independence in which



those nations live who, without maintaining an independent system



of industry, commerce, and credit of their own, nevertheless always



want to assume towards England the attitude of independence. Do not



we see what Portugal would have gained if she had been governed



since the Methuen Treaty by an English viceroy -- if England had



transplanted her laws and her national spirit to Portugal, and



taken that country (like the East Indian Empire) altogether under



her wings? Do not we perceive how advantageous such a condition



would be to Germany -- to the whole European continent?



    India, it is true, has lost her manufacturing power to England,



but has she not gained considerably in her internal agricultural



production and in the exportation of her agricultural products?



Have not the former wars under her Nabobs ceased? Are not the



native Indian princes and kings extremely well off? Have they not



preserved their large private revenues? Do not they find themselves



thereby completely relieved of the weighty cares of government?



    Moreover, it is worthy of notice (though it is so after the



manner of those who, like Adam Smith, make their strong points in



maintaining paradoxical opinions) that this renowned author, in



spite of all his arguments against the existence of a balance of



trade, maintains, nevertheless, the existence of a thing which he



calls the balance between the consumption and production of a



nation, which, however, when brought to light, means nothing else



but our actual balance of trade. A nation whose exports and imports



tolerably well balance each other, may rest assured that, in



respect of its national interchange, it does not consume much more



in value than it produces, while a nation which for a series of



years (as the United States of America have done in recent years)



imports larger quantities in value of foreign manufactured goods



than it exports in value of products of its own, may rest assured



that, in respect to international interchange, it consumes



considerably larger quantities in value of foreign goods than it



produces at home. For what else did the crises of France



(1786-1789), of Russia (1820-1821), and of the United States since



1833, prove?



    In concluding this chapter we must be permitted to put a few



questions to those who consider the whole doctrine of the balance



of trade as a mere exploded fallacy.



    How is it that a decidedly and continuously disadvantageous



balance of trade has always and without exception been accompanied



in those countries to whose detriment it existed (with the



exception of colonies) by internal commercial crises, revolutions



in prices, financial difficulties, and general bankruptcies, both



in the public institutions of credit, and among the individual



merchants, manufacturers, and agriculturists?



    How is it that in those nations which possessed a balance of



trade decidedly in their favour, the opposite appearances have



always been observed, and that commercial crises in the countries



with which such nations were connected commercially, have only



affected such nations detrimentally for periods which passed away



very quickly?



    How is it that since Russia has produced for herself the



greatest part of the manufactured goods which she requires, the



balance of trade has been decidedly and lastingly in her favour,



that since that time nothing has been heard of economical



convulsions in Russia, and that since that time the internal



prosperity of that empire has increased year by year?



    How is it that in the United States of North America the same



effects have always resulted from similar causes? How is it that in



the United States of North America, under the large importation of



manufactured goods which followed the 'Compromise bill,' the



balance of trade was for a series of years so decidedly adverse to



them, and that this appearance was accompanied by such great and



continuous convulsions in the internal economy of that nation?



    How is it that we, at the present moment, see the United States



so glutted with primitive products of all kinds (cotton, tobacco,



cattle, corn, &c.) that the prices of them have fallen everywhere



one-half, and that at the same time these states are unable to



balance their exports with their imports, to satisfy their debt



contracted with England, and to put their credit again on sound



footing?



    How is it, if no balance of trade exists, or if it does not



signify whether it is in our favour or not, if it is a matter of



indifference whether much or little of the precious metals flows to



foreign countries, that England in the case of failures of harvests



(the only case where the balance is adverse to her) strives, with



fear and trembling, to equalise her exports with her imports, that



she then carefully estimates every ounce of gold or silver which is



imported or exported, that her national bank endeavours most



anxiously to stop the exportation of precious metals and to promote



their importation -- how is it, we ask, if the balance of trade is



an 'exploded fallacy,' that at such a time no English newspaper can



be read wherein this 'exploded fallacy' is not treated as a matter



of the most important concern to the nation?



    How is it that, in the United States of North America, the same



people who before the Compromise bill spoke of the balance of trade



as an exploded fallacy, since the Compromise bill cannot cease



speaking of this exploded fallacy as a matter of the utmost



importance to their country?



    How is it, if the nature of things itself always suffices to



provide every country with exactly the quantity of precious metals



which it requires, that the Bank of England tries to turn this



so-called nature of things in her own favour by limiting her



credits and increasing her rates of discount, and that the American



banks are obliged from time to time to suspend their cash payments



till the imports of the United States are reduced to a tolerably



even balance with the exports?







NOTES:







1. Wealth of Nations, book IV. chapter iii.







Chapter 24







The Manufacturing Power and the Principle of Stability and



Continuity of Work







    If we investigate the origin and progress of individual



branches of industry we shall find that they have only gradually



become possessed of improved methods of operation, machinery



buildings, advantages in production, experiences, and skill, and of



all those knowledges and connections which insure to them the



profitable purchase of their raw materials and the profitable sale



of their products. We may rest assured that it is (as a rule)



incomparably easier to perfect and extend a business already



established than to found a new one. We see everywhere old business



establishments that have lasted for a series of generations worked



with greater profits than new ones. We observe that it is the more



difficult to set a new business going in proportion as fewer



branches of industry of a similar character already exist in a



nation; because, in that case, masters, foremen, and workmen must



first be either trained up at home or procured from abroad, and



because the profitableness of the business has not been



sufficiently tested to give capitalists confidence in its success.



If we compare the conditions of distinct classes of industry in any



nation at various periods, we everywhere find, that when special



causes had not operated to injure them, they have made remarkable



progress, not only in regard to cheapness of prices, but also with



respect to quantity and quality, from generation to generation. On



the other hand, we observe that in consequence of external



injurious causes, such as wars and devastation of territory, &c.,



or oppressive tyrannical or fanatical measures of government and



finance (as e.g. the revocation of the Edict of Nantes), whole



nations have been thrown back for centuries, either in their entire



industry or in certain branches of it, and have in this manner been



far outstripped by nations in comparison with which they had



previously been far advanced.



    One can see at a glance that, as in all human institutions so



also in industry, a law of nature lies at the root of important



achievements which has much in common with the natural law of the



division of labour and of the confederation of the productive



forces, whose principle, namely, consists in the circumstance that



several generations following one another have equally united their



forces towards the attainment of one and the same object, and have



participated in like manner in the exertions needed to attain it.



    It is the same principle which in the cases of hereditary



kingdoms has been incomparably more favourable to the maintenance



and increase of the power of the nation than the constant changes



of the ruling families in the case of electoral kingdoms.



    It is partly this natural law which secures to nations who have



lived for a long time past under a rightly ordered constitutional



form of government, such great successes in industry, commerce, and



navigation.



    Only through this natural law can the effect of the invention



of printing on human progress be partially explained. Printing



first rendered it possible to hand down the acquisitions of human



knowledge and experience from the present to future generations



more perfectly and completely than could be done by oral tradition.



    To the recognition of this natural law is undoubtedly partly



attributable the division of the people into castes, which existed



among the nations of antiquity, and also the law of the old



Egyptians -- that the son must continue to follow the trade or



profession of his father. Before the invention and general



dissemination of printing took place, these regulations may have



appeared to be indispensable for the maintenance and for the



development of arts and trades.



    Guilds and trade societies also have partly originated from



this consideration. For the maintenance and bringing to perfection



of the arts and sciences, and their transfer from one generation to



another, we are in great measure indebted to the priestly castes of



ancient nations, to the monasteries and universities.



    What power and what influence have the orders of priesthood and



orders of knights, as well as the papal chair, attained to, by the



fact that for centuries they have aspired to one and the same aim,



and that each successive generation has always continued to work



where the other had left off.



    The importance of this principle becomes still more evident in



respect to material achievements.



    Individual cities, monasteries, and corporations have erected



works the total cost of which perhaps surpassed the value of their



whole property at the time. They could only obtain the means for



this by successive generations devoting their savings to one and



the same great purpose.



    Let us consider the canal and dyke system of Holland; it



comprises the labours and savings of many generations. Only to a



series of generations is it possible to complete systems of



national transport or a complete system of fortifications and



defensive works.



    The system of State credit is one of the finest creations of



more recent statesmanship, and a blessing for nations, inasmuch as



it serves as the means of dividing among several generations the



costs of those achievements and exertions of the present generation



which are calculated to benefit the nationality for all future



times, and which guarantee to it continued existence, growth,



greatness, power, and increase of the powers of production; it



becomes a curse only if it serves for useless national expenditure,



and thus not merely does not further the progress of future



generations, but deprives them beforehand of the means of



undertaking great national works, or also if the burden of the



payment of interest of the national debt is thrown on the



consumptions of the working classes instead of on capital.



    State debts are bills which the present generation draws on



future ones. This can take place either to the special advantage of



the present generation or the special advantage of the future one,



or to the common advantage of both. In the first case only is this



system an objectionable one. But all cases in which the object in



view is the maintenance and promotion of the greatness and welfare



of the nationality, so far as the means required for the purpose



surpass the powers of the present generation, belong to the last



category.



    No expenditure of the present generation is so decidedly and



specially profitable to future generations as that for the



improvement of the means of transport, especially because such



undertakings as a rule, besides increasing the powers of production



of future generations, do also in a constantly increasing ratio not



merely pay interest on the cost in the course of time, but also



yield dividends. The present generation is, therefore, not merely



entitled to throw on to future generations the capital outlay of



these works and fair interest on it (as long as they do not yield



sufficient income), but further acts unjustly towards itself and to



the true fundamental principles of national economy, if it takes



the burden or even any considerable part of it on its own



shoulders.



    If in our consideration of the subject of the continuity of



national industry we revert to the main branches which constitute



it, we may perceive, that while this continuity has an important



influence on agriculture, yet that interruptions to it, in the case



of that industry, are much less decided and much less injurious



when they occur, also that their evil consequences can be much more



easily and quickly made good than in the case of manufactures.



    However great may be any damage or interruption to agriculture,



the actual personal requirements and consumption of the



agriculturist, the general diffusion of the skill and knowledge



required for agriculture, and the simplicity of its operations and



of the implements which it requires, suffice to prevent it from



coming entirely to an end.



    Even after devastations by war it quickly raises itself up



again. Neither the enemy nor the foreign competitor can take away



the main instrument of agriculture, the land; and it needs the



oppressions of a series of generations to convert arable fields



into uncultivated waste, or to deprive the inhabitants of a country



of the capability of carrying on agriculture.



    On manufactures, however, the least and briefest interruption



has a crippling effect; a longer one is fatal. The more art and



talent that any branch of manufacture requires, the larger the



amounts of capital which are needful to carry it on, the more



completely this capital is sunk in the special branch of industry



in which it has been invested, so much the more detrimental will be



the interruption. By it machinery and tools are reduced to the



value of old iron and fire-wood, the buildings become ruins, the



workmen and skilled artificers emigrate to other lands or seek



subsistence in agricultural employment. Thus in a short time a



complex combination of productive powers and of property becomes



lost, which had been created only by the exertions and endeavours



of several generations.



    Just as by the establishment and continuance of industry one



branch of trade originates, draws after it, supports and causes to



flourish many others, so is the ruin of one branch of industry



always the forerunner of the ruin of several others, and finally of



the chief foundations of the manufacturing power of the nation.



    The conviction of the great effects produced by the steady



continuation of industry and of the irretrievable injuries caused



by its interruption, and not the clamour and egotistical demands of



manufacturers and traders for special privileges, has led to the



idea of protective duties for native industry.



    In cases where the protective duty cannot help, where the



manufactories, for instance, suffer from want of export trade,



where the Government is unable to provide any remedy for its



interruption, we often see manufacturers continuing to produce at



an actual loss. They want to avert, in expectation of better times,



the irrecoverable injury which they would suffer from a stoppage of



their works.



    By free competition it is often hoped to oblige the competitor



to discontinue work which has compelled the manufacturer or



merchant to sell his products under their legitimate price and



often at an actual loss. The object is not merely to prevent the



interruption of our own industry, but also to force others to



discontinue theirs in the hope later on of being able by better



prices to recoup the losses which have been suffered.



    In any case striving after monopoly forms part of the very



nature of manufacturing industry. This circumstance tends to



justify and not to discredit a protective policy; for this



striving, when restricted in its operation to the home market,



tends to promote cheaper prices and improvements in the art of



production, and thus increases the national prosperity; while the



same thing, in case it presses from without with overwhelming force



on the internal industry, will occasion the interruption of work



and downfall of the internal national industry.



    The circumstance that there are no limits to manufacturing



production (especially since it has been so extraordinarily aided



and promoted by machinery) except the limits of the capital which



it possesses and its means of effecting sales, enables that



particular nation whose manufacturing industry has continued for a



century, which has accumulated immense capitals, extended its



commerce all over the world, dominated the money market by means of



large institutions of credit (whose operations are able to depress



the prices of fabrics and to induce merchants to export), to



declare a war of extermination against the manufacturers of all



other countries. Under such circumstances it is quite impossible



that in other nations, 'in the natural course of things' (as Adam



Smith expresses himself), merely in consequence of their progress



in agriculture, immense manufactures and works should be



established, or that those manufactures which have originated in



consequence of the commercial interruptions caused by war should be



able, 'in the natural course of things,' to continue to maintain



themselves. The reason for this is the same as that why a child or



a boy in wrestling with a strong man can scarcely be victorious or



even offer steady resistance. The manufactories which constitute



the commercial and industrial supremacy (of England) have a



thousand advantages over the newly born or half-grown manufactories



of other nations. The former, for instance, can obtain skilled and



experienced workmen in the greatest number and at the cheapest



wages, the best technical men and foremen, the most perfect and the



cheapest machinery, the greatest benefit in buying and selling



advantageously; further, the cheapest means of transport, as



respects raw materials and also in respect of transporting goods



when sold, more extended credit for the manufacturers with banks



and money institutions at the lowest rates of interest, greater



commercial experience, better tools, buildings, arrangements,



connections, such as can only be acquired and established in the



course of generations; an enormous home market, and, what is



equally good, a colonial market equally enormous. Hence under all



circumstances the English manufacturers can feel certainty as to



the sale of large quantities of manufactured products by vigorous



efforts, and consequently possess a guarantee for the continuance



of their business and abundant means to sell on credit for years to



come in the future, if it is required to acquire the control of a



foreign market. If we enumerate and consider these advantages one



after another, we may easily be convinced that in competition with



such a power it is simply foolish to rest our hopes on the



operation of 'the natural course of things' under free competition,



where, as in our case, workmen and technical men have in the first



place yet to be trained, where the manufacture of machinery and



proper means of transport are merely in course of erection, where



even the home market is not secured to the manufacturer -- not to



mention any important export market, where the credit that the



manufacturer can obtain is under the most fortunate circumstances



limited to the lowest point, where no man can be certain even for



a day that, in consequence of English commercial crises and bank



operations, masses of foreign goods may not be thrown on the home



market at prices which scarcely recoup the value of the raw



materials of which they are made, and which bring to a stand for



years the progress of our own manufacturing industries.



    It would be in vain for such nations to resign themselves to a



state of perpetual subordination to the English manufacturing



supremacy, and content themselves with the modest determination to



supply it with what it may not be able to produce for itself or to



procure elsewhere. Even by this subordination they will find no



permanent benefit. What benefit is it to the people of the United



States, for instance, that they sacrifice the welfare of their



finest and most cultivated states, the states of free labour, and



perhaps their entire future national greatness, for the advantage



of supplying England with raw cotton? Do they thereby restrict the



endeavours of England to procure this material from other districts



of the world? In vain would the Germans be content to obtain their



requirements of manufactured goods from England in exchange for



their fine sheep's wool; they would by such a policy hardly prevent



Australia from flooding all Europe with fine wool in the course of



the next twenty years.



    Such a condition of dependence appears still more deplorable



when we consider that such nations lose in times of war their means



of selling their agricultural products, and thereby the means of



purchasing the manufacturing products of the foreigner. At such



times all economical considerations and systems are thrust into the



background. It is the principle of self-maintenance, of



self-defence, which counsels the nations to work up their



agricultural products themselves, and to dispense with the



manufactured goods of the enemy. Whatever losses may be involved in



adopting such a war-prohibitive system, cannot be taken into



account during such a state of things. However great the exertions



and the sacrifices may have been by which the agricultural nation



during the time of war has called into existence manufactures and



works, the competition of the manufacturing supremacy which sets in



on the recurrence of peace will again destroy all these creations



of the times of necessity. In short, it is an eternal alternation



of erecting and destroying, of prosperity and calamity which those



nations have to undergo who do not strive to insure, through



realisation of their national division of labour and through the



confederation of their own powers of production, the benefits of



the continuation of their own industries from generation to



generation.







Chapter 25







The Manufacturing Power and the Inducement to Production and



Consumption







    In society man is not merely productive owing to the



circumstance that he directly brings forth products or creates



powers of production, but he also becomes productive by creating



inducements to production and to consumption, or to the formation



of productive powers.



    The artist by his works acts in the first place on the



ennobling and refinement of the human spirit and on the productive



power of society; but inasmuch as the enjoyment of art presupposes



the possession of those material means whereby it must be



purchased, the artist also offers inducements to material



production and to thrift.



    Books and newspapers act on the mental and material production



by giving information; but their acquisition costs money, and so



far the enjoyment which they afford is also an inducement to



material production.



    The education of youth ennobles society; but what great



exertions do parents make to obtain the means of giving their



children a good education!



    What immense performances in both mental and material



production arise out of the endeavour to move in better society!



    We can live as well in a house made of boards as in a villa, we



can protect ourselves for a few florins against rain and cold as



well as by means of the finest and most elegant clothing. Ornaments



and utensils of gold and silver add no more to comfort than those



of iron and tin; but the distinction connected with the possession



of the former acts as an inducement to exertions of the body and



the mind, and to order and thrift; and to such inducements society



owes a large part of its productiveness. Even the man living on his



private property who merely occupies himself with preserving,



increasing, and consuming his income, acts in manifold ways on



mental and material production : firstly, by supporting through his



consumption art and science, and artistic trades; next, by



discharging, as it were, the function of a preserver and augmenter



of the material capital of society; finally, by inciting through



his display all other classes of society to emulation. As a whole



school is encouraged to exertions by the offer of prizes, although



only a few become winners of the principal prizes, so does the



possession of large property, and the appearance and display



connected with it, act on civil society. This action of course



ceases when the great property is the fruit of usurpation, of



extortion, or fraud, or where the possession of it and the



enjoyment of its fruits cannot be openly displayed.



    Manufacturing production yields either productive instruments



or the means of satisfying the necessities of life and the means of



display. The last two advantages are frequently combined. The



various ranks of society are everywhere distinguished by the manner



in which and where they live, and how they are furnished and



clothed, by the costliness of their equipages and the quality,



number, and external appearance of their servants. Where the



commercial production is on a low scale, this distinction is but



slight, i.e. almost all people live badly and are poorly clothed,



emulation is nowhere observable. It originates and increases



according to the ratio in which industries flourish. In flourishing



manufacturing countries almost everyone lives and dresses well,



although in the quality of manufactured goods which are consumed



the most manifold degrees of difference take place. No one who



feels that he has any power in him to work is willing to appear



outwardly needy. Manufacturing industry, therefore, furthers



production by the community by means of inducements which



agriculture, with its mean domestic manufacture, its productions of



raw materials and provisions, cannot offer.



    There is of course an important difference between various



modes of living, and everyone feels some inducement to eat and



drink well; but we do not dine in public; and a German proverb says



strikingly, 'Man sieht mir auf den Kragen, nicht auf den Magen'



(One looks at my shirt collar, not at my stomach). If we are



accustomed from youth to rough and simple fare, we seldom wish for



better. The consumption of provisions also is restricted to very



narrow limits where it is confined to articles produced in the



immediate neighbourhood. These limits are extended in countries of



temperate climate, in the first instance, by procuring the products



of tropical climates. But as respects the quantity and the quality



of these products, in the enjoyment of which the whole population



of a country can participate, they can only be procured (as we have



shown in a former chapter) by means of foreign commerce in



manufactured goods.



    Colonial products, so far as they do not consist of raw



materials for manufacturing purposes, evidently act more as



stimulants than necessary means of subsistence. No one will deny



that barley coffee without sugar is as nutritious as mocha coffee



with sugar; and admitting also that these products contain some



nutritious matter, their value in this respect is nevertheless so



unimportant that they can scarcely be considered as substitutes for



native provisions. With regard to spices and tobacco, they are



certainly mere stimulants, i.e. they chiefly produce a useful



effect on society only so far as they augment the enjoyments of the



masses, and incite them to mental and bodily labour.



    In many countries very erroneous notions prevail among those



who live by salaries or rents, respecting what they are accustomed



to call the luxurious habits of the lower classes; such persons are



shocked to observe that labourers drink coffee with sugar, and



regret the times when they were satisfied with gruel; they deplore



that the peasant has exchanged his poor clothing of coarse homespun



for woollen cloth; they express fears that the maid-servant will



soon not be distinguishable from the lady of the house; they praise



the legal restrictions on dress of previous centuries. But if we



compare the result of the labour of the workman in countries where



he is clad and nourished like the well-to-do man with the result of



his labour where he has to be satisfied with the coarsest food and



clothing, we shall find that the increase of his comfort in the



former case has been attained not at the expense of the general



welfare, but to the advantage of the productive powers of the



community. The day's work of the workman is double or three times



greater in the former case than in the latter. Attempts to regulate



dress and restrictions on luxury have destroyed wholesome emulation



in the large masses of society, and have merely tended to the



increase of mental and bodily idleness.



    In any case products must be created before they can be



consumed, and thus production must necessarily generally precede



consumption. In popular and national practice, however, consumption



frequently precedes production. Manufacturing nations, supported by



large capital and less restricted in their production than mere



agricultural nations, make, as a rule, advances to the latter on



the yield of future crops; the latter thus consume before they



produce -- they produce later on because they have previously



consumed. The same thing manifests itself in a much greater degree



in the relation between town and country: the closer the



manufacturer is to the agriculturist, the more will the former



offer to the latter both an inducement to consume and means for



consumption, the more also will the latter feel himself stimulated



to greater production.



    Among the most potent stimulants are those afforded by the



civil and political institutions of the country. Where it is not



possible to raise oneself by honest exertions and by prosperity



from one class of society to another, from the lowest to the



highest; where the possessor necessarily hesitates to show his



property publicly or to enjoy the fruits of it because it would



expose his property to risk, or lest he should be accused of



arrogance or impropriety; where persons engaged in trade are



excluded from public honour, from taking part in administration,



legislation, and juries; where distinguished achievements in



agriculture, industry, and commerce do not lead also to public



esteem and to social and civil distinction, there the most



important motives for consumption as well as for production are



wanting.



    Every law, every public regulation, has a strengthening or



weakening effect on production or on consumption or on the



productive forces.



    The granting of patent privileges offers a prize to inventive



minds. The hope of obtaining the prize arouses the mental powers,



and gives them a direction towards industrial improvements. It



brings honour to the inventive mind in society, and roots out the



prejudice for old customs and modes of operation so injurious among



uneducated nations. It provides the man who merely possesses mental



faculties for new inventions with the material means which he



requires, inasmuch as capitalists are thus incited to support the



inventor, by being assured of participation in the anticipated



profits.



    Protective duties act as stimulants on all those branches of



internal industry the produce of which foreign countries can



provide better than the home country but of the production of which



the home country is capable. They guarantee a reward to the man of



enterprise and to the workman for acquiring new knowledge and



skill, and offer to the inland and foreign capitalist means for



investing his capital for a definite and certain time in a



specially remunerative manner.







Chapter 26







Customs Duties as a Chief Means of Establishing and Protecting the



internal Manufacturing Power







    It is not part of our plan to treat of those means of promoting



internal industry whose efficacy and applicability are nowhere



called in question. To these belong e.g. educational establishments



(especially technical schools), industrial exhibitions, offers of



prizes, transport improvements, patent laws, &c.; in short, all



those laws and institutions by means of which industry is



furthered, and internal and external commerce facilitated and



regulated. We have here merely to speak of the institution of



customs duties as a means for the development of industry.



    According to our system, prohibitions of, or duties on, exports



can only be thought of as exceptional things; the imports of



natural products must everywhere be subject to revenue duties only,



and never to duties intended to protect native agricultural



production. In manufacturing states, articles of luxury from warm



climates are chiefly subject to duties for revenue, but not the



common necessaries of life, as e.g. corn or fat cattle; but the



countries of warmer climate or countries of smaller population or



limited territory, or countries not yet sufficiently populous, or



such as are still far behind in civilisation and in their social



and political institutions, are those which should only impose mere



revenue duties on manufactured goods.



    Revenue duties of every kind, however, should everywhere be so



moderate as not essentially to restrict importation and



consumption; because, otherwise, not only would the internal



productive power be weakened, but the object of raising revenue be



defeated.



    Measures of protection are justifiable only for the purpose of



furthering and protecting the internal manufacturing power, and



only in the case of nations which through an extensive and compact



territory, large population, possession of natural resources, far



advanced agriculture, a high degree of civilisation and political



development, are qualified to maintain an equal rank with the



principal agricultural manufacturing commercial nations, with the



greatest naval and military powers.



    Protection can be afforded, either by the prohibition of



certain manufactured articles, or by rates of duty which amount



wholly, or at least partly, to prohibition, or by moderate import



duties. None of these kinds of protection are invariably beneficial



or invariably objectionable; and it depends on the special



circumstances of the nation and on the condition of its industry



which of these is the right one to be applied to it.



    War exercises a great influence on the selection of the precise



system of protection, inasmuch as it effects a compulsory



prohibitive system. In time of war, exchange between the



belligerent parties ceases, and every nation must endeavour,



without regard to its economical conditions, to be sufficient to



itself. Hence, on the one hand, in the less advanced manufacturing



nations commercial industry, on the other hand, in the most



advanced manufacturing nation agricultural production, becomes



stimulated in an extraordinary manner, indeed to such a degree that



it appears advisable to the less advanced manufacturing nation



(especially if war has continued for several years) to allow the



exclusion which war has occasioned of those manufactured articles



in which it cannot yet freely compete with the most advanced



manufacturing nation, to continue for some time during peace.



    France and Germany were in this condition after the general



peace. If in 1815 France had allowed English competition, as



Germany, Russia, and North America did, she would also have



experienced the same fate; the greatest part of her manufactories



which had sprung up during the war would have come to grief; the



progress which has since been made in all branches of manufacture,



in improving the internal means of transport, in foreign commerce,



in steam river and sea navigation, in the increase in the value of



land (which, by the way, has doubled in value during this time in



France), in the augmentation of population and of the State's



revenues, could not have been hoped for. The manufactories of



France at that time were still in their childhood; the country



possessed but few canals; the mines had been but little worked;



political convulsions and wars had not yet permitted considerable



capital to accumulate, sufficient technical cultivation to exist,



a sufficient number of really qualified workmen or an industrial



and enterprising spirit to have been called into existence; the



mind of the nation was still turned more towards war than towards



the arts of peace; the small capital which a state of war permitted



to accumulate, still flowed principally into agriculture, which had



declined very much indeed. Then, for the first time, could France



perceive what progress England had made during the war; then, for



the first time, was it possible for France to import from England



machinery, artificers, workmen, capital, and the spirit of



enterprise; then, to secure the home market exclusively for the



benefit of home industry, demanded the exertion of her best powers,



and the utilisation of all her natural resources. The effects of



this protective policy are very evident; nothing but blind



cosmopolitanism can ignore them, or maintain that France would



have, under a policy of free competition with other nations, made



greater progress. Does not the experience of Germany, the United



States of America, and Russia, conclusively prove the contrary?



    If we maintain that the prohibitive system has been useful to



France since 1815, we do not by that contention wish to defend



either her mistakes or her excess of protection, nor the utility or



necessity of her continued maintenance of that excessive protective



policy. It was an error for France to restrict the importation of



raw materials and agricultural products (pig-iron, coal, wool,



corn, cattle) by import duties; it would be a further error if



France, after her manufacturing power has become sufficiently



strong and established, were not willing to revert gradually to a



moderate system of protection, and by permitting a limited amount



of competition incite her manufacturers to emulation.



    In regard to protective duties it is especially important to



discriminate between the case of a nation which contemplates



passing from a policy of free competition to one of protection, and



that of a nation which proposes to exchange a policy of prohibition



for one of moderate protection; in the former case the duties



imposed at first must be low, and be gradually increased, in the



latter they must be high at first and be gradually diminished.



    A nation which has been formerly insufficiently protected by



customs duties, but which feels itself called upon to make greater



progress in manufactures, must first of all endeavour to develop



those manufactures which produce articles of general consumption.



In the first place the total value of such industrial products is



incomparably greater than the total value of the much more



expensive fabrics of luxury. The former class of manufactures,



therefore, brings into motion large masses of natural, mental, and



personal productive powers, and gives -- by the fact that it



requires large capital -- inducements for considerable saving of



capital, and for bringing over to its aid foreign capital and



powers of all kinds. The development of these branches of



manufacture thus tends powerfully to promote the increase of



population, the prosperity of home agriculture, and also especially



the increase of the trade with foreign countries, inasmuch as less



cultivated countries chiefly require manufactured goods of common



use, and the countries of temperate climates are principally



enabled by the production of these articles to carry on direct



interchange with the countries of tropical climates. A country e.g.



which trade has to import cotton yarns and cotton goods cannot



carry on direct with Egypt, Louisiana, or Brazil, because it cannot



supply those countries with the cotton goods which they require,



and cannot take from them their raw cotton. Furthermore, these



articles, on account of the magnitude of their total value, serve



especially to equalise the exports of the nation tolerably well



with its imports, and always to retain in the nation the amount of



circulating medium which it requires, or to provide it with the



same. Thus it is by the prosperity and preservation of these



important branches of industry that the industrial independence of



the nation is gained and maintained, for the disturbance of trade



resulting from wars is of little importance if it merely hinders



the purchase of expensive articles of luxury, but, on the other



hand, it always occasions great calamities if it is attended by



scarcity and rise in price of common manufactured goods, and by the



interruption of a previously considerable sale of agricultural



products. Finally, the evasion of customs duties by smuggling and



false declarations of value is much less to be feared in the case



of these articles, and can be much more easily prevented than in



the case of costly fabrics of luxury.



    Manufactures and manufactories are always plants of slow



growth, and every protective duty which suddenly breaks off



formerly existing commercial connections must be detrimental to the



nation for whose benefit it is professedly introduced. Such duties



ought only to be increased in the ratio in which capital, technical



abilities, and the spirit of enterprise are increasing in the



nation or are being attracted to it from abroad, in the ratio in



which the nation is in a condition to utilise for itself its



surplus of raw materials and natural products which it had



previously exported. It is, however, of special importance that the



scale by which the import duties are increased should be determined



beforehand, so that an assured remuneration can be offered to the



capitalists, artificers, and workmen, who are found in the nation



or who can be attracted to it from abroad. It is indispensable to



maintain these scales of duty inviolably , and not to diminish them



before the appointed time, because the very fear of any such breach



of promise would already destroy for the most part the effect of



that assurance of remuneration.



    To what extent import duties should be increased in the case of



a change from free competition to the protective system, and how



much they ought to be diminished in the case of a change from a



system of prohibition to a moderate system of protection, cannot be



determined theoretically: that depends on the special conditions as



well as on the relative conditions in which the less advanced



nation is placed in relation to the more advanced ones. The United



States of North America e.g. have to take into special



consideration their exports of raw cotton to England, and of



agricultural and maritime products to the English colonies, also



the high rate of wages existing in the United States; whereby they



again profit by the fact that they can depend more than any other



nation on attracting to themselves English capital, artificers, men



of enterprise, and workmen.



    It may in general be assumed that where any technical industry



cannot be established by means of an original protection of forty



to sixty per cent and cannot continue to maintain itself under a



continued protection of twenty to thirty per cent the fundamental



conditions of manufacturing power are lacking.



    The causes of such incapacity can be removed more or less



readily; to the class more readily removable belong want of



internal means of transport, want of technical knowledge, of



experienced workmen, and of the spirit of industrial enterprise; to



the class which it is more difficult to remove belong the lack of



industrious disposition, civilisation, education, morality, and



love of justice on the part of the people; want of a sound and



vigorous system of agriculture, and hence of material capital; but



especially defective political institutions, and want of civil



liberty and of security of justice; and finally , want of



compactness of territory, whereby it is rendered impossible to put



down contraband trade.



    Those industries which merely produce expensive articles of



luxury require the least consideration and the least amount of



protection; firstly, because their production requires and assumes



the existence of a high degree of technical attainment and skill;



secondly because their total value is inconsiderable in proportion



to that of the whole national production, and the imports of them



can be readily paid for by means of agricultural products and raw



materials, or with manufactured products of common use; further,



because the interruption of their importation occasions no



important inconvenience in time of war; lastly, because high



protective duties on these articles can be most readily evaded by



smuggling.



    Nations which have not yet made considerable advances in



technical art and in the manufacture of machinery should allow all



complicated machinery to be imported free of duty, or at least only



levy a small duty upon them, until they themselves are in a



Position to produce them as readily as the most advanced nation.



Machine manufactories are in a certain sense the manufacturers of



manufactories, and every tax on the importation of foreign



machinery is a restriction on the internal manufacturing power.



Since it is, however, of the greatest importance, because of its



great influence on the whole manufacturing power, that the nation



should not be dependent on the chances and changes of war in



respect of its machinery, this particular branch of manufacture has



very special claims for the direct support of the State in case it



should not be able under moderate import duties to meet



competition. The State should at least encourage and directly



support its home manufactories of machinery, so far as their



maintenance and development may be necessary to provide at the



commencement of a time of war the most necessary requirements, and



under a longer interruption by war to serve as patterns for the



erection of new machine factories.



    Drawbacks can according to our system only be entertained in



cases where half-manufactured goods which are still imported from



abroad, as for instance cotton yarn, must be subjected to a



considerable protective duty in order to enable the country



gradually to produce them itself.



    Bounties are objectionable as permanent measures to render the



exports and the competition of the native manufactories possible



with the manufactories of further advanced nations in neutral



markets; but they are still more objectionable as the means of



getting possession of the inland markets for manufactured goods of



nations which have themselves already made progress in



manufactures. Yet there are cases where they are to be justified as



temporary means of encouragement, namely, where the slumbering



spirit of enterprise of a nation merely requires stimulus and



assistance in the first period of its revival, in order to evoke in



it a powerful and lasting production and an export trade to



countries which themselves do not possess flourishing manufactures.



But even in these cases it ought to be considered whether the State



would not do better by making advances free of interest and



granting special privileges to individual men of enter prise, or



whether it would not be still more to the purpose to promote the



formation of companies to carry into effect such primary



experimental adventures, to advance to such companies a portion of



their requisite share capital out of the State treasury, and to



allow to the private persons taking shares in them a preferential



interest on their invested capital. As instances of the cases



referred to, we may mention experimental undertakings in trade and



navigation to distant countries, to which the commerce of private



persons has not yet been extended; the establishment of lines of



steamers to distant countries; the founding of new colonies, &c.







Chapter 27







The Customs System and the Popular School







    The popular school does not discriminate (in respect of the



operation of protective duties) between natural or primitive



products and manufactured products. It perverts the fact that such



duties always operate injuriously on the production of primitive or



natural products, into the false conclusion that they exercise an



equally detrimental influence on the production of manufactured



goods.



    The school recognises no distinction in reference to the



establishment of manufacturing industry in a State between those



nations which are not adapted for such industry and those which,



owing to the nature of their territory, to perfectly developed



agriculture, to their civilisation, and to their just claims for



guarantees for their future prosperity for their permanence, and



for their power, are clearly qualified, to establish such an



industry for themselves.



    The school fails to perceive that under a system of perfectly



free competition with more advanced manufacturing nations, a nation



which is less advanced than those, although well fitted for



manufacturing, can never attain to a perfectly developed



manufacturing power of its own, nor to perfect national



independence, without protective duties.



    It does not take into account the influence of war on the



necessity for a protective system; especially it does not perceive



that war effects a compulsory prohibitive system, and that the



prohibitive system of the custom-house is but a necessary



continuation of that prohibitive system which war has brought



about.



    It seeks to adduce the benefits which result from free internal



trade as a proof that nations can only attain to the highest degree



of prosperity and power by absolute freedom in international trade;



whereas history everywhere proves the contrary.



    It maintains that protective measures afford a monopoly to



inland manufacturers, and thus tend to induce indolence; while,



nevertheless, all the time internal competition amply suffices as



a stimulus to emulation among manufacturers and traders.



    It would have us believe that protective duties on manufactured



goods benefit manufacturers at the expense of agriculturists;



whereas it can be proved that enormous benefits accrue to home



agriculture from the existence of a home manufacturing power,



compared to which the sacrifices which the former has to make to



the protective system are inconsiderable.



    As a main point against protective duties, the popular school



adduces the expenses of the custom-house system and the evils



caused by contraband trade. These evils cannot be denied; but can



they be taken seriously into account in comparison of measures



which exercise such enormous influence on the existence, the power,



and the prosperity of the nation? Can the evils of standing armies



and wars constitute an adequate motive for the nation to neglect



means of defence? If it is maintained that protective duties which



far exceed the limit which offers an assured remuneration to



smuggling, serve merely to favour contraband trade, but not to



benefit home manufactures, that can apply only to ill-regulated



customs establishments, to countries of small extent and irregular



frontiers, to the consumption which takes place on the frontiers,



and only to high duties on articles of luxury of no great aggregate



bulk.



    but experience everywhere teaches us that with well-ordered



customs establishments, and with wisely devised tariffs, the



objects of protective duties in large and compact states cannot be



materially impeded by contraband trade.



    So far as regards the mere expenses of the customs system, a



large portion of these would, if it were abolished, have to be



incurred in the collection of revenue duties; and that revenue



duties can be dispensed with by great nations, even the school



itself does not maintain.



    Moreover, the school itself does not condemn all protective



duties.



    Adam Smith allows in three cases the special protection of



internal industry: firstly, as a measure of retaliation in case a



foreign nation imposes restrictions on our imports, and there is



hope of inducing it by means of reprisals to repeal those



restrictions; secondly, for the defence of the nation, in case



those manufacturing requirements which are necessary for defensive



purposes could not under open competition be produced at home;



thirdly, as a means of equalisation in case the products of



foreigners are taxed lower than those of our home producers. J. B.



Say objects to protection in all these cases, but admits it in a



fourth case -- namely, when some branch of industry is expected to



become after the lapse of a few years so remunerative that it will



then no longer need protection.



    Thus it is Adam Smith who wants to introduce the principle of



retaliation into commercial policy -- a principle which would lead



to the most absurd and most ruinous measures, especially if the



retaliatory duties, as Smith demands, are to be repealed as soon as



the foreign nation agrees to abolish its restrictions. Supposing



Germany made reprisals against England, because of the duties



imposed by the latter on German corn and timber, by excluding from



Germany English manufactured goods, and by this exclusion called



artificially into existence a manufacturing power of her own; must



Germany then allow this manufacturing industry, created at immense



sacrifice, to come to grief in case England should be induced to



reopen her ports to German corn and timber? What folly. It would



have been ten times better than that if Germany had submitted



quietly to all measures of restriction on the part of England, and



had discouraged the growth of any manufacturing power of her own



which might grow up notwithstanding the English import



prohibitions, instead of stimulating its growth.



    The principle of retaliation is reasonable and applicable only



if it coincides with the principle of the industrial development of



the nation, if it serves as it were as an assistance to this



object.



    Yes, it is reasonable and beneficial that other nations should



retaliate against the English import restrictions on their



agricultural products, by imposing restrictions on the importation



of manufactured goods, but only when those nations are qualified to



establish a manufacturing power of their own and to maintain it for



all times.



    By the second exception, Adam Smith really justifies not merely



the necessity of protecting such manufactures as supply the



immediate requirements of war, such as, for instance, manufactories



of arms and powder, but the whole system of protection as we



understand it; for by the establishment in the nation of a



manufacturing power of its own, protection to native industry tends



to the augmentation of the nation's population, of its material



wealth, of its machine power, of its independence, and of all



mental powers, and, therefore, of its means of national defence, in



an infinitely higher degree than it could do by merely



manufacturing arms and powder.



    The same must be said of Adam Smith's third exception. If the



burden of taxation to which our productions are subjected, affords



a just ground for imposing protective duties On the less taxed



products of foreign countries, why should not also the other



disadvantages to which our manufacturing industry is subjected in



comparison with that of the foreigner afford just grounds for



protecting our native industry against the overwhelming competition



of foreign industry?



    J. B. Say has clearly perceived the contradictory character of



this exception, but the exception substituted by him is no better;



for in a nation qualified by nature and by its degree of culture to



establish a manufacturing power of its own, almost every branch of



industry must become remunerative under continued and powerful



protection; and it is ridiculous to allow a nation merely a few



years for the task of bringing to perfection one great branch of



national industry or the whole industry of the nation; just as a



shoemaker's apprentice is allowed only a few years to learn



shoemaking.



    In its eternal declamations on the immense advantages of



absolute freedom of trade, and the disadvantages of protection, the



popular school is accustomed to rely on the examples of a few



nations; that of Switzerland is quoted to prove that industry can



prosper without protective duties, and that absolute liberty of



international commerce forms the safest basis of national



prosperity. The fate of Spain is quoted to exhibit to all nations



which seek aid and preservation in the protective system, a



frightful example of its ruinous effects. The case of England,



which, as we have shown in a former chapter, affords such an



excellent example for imitation to all nations which are capable of



developing a manufacturing power, is adduced by these theorists



merely to support their allegation that capability for



manufacturing production is a natural gift exclusively peculiar to



certain countries, like the capability to produce burgundy wines;



and that nature has bestowed on England, above all other countries



of the earth, the destiny and the ability to devote herself to



manufacturing industry and to an extensive commerce.



    Let us now take these examples more closely into consideration.



    As for Switzerland, it must be remarked in the first place that



she does not constitute a nation, at least not one of normal



magnitude which can be ranked as a great nation, but is merely a



conglomeration of municipalities. Possessing no sea-coast, hemmed



in between three great nations, she lacks all inducement to strive



to obtain a native commercial marine, or direct trade with tropical



countries; she need pay no regard to the establishment of a naval



power, or to founding or acquiring colonies. Switzerland laid the



foundation of her present very moderate degree of prosperity at the



time when she still belonged to the German Empire. Since that time,



she has been almost entirely free from internal wars, her capital



has been permitted to increase from generation to generation, as



scarcely any of it was required by her municipal governments for



discharging their expenses. Amid the devastations occasioned by the



despotism, fanaticism, wars, and revolutions, with which Europe was



perturbed during the last centuries, Switzerland offered an asylum



to all who desired to transfer their capital and talents to another



country than their own, and thus acquired considerable wealth from



abroad. Germany has never adopted strong commercial restrictions



against Switzerland, and a large part of the manufactured products



of the latter has obtained a market in Germany. Moreover, the



industry of Switzerland was never a national one, one comprising



the production of articles of common use, but chiefly an industry



in articles of luxury, the products of which could be easily



smuggled into the neighbouring countries or transported to distant



parts of the world. Furthermore, her territory is most favourably



situated for intermediate trade, and in this respect is in some



measure privileged. Again, their excellent opportunity of becoming



acquainted with the languages, laws, institutions, and



circumstances of the three nations which adjoin her must have given



the Swiss important advantages in intermediate commerce and in



every other respect. Civil and religious liberty and universal



education have evoked in the Swiss, activity and a spirit of



enterprise which, in view of the narrow limits of their country's



internal agriculture, and of her internal resources for supporting



her population, drove the Swiss to foreign countries, where they



amassed wealth, by means of military service, by commerce, by



industries of every kind, in order to bring it home to their



fatherland. If under such special circumstances they managed to



acquire mental and material resources, in order to develop a few



branches of industry for producing articles of luxury, if these



industries could maintain themselves without protective duties by



sales to foreign countries, it cannot thence be concluded that



great nations could follow a similar policy under wholly different



circumstances. In her small national expenditure Switzerland



possesses an advantage which great nations could only attain if



they, like Switzerland, resolved themselves into mere



municipalities and thus exposed their nationality to foreign



attacks.



    That Spain acted foolishly in preventing the exportation of the



precious metals, especially since she herself produced such a large



excess of these articles, must be admitted by every reasonable



person. It is a mistake, however, to attribute the decline of the



industry and national well-being of Spain to her restrictions



against the importation of manufactured goods. If Spain had not



expelled the Moors and Jews, and had never had an Inquisition; if



Charles V had permitted religious liberty in Spain; if the priests



and monks had been changed into teachers of the people, and their



immense property secularised, or at least reduced to what was



actually necessary for their maintenance; if, in consequence of



these measures, civil liberty had gained a firm footing, the feudal



nobility had been reformed and the monarchy limited; if, in a word,



Spain had politically developed herself in consequence of a



Reformation, as England did, and if the same spirit had extended to



her colonies, a prohibitive and protective policy would have had



similar effects in Spain as it had in England, and this all the



more because at the time of Charles V the Spaniards were more



advanced than the English and French in every respect, and the



Netherlands only (of all countries) occupied a more advanced



position than Spain, whose industrial and commercial spirit might



have been transferred to Spain by means of the protective policy,



provided that the institutions and conditions of Spain were such as



would have invited foreign talents and capital to her shores,



instead of driving her own native talents and capital into foreign



countries.



    To what causes England owes her manufacturing and commercial



supremacy, we have shown in our fifth chapter.



    It is especially owing to her civil, mental, and religious



liberty, to the nature and excellence of her political



institutions, that the commercial policy of England has been



enabled to make the most of the natural riches of the country, and



fully to develop the productive powers of the nation. But who would



deny that other nations are capable of raising themselves to the



same degree of liberty? Who would venture to maintain that nature



has denied to other nations the means which are requisite for



manufacturing industry?



    In the latter respect the great natural wealth in coal and iron



which England possesses has often been adduced as a reason why the



English are specially destined to be a manufacturing nation. It is



true that in this respect England is greatly favoured by nature;



but against this it may be stated that even in respect of these



natural products, nature has not treated other countries merely



like a stepmother; for the most part the want of good transport



facilities is the chief obstacle to the full utilisation of these



products by other nations; that other countries possess enormous



unemployed water power, which is cheaper than steam power; that



where it is necessary they are able to counterbalance the want of



coal by the use of other fuels; that many other countries possess



inexhaustible means for the production of iron, and that they are



also able to procure these raw materials from abroad by commercial



exchange.



    In conclusion, we must not omit here to make mention of



commercial treaties based on mutual concessions of duties. The



school objects to these conventions as unnecessary and detrimental,



whereas they appear to us as the most effective means of gradually



diminishing the respective restrictions on trade, and of leading



the nations of the world gradually to freedom of international



intercourse. Of course, the specimens of such treaties which the



world has hitherto seen, are not very encouraging for imitation. We



have shown in former chapters what injurious effects the Methuen



Treaty has produced in Portugal, and the Eden Treaty has produced



in France. It is on these injurious effects of reciprocal



alleviation of duties, that the objections of the school to



commercial treaties appear principally to be founded. Its principle



of absolute commercial liberty has evidently experienced a



practical contradiction in these cases, inasmuch as, according to



that principle, those treaties ought to have operated beneficially



to both contracting nations, but not to the ruin of the one, and to



the immense advantage of the other. If, however, we investigate the



cause of this disproportionate effect, we find that Portugal and



France, in consequence of those conventions, abandoned in favour of



England the progress they had already made in manufacturing



industry, as well as that which they could expect to make in it in



the future, with the expectation of increasing by that means their



exportation of natural products to England; that, accordingly, both



those nations have declined, in consequence of the treaties thus



concluded, from a higher to a lower standpoint of industrial



development. From this, however, it merely follows that a nation



acts foolishly if it sacrifices its manufacturing power to foreign



competition by commercial treaties, and thereby binds itself to



remain for all future time dependent on the low standpoint of



merely agricultural industry; but it does not in the least follow



from this, that those treaties are also detrimental and



objectionable whereby the reciprocal exchange of agricultural



products and raw materials, or the reciprocal exchange of



manufactured products, is promoted.



    We have previously explained that free trade in agricultural



products and raw materials is useful to all nations at all stages



of their industrial development; from this it follows that every



commercial treaty which mitigates or removes prohibitions and



restrictions on freedom of trade in such articles must have a



beneficial effect on both contracting nations, as e.g. a convention



between France and England whereby the mutual exchange of wines and



brandies for pig-iron and coal, or a treaty between France and



Germany whereby the mutual exchange of wine, oil, and dried fruit,



for corn, wool, and cattle, were promoted.



    According to our former deductions, protection is only



beneficial to the prosperity of the nation so far as it corresponds



with the degree of the nation's industrial development. Every



exaggeration of protection is detrimental; nations can only obtain



a perfect manufacturing power by degrees. On that account also, two



nations which stand at different stages of industrial cultivation,



can with mutual benefit make reciprocal concessions by treaty in



respect to the exchange of their various manufacturing products.



The less advanced nation can, while it is not yet able to produce



for itself with profit finer manufactured goods, such as fine



cotton and silk fabrics, nevertheless supply the further advanced



nation with a portion of its requirements of coarser manufactured



goods.



    Such treaties might be still more allowable and beneficial



between nations which stand at about the same degree of industrial



development, between which, therefore, competition is not



overwhelming, destructive, or repressive, nor tending to give a



monopoly of everything to one side, but merely acts, as competition



in the inland trade does, as an incentive to mutual emulation,



perfection, and cheapening of production. This is the case with



most of the Continental nations. France, Austria, and the German



Zollverein might, for instance, anticipate only very prosperous



effects from moderately low reciprocal protective duties. Also,



between these countries and Russia mutual concessions could be made



to the advantage of all sides. What they all have to fear at this



time is solely the preponderating competition of England.



    Thus it appears also from this point of view, that the



supremacy of that island in manufactures, in trade, in navigation,



and in her colonial empire, constitutes the greatest existing



impediment to all nations drawing nearer to one another; although



it must be at the same time admitted that England, in striving for



this supremacy, has immeasurably increased, and is still daily



increasing, the productive power of the entire human race.









End













The National System of Political Economy





by Friedrich List





translated by Sampson S. Lloyd, 1885













First Book: The History







Chapter 1







The Italians







    At the revival of civilisation in Europe, no county was in so



favourable a position as Italy in respect to commerce and industry.



Barbarism had not been able entirely to eradicate the culture and



civilisation of ancient Rome. A genial climate and a fertile soil,



notwithstanding an unskilful system of cultivation, yielded



abundant nourishment for a numerous population. The most necessary



arts and industries remained as little destroyed as the municipal



institutions of ancient Rome. Prosperous coast fisheries served



everywhere as nurseries for seamen, and navigation along Italy's



extensive sea-coasts abundantly compensated her lack of internal



means of transport. Her proximity to Greece, Asia Minor, and Egypt,



and her maritime intercourse with them, secured for Italy special



advantages in the trade with the East which had previously, though



not extensively, been carried on through Russia with the countries



of the North. By means of this commercial intercourse Italy



necessarily acquired those branches of knowledge and those arts and



manufactures which Greece had preserved from the civilisation of



ancient times. 



    From the period of the emancipation of the Italian cities by



Otho the Great, they gave evidence of what history was testified



alike in earlier and later times, namely, that freedom and industry



are inseparable companions, even although not unfrequently the one



has come into existence before the other. If commerce and industry



are flourishing anywhere, one may be certain that there freedom is



nigh at hand: if anywhere Freedom was unfolded her banner, it is as



certain that sooner or later industry will there establish herself;



for nothing is more natural than that when man has acquired



material or mental wealth he should strive to obtain guarantees for



the transmission of his acquisitions to his successors, or that



when he has acquired freedom, he should devote all his energies to



improve his physical and intellectual condition.



    For the first time since the downfall of the free states of



antiquity was the spectacle again presented to the world by the



cities of Italy of free and rich communities. Cities and



territories reciprocally rose to a state of prosperity and received



a powerful impulse in that direction from the Crusades. The



transport of the Crusaders and their baggage and material of war



not only benefited Italy's navigation, it afforded also inducements



and opportunities for the conclusion of advantageous commercial



relations with the East for the introduction of new industries,



inventions, and plants, and for acquaintance with new enjoyments.



On the other hand, the oppressions of feudal lordship were weakened



and diminished in manifold ways, owing to the same cause, tending



to the greater freedom of the cities and of the cultivation of the



soil.



    Next after Venice and Genoa, Florence became especially



conspicuous for her manufactures and her monetary exchange



business. Already, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, her



silk and woollen manufactures were very flourishing; the guilds of



those trades took part in the government, and under their influence



the Republic was constituted. The woollen manufacture alone



employed 200 manufactories, which produced annually 80,000 pieces



of cloth, the raw material for which was imported from Spain. In



addition to these, raw cloth to the amount of 300,000 gold gulden



was imported annually from Spain, France, Belgium, and Germany,



which, after being finished at Florence, was exported to the



Levant. Florence conducted the banking business of the whole of



Italy, and contained eighty banking establishments.(1*) The annual



revenue of her Government amounted to 300,000 gold gulden (fifteen



million francs of our present money), considerably more than the



revenue of the kingdoms of Naples and Aragon at that period, and



more than that of Great Britain and Ireland under Queen



Elizabeth.(2*)



    We thus see Italy in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries



possessing all the elements of national economical prosperity, and



in respect of both commerce and industry far in advance of all



other nations. Her agriculture and her manufactures served as



patterns and as motives for emulation to other countries. Her roads



and canals were the best in Europe. The civilised world is indebted



to her for banking institutions, the mariner's compass, improved



naval architecture, the system of exchanges, and a host of the most



useful commercial customs and commercial laws, as well as for a



great part of its municipal and governmental institutions. Her



commercial, marine, and naval power were by far the most important



in the southern seas. She was in possession of the trade of the



world; for, with the exception of the unimportant portion of it



carried on over the northern seas, that trade was confined to the



Mediterranean and the Black Sea. She supplied all nations with



manufactures, with articles of luxury, and with tropical products,



and was supplied by them with raw materials. One thing alone was



wanting to Italy to enable her to become what England has become in



our days, and because that one thing was wanting to her, every



other element of prosperity passed away from her; she lacked



national union and the power which springs from it. The cities and



ruling powers of Italy did not act as members of one body, but made



war on and ravaged one another like independent powers and states.



While these wars raged externally, each commonwealth was



successively overthrown by the internal conflicts between



democracy, aristocracy, and autocracy. These conflicts, so



destructive to national prosperity, were stimulated and increased



by foreign powers and their invasions, and by the power of the



priesthood at home and its pernicious influence, whereby the



separate Italian communities were arrayed against one another in



two hostile factions.



    How Italy thus destroyed herself may be best learned from the



history of her maritime states. We first see Amalfi great and



powerful (from the eighth to the eleventh century).(3*) Her ships



covered the seas, and all the coin which passed current in Italy



and the Levant was that of Amalfi. She possessed the most practical



code of maritime laws, and those laws were in force in every port



of the Mediterranean. In the twelfth century her naval power was



destroyed by Pisa, Pisa in her turn fell under the attacks of



Genoa, and Genoa herself, after a conflict of a hundred years, was



compelled to succumb to Venice.



    The fall of Venice herself appears to have indirectly resulted



from this narrow-minded policy. To a league of Italian naval powers



it could not have been a difficult task, not merely to maintain and



uphold the preponderance of Italy in Greece, Asia Minor, the



Archipelago, and Egypt, but continually to extend and strengthen



it; or to curb the progress of the Turks on land and repress their



piracies at sea, while contesting with the Portuguese the passage



round the Cape of Good Hope.



    As matters actually stood, however, Venice was not merely left



to her own resources, she found herself crippled by the external



attacks of her sister states and of the neighbonring European



powers.



    It could not have proved a difficult task to a well-organised



league of Italian military powers to defend the independence of



Italy against the aggression of the great monarchies. The attempt



to form such a league was actually made in 1526, but then not until



the moment of actual danger and only for temporary defence. The



lukewarmness and treachery of the leaders and members of this



league were the cause of the subsequent subjugation of Milan and



the fall of the Tuscan Republic. From that period must be dated the



downfall of the industry and commerce of Italy.(4*)



    In her earlier as well as in her later history Venice aimed at



being a nation for herself alone. So long as she had to deal only



with petty Italian powers or with decrepid Greece, she had no



difficulty in maintaining a supremacy in manufactures and commerce



through the countries bordering on the Mediterranean and Black



Seas. As soon, however, as united and vigorous nations appeared on



the political stage, it became manifest at once that Venice was



merely a city and her aristocracy only a municipal one. It is true



that she had conquered several islands and even extensive



provinces, but she ruled over them only as conquered territory, and



hence (according to the testimony of all historians) each conquest



increased her weakness instead of her power 



    At the same period the spirit within the Republic by which she



had grown great gradually died away. The power and prosperity of



Venice -- the work of a patriotic and heroic aristocracy which had



sprung from an energetic and liberty-loving democracy-maintained



itself and increased so long as the freedom of democratic energy



lent it support, and that energy was guided by the patriotism, the



wisdom, and the heroic spirit of the aristocracy. But in proportion



as the aristocracy became a despotic oligarchy, destructive of the



freedom and energies of the people, the roots of power and



prosperity died away, notwithstanding that their branches and



leading stem appeared still to flourish for some time longer.'(5*)



    A nation which has fallen into slavery,' says Montesquieu,(6*)



'strives rather to retain what it possesses than to acquire more;



a free nation, on the contrary, strives rather to acquire than to



retain.' To this very true observation he might have added -- and



because anyone strives only to retain without acquiring he must



come to grief, for every nation which makes no forward progress



sinks lower and lower, and must ultimately fall. Far from striving



to extend their commerce and to make new discoveries, the Venetians



never even conceived the idea of deriving benefit from the



discoveries made by other nations. That they could be excluded from



the trade with the East Indies by the discovery of the new



commercial route thither, never occurred to them until they



actually experienced it. What all the rest of the world perceived



they would not believe; and when they began to find out the



injurious results of the altered state of things, they strove to



maintain the old commercial route instead of seeking to participate



in the benefits of the new one; they endeavoured to maintain by



petty intrigues what could only be won by making wise use of the



altered circumstances by the spirit of enterprise and by hardihood.



And when they at length had lost what they had possessed, and the



wealth of the East and West indies was pouted into Cadiz and Lisbon



instead of into their own ports, like simpletons or spendthrifts



they turned their attention to alchemy.(7*)



    In the times when the Republic grew and flourished, to be



inscribed in the Golden Book was regarded as a reward for



distinguished exertions in commerce, in industry, or in the civil



or military service of the State. On that condition this honour was



open to foreigners; for example, to the most distinguished of the



silk manufacturers who had immigrated from Florence.(8*) But that



book was closed when men began to regard places of honour and State



salaries as the family inheritance of the patrician class. At a



later period, when men recognised the necessity of giving new life



to the impoverished and enfeebled aristocracy, the book was



reopened. But the chief title to inscription in it was no longer,



as in former times, to have rendered services to the State, but the



possession of wealth and noble birth. At length the honour of being



inscribed in the Golden Book was so little esteemed, that it



remained open for a century with scarcely any additional names.



    If we inquire of History what were the causes of the downfall



of this Republic and of its commerce, she replies that they



principally consisted in the folly, neglect, and cowardice of a



worn-out aristocracy, and in the apathy of a people who had sunk



into slavery. The commerce and manufactures of Venice must have



declined, even if the new route round the Cape of Good Hope had



never been discovered.



    The cause of it, as of the fall of all the other Italian



republics, is to be found in the absence of national unity, in the



domination of foreign powers, in priestly rule at home, and in the



rise of other greater, more powerful, and more united nationalities



in Europe.



    If we carefully consider the commercial policy of Venice, we



see at a glance that that of modern commercial and manufacturing



nations is but a copy of that of Venice, only on an enlarged (i.e.



a national) scale. By navigation laws and customs duties in each



case native vessels and native manufactures were protected against



those of foreigners, and the maxim thus early held good that it was



sound policy to import raw materials from other states and to



export to them manufactured goods.(9*)



    It has been recently asserted in defence of the principle of



absolute and unconditional free trade, that her protective policy



was the cause of the downfall of Venice. That assertion comprises



a little truth with a great deal of error if we investigate the



history of Venice with an unprejudiced eye, we find that in her



case, as in that of the great kingdoms at a later period, freedom



of international trade as well as restrictions on it have been



beneficial or prejudicial to the power and prosperity of the State



at different epochs. Unrestricted freedom of trade was beneficial



to the Republic in the first years of her existence; for how



otherwise could she have raised herself from a mere fishing village



to a commercial power? But a protective policy was also beneficial



to her when she had arrived at a certain stage of power and wealth,



for by means of it she attained to manufacturing and commercial



supremacy. Protection first became injurious to her when her



manufacturing and commercial power had reached that supremacy,



because by it all competition with other nations became absolutely



excluded, and thus indolence was encouraged. Therefore, not the



introduction of a protective policy, but perseverance in



maintaining it after the reasons for its introduction had passed



away, was really injurious to Venice.



    Hence the argument to which we have adverted has this great



fault, that it takes no account of the rise of great nations under



hereditary monarchy. Venice, although mistress of some provinces



and islands, yet being all the time merely one Italian city, stood



in competition, at the period of her rise to a manufacturing and



commercial power, merely with other Italian cities; and her



prohibitory commercial policy could benefit her so long only as



whole nations with united power did not enter into competition with



her. But as soon as that took place, she could only have maintained



her supremacy by placing herself at the head of a united Italy and



by embracing in her commercial system the whole Italian nation. No



commercial policy was ever clever enough to maintain continuously



the commercial supremacy of a single city over united nations.



    From the example of Venice (so far as it may be adduced against



a protective commercial policy at the present time) neither more



nor less can be inferred than this -- that a single city or a small



state cannot establish and maintain such a policy successfully in



competition with great states and kingdoms; also that any power



which by means of a protective policy has attained a position of



manufacturing and commercial supremacy, can (after she has attained



it) revert with advantage to the policy of free trade.



    In the argument before adverted to, as in every other when



international freedom of trade is the subject of discussion, we



meet with a misconception which has been the parent of much error,



occasioned by the misuse of the term 'freedom.' Freedom of trade is



spoken of in the same terms as religious freedom and municipal



freedom. Hence the friends and advocates of freedom feel themselves



especially bound to defend freedom in all its forms. And thus the



term 'free trade' has become popular without drawing the necessary



distinction between freedom of internal trade within the State and



freedom of trade between separate nations, notwithstanding that



these two in their nature and operation are as distinct as the



heaven is from the earth. For while restrictions on the internal



trade of a state are compatible in only very few cases with the



liberty of individual citizens, in the case of international trade



the highest degree of individual liberty may consist with a high



degree of protective policy. Indeed, it is even possible that the



greatest freedom of international trade may result in national



servitude, as we hope hereafter to show from the case of Poland. In



respect to this Montesquieu says truly, 'Commerce is never



subjected to greater restrictions than in free nations, and never



subjected to less ones than in those under despotic



government.'(10*)







NOTES:







1. De l'Ecluse, Florence et ses Vicissitudes, pp. 23, 26, 32, 163,



213.







2. Pechio, Histoire de l'Economie Politique en Italie.







3. Amalfi contained at the period of her prosperity 50,000



inhabitants. Flavio Guio, the inventor of the mariner's compass,



was a citizen of Amalfi. It was the sack of Amalfi by the Pisans



(1135 or 1137) that that ancient book was discovered which later on



became so injurious to the freedom and energies of Germany -- the



Pandects.







4. Hence Charles V was the destroyer of commerce and industry in



Italy, as he was also in the Netherlands and in Spain. He was the



introducer of nobility by patent, and of the idea that it was



disgraceful for the nobility to carry on commerce or manufactures



-- an idea which had the most destructive influence on the national



industry. Before his time the contrary idea prevailed; the Medici



continued to be engaged in commerce long after they had become



sovereign rulers.







5. "Quand les nobles, au lien de verser leur sang pour la patrie,



au lieu d'illustrer l'etat par des victoires et de l'agrandir par



des conquetes, n'eurent plus qu'a jouir des honneurs et a se



partager des impots on dut se demander pourquoi il y avait huit ou



neuf cents habitants de Venice qui se disaient proprietaries de



toute la Republique." (Daru, Histoire de Venise, vol. iv. ch.



xviii.)







6. Esprit des Lois, p. 192.







7. A mere charlatan, Marco Brasadino, who professed to have the art



of making gold, was welcomed by the Venetian aristocracy as a



saviour. (Daru, Histoire de Venise, vol. iii. ch. xix.)







8. Venice, as Holland and England subsequently did, made use of



every opportunity of attracting to herself manufacturing industry



and capital from foreign states. Also a considerable number of silk



manufacturers emigrated to Venice from Luces, where already in the



thirteenth century the manufacturer of velvets and brocades was



very flourishing, in consequence of the oppression of the Lucchese



tyrant Castruccio Castracani. (Sandu, Histoire de Venise, vol. i.



pp. 247-256.)







9. Sismondi, Histoire des Republiques Italiennes, Pt. I, p. 285.







10. Esprit des Lois, livre xx. ch. xii.







Chapter 2







The Hansards











    The spirit of industry, commerce, and liberty having attained



full influence in Italy, crossed the Alps, permeated Germany, and



erected for itself a new throne on the shores of the northern seas,



the Emperor Henry I, the father of the liberator of the Italian



municipalities, promoted the founding of new cities and the



enlargement of older ones which were already partly established on



the sites of the ancient Roman colonies and partly in the imperial



domains.



    Like the kings of France and England at a later period, he and



his successors regarded the cities as the strongest counterpoise to



the aristocracy, as the richest source of revenue to the State, as



a new basis for national defence. By means of their commercial



relations with the cities of Italy, their competition with Italian



industry, and their free institutions, these cities soon attained



to a high degree of prosperity and civilisation. Life in common



fellow-citizenship created a spirit of progress in the arts and in



manufacture, as well as zeal to achieve distinction by wealth and



by enterprise; while, on the other hand, the acquisition of



material wealth stimulated exertions to acquire culture and



improvement in their political condition.



    Strong through the power of youthful freedom and of flourishing



industry, but exposed to the attacks of robbers by land and sea,



the maritime towns of Northern Germany soon felt the necessity of



a closer mutual union for protection and defence. With this object



Hamburg and Lübeck formed a league in 1241, which before the close



of that century embraced all the cities of any importance on the



coasts of the Baltic and North Seas, or on the banks of the Oder,



the Elbe, the Weser, and the Rhine (eighty-five in all). This



confederation adopted the title of the 'Hansa,' which in the Low



German dialect signifies a league.



    Promptly comprehending what advantages the industry of



individuals might derive from a union of their forces, the Hansa



lost no time in developing and establishing a commercial policy



which resulted in a degree of commercial prosperity previously



unexampled. Perceiving that whatever power desires to create and



maintain an extensive maritime commerce, must possess the means of



defending it, they created a powerful navy; being further convinced



that the naval power of any country is strong or weak in proportion



to the extent of its mercantile marine and its sea fisheries, they



enacted a law that Hanseatic goods should be conveyed only on board



Hanseatic vessels, and established extensive sea fisheries. The



English navigation laws were copied from those of the Hanseatic



League, just as the latter were an imitation of those of



Venice.(1*)



    England in that respect only followed the example of those who



were her forerunners in acquiring supremacy at sea. Yet the



proposal to enact a navigation Act in the time of the Long



Parliament was then treated as a novel one. Adam Smith appears in



his comment on this Act(2*) not to have known, or to have refrained



from stating, that already for centuries before that time and on



various occasions the attempt had been made to introduce similar



restrictions. A proposal to that effect made by Parliament in 1461



was rejected by Henry VI, and a similar one made by James I,



rejected by Parliament;(3*) indeed, long before these two proposals



(viz. in 1381) such restrictions had been actually imposed by



Richard II, though they soon proved inoperative and passed into



oblivion. The nation was evidently not then ripe for such



legislation. Navigation laws, like other measures for protecting



native industry, are so rooted in the very nature of those nations



who feel themselves fitted for future industrial and commercial



greatness, that the United States of North America before they had



fully won their independence had already at the instance of James



Madison introduced restrictions on foreign shipping, and



undoubtedly with not less great results (as will be seen in a



future chapter) than England had derived from them a hundred and



fifty years before.



    The northern princes, impressed with the benefits which trade



with the Hansards promised to yield to them -- inasmuch as it gave



them the means not only of disposing of the surplus products of



their own territories, and of obtaining in exchange much better



manufactured articles than were produced at home, but also of



enriching their treasuries by means of import and export



duties,(4*) and of diverting to habits of industry their subjects



who were addicted to idleness, turbulence, and riot -- considered



it as a piece of good fortune whenever the Hansards established



factories on their territory, and endeavoured to induce them to do



so by wanting them privileges and favours of every kind. The kings



of England were conspicuous above all other sovereigns in this



respect.



    The trade of England (says Hume) was formerly entirely in the



hands of foreigners, but especially of the 'Easterlings'(5*) whom



Henry III constituted a corporation, to whom he granted privileges,



and whom he freed from restrictions and import duties to which



other foreign merchants were liable. The English at that time were



so inexperienced in commerce that from the time of Edward II the



Hansards, under the title of 'Merchants of the Steelyard',



monopolised the entire foreign trade of the kingdom. And as they



conducted it exclusively in their own ships, the shipping interest



of England was in a very pitiable condition.(6*)



    Some German merchants, viz. those of Cologne, after they had



for a long time maintained commercial intercourse with England, at



length established in London, in the year 1250, at the invitation



of the King, the factory which became so celebrated under the name



of 'The Steelyard' an institution which at first was so influential



in promoting culture and industry in England, but afterwards



excited so much national jealousy, and which for 375 years, until



its ultimate dissolution, was the cause of such warm and



long-continued conflicts.



    England formerly stood in similar relations with the Hanseatic



League to those in which Poland afterwards stood with the Dutch,



and Germany with the English; she supplied them with wool, tin,



hides, butter, and other mineral and agricultural products, and



received manufactured articles in exchange. The Hansards conveyed



the raw products which they obtained from England and the northern



states to their establishment at Bruges (founded in 1252), and



exchanged them there for Belgian cloths and other manufactures, and



for Oriental products and manufactures which came from Italy, which



latter they carried back to all the countries bordering on the



northern seas.



    A third factory of theirs, at Novgorod in Russia (established



in 1272), supplied them with furs, flax, hemp, and other raw



products in exchange for manufactures. A fourth factory, at Bergen



in Norway (also founded in 1272), was occupied principally with



fisheries and trade in train oil and fish products.(7*)



    The experience of all nations in all times teaches us that



nations, so long as they remain in a state of barbarism, derive



enormous benefit from free and unrestricted trade, by which they



can dispose of the products of the chase and those of their



pastures, forests, and agriculture -- in short, raw products of



every kind; obtaining in exchange better clothing materials,



machines, and utensils, as well as the precious metals -- the great



medium of exchange and hence that at first they regard free trade



with approval. But experience also shows that those very nations,



the farther advances that they make for themselves in culture and



in industry, regard such a system of trade with a less favourable



eye, and that at last they come to regard it as injurious and as a



hindrance to their further progress. Such was the case with the



trade between England and the Hansards. A century had scarcely



elapsed from the foundation of the factory of the 'Steelyard' when



Edward III conceived the opinion that a nation might do something



more useful and beneficial than to export raw wool and import



woollen cloth. He therefore endeavoured to attract Flemish weavers



into England by granting them all kinds of privileges; and as soon



as a considerable number of them had got to work, he issued a



prohibition against wearing any articles made of foreign cloth.(8*)



    The wise measures of this king were seconded in the most



marvellous manner by the foolish policy pursued by the rulers of



other countries -- a coincidence which has not unfrequently to be



noted in commercial history. If the earlier rulers of Flanders and



Brabant did everything in their power to raise their native



industry to a flourishing condition, the later ones did everything



that was calculated to make the commercial and manufacturing



classes discontented and to incite them to emigration.(9*)



    In the year 1413 the English woollen industry had already made



such progress that Hume could write respecting that period, 'Great



jealousy prevailed at this time against foreign merchants, and a



number of restrictions were imposed on their trade, as, for



instance, that they were required to lay out in the purchase of



goods produced in England the whole value which they realized from



articles which they imported into it.(10*)



    Under Edward IV this jealousy of foreign traders rose to such



a pitch that the importation of foreign cloth, and of many other



articles, was absolutely prohibited.(11*)



    Notwithstanding that the king was afterwards compelled by the



Hansards to remove this prohibition, and to reinstate them in their



ancient privileges, the English woollen manufacture appears to have



been greatly promoted by it, as is noted by Hume in treating of the



reign of Henry VII, who came to the throne half a century later



than Edward IV.



    'The progress made in industry and the arts imposed limits, in



a much more effective way than the rigour of laws could do, to the



pernicious habit of the nobility of maintaining a great number of



servants. Instead of vying with one another in the number and



valour of their retainers, the nobility were animated by another



kind of rivalry more in accordance with the spirit of civilisation,



inasmuch as they now sought to excel one another in the beauty of



their houses, the elegance of their equipages, and the costliness



of their furniture. As the people could no longer loiter about in



pernicious idleness, in the service of their chieftains and



patrons, they became compelled, by learning some kind of handiwork,



to make themselves useful to the community. Laws were again enacted



to prevent the export of the precious metals, both coined and



uncoined; but as these were well known to be inoperative, the



obligation was again imposed on foreign merchants to lay out the



whole proceeds of goods imported by them, in articles of English



manufacture.'(12*)



    In the time of Henry VIII the prices of all articles of food



had considerably risen, owing to the great number of foreign



manufacturers in London; a sure sign of the great benefit which the



home agricultural industry derived from the development of home



manufacturing industry.



    The king, however, totally misjudging the causes and the



operation of this phenomenon, gave ear to the unjust complaints of



the English against the foreign manufacturers, whom the former



perceived to have always excelled themselves in skill, industry,



and frugality. An order of the Privy Council decreed the expulsion



of 15,000 Belgian artificers, 'because they had made all provisions



dearer, and had exposed the nation to the risk of a famine.' In



order to strike at the root of this evil, laws were enacted to



limit personal expenditure, to regulate the style of dress, the



prices of provisions, and the rate of wages. This policy naturally



was warmly approved by the Hansards, who acted towards this king in



the same spirit of good-will which they had previously Displayed



towards all those former kings of England whose policy had favoured



their interests, and which in our days the English display towards



the kings of Portugal -- they placed their ships of war at his



disposition. During this king's whole reign the trade of the



Hansards with England was very active. They possessed both ships



and capital, and knew, not less cleverly than the English do in our



days, how to acquire influence over peoples and governments who did



not thoroughly understand their own interests. Only their arguments



rested on quite a different basis from those of the trade



monopolists of our day. The Hansards based their claim to supply



all countries with manufactures on actual treaties and on



immemorial possession of the trade, whilst the English in our day



base a similar claim on a mere theory, which has for its author one



of their own Custom-house officials. The latter demand in the name



of a pretended science, what the former claimed in the name of



actual treaties and of justice.



    In the reign of Edward VI the Privy Council sought for and



found pretexts for abolishing the privileges of the 'Merchants of



the Steelyard.' The Hansards made strong protests against this



innovation. But the Privy Council persevered in its determination,



and the step was soon followed by the most beneficial results to



the nation. The English merchants possessed great advantages over



the foreign ones, on account of their position as dwellers in the



country, in the purchase of cloths, wool, and other articles,



advantages which up to that time they had not so clearly perceived



as to induce them to venture into competition with such a wealthy



company. But from the time when all foreign merchants were



subjected to the same commercial restrictions, the English were



stimulated to enterprise, and the spirit of enterprise was diffused



over the whole kingdom.(13*)



    After the Hansards had continued for some years to be entirely



excluded from a market which they had for three centuries



previously possessed as exclusively as England in our days



possesses the markets of Germany and the United States, they were



reinstated by Queen Mary in all their ancient privileges owing to



representations made by the German Emperor.(14*) But their joy was



this time of short duration. Being earnestly Desirous not merely of



maintaining these privileges, but of increasing them, they made



strong complaints at the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth of the



treatment to which they had been subjected under Edward VI and



Mary. Elizabeth prudently replied that 'she had no power to alter



anything, but she would willingly protect them still in the



possession of those privileges and immunities which they then



possessed.' This reply, however, did not satisfy them at all. Some



time afterwards their trade was further suspended, to the great



advantage of the English merchants, who now had an opportunity of



showing of what they were capable; they gained control over the



entire export trade of their own country, and their efforts were



crowned with complete success. They divided themselves into



'staplers and merchant adventurers,' the former carrying on



business in some one place, the latter seeking their fortune in



foreign cities and states with cloth and other English



manufactures. This excited the jealousy of the Hansards so greatly,



that they left no means untried to draw down on the English traders



the ill opinion of other nations. At length, on August 1, 1597,



they gained an imperial edict, by which all trade within the German



Empire was forbidden to English merchants The Queen replied (on



January 13, 1598) by proclamation, in consequence of which she



sought reprisals by seizing sixty Hanseatic vessels which were



engaged in contraband trade with Spain. In taking this step she had



at first only intended, by restoring the vessels, to bring about a



better understanding with the Hansards. But when she was informed



that a general Hanseatic assembly was being held in the city of



Lübeck in order to concert measures for harassing the export trade



of England, she caused all these vessels with their cargoes to be



confiscated, and then released two of them, which she sent to



Lübeck with the message that she felt the greatest contempt for the



Hanseatic League and all their proceedings and measures.(15*)



    Thus Elizabeth acted towards these merchants, who had lent



their ships to her father and to so many English kings to fight



their battles; who had been courted by all the potentates of



Europe; who had treated the kings of Denmark and Sweden as their



vassals for centuries, and invited them into their territories and



expelled them as they pleased; who had colonised and civilised all



the southeastern coasts of the Baltic, and freed all seas from



piracy; who not very long before had, with sword in hand, compelled



a king of England to recognise their privileges; to whom on more



than one occasion English kings had given their crowns in pledge



for loans; and who had once carried their cruelty and insolence



towards England so far as to drown a hundred English fishermen



because they had ventured to approach their fishing grounds. The



Hansards, indeed, still possessed sufficient power to have avenged



this conduct of the queen of England; but their ancient courage,



their mighty spirit of enterprise, the power inspired by freedom



and by co-operation, had passed from them. They dwindled gradually



into powerlessness until at length, in 1630, their League was



formally dissolved, after they had supplicated every court in



Europe for import privileges, and had everywhere been repulsed with



scorn.



    Many external causes, besides the internal ones which we have



to mention hereafter, contributed to their fall. Denmark and Sweden



sought to avenge themselves for the position of dependence in which



they had been so long held by the League, and placed all possible



obstructions in the way of its commerce. The czars of Russia had



conferred privileges on an English company. The order of Teutonic



knights, who had for centuries been the allies as well as



(originally) the children of the League, declined and was



dissolved. The Dutch and the English drove them out of all markets,



and supplanted them in every court. Finally, the discovery of the



route to the East indies by the Cape of Good Hope, operated most



seriously to their disadvantage.



    These leaguers, who during the period of their might and



prosperity had scarcely deemed an alliance with the German Empire



as worthy of consideration, now in their time of need betook



themselves to the German Reichstag and represented to that body



that the English exported annually 200,000 pieces of cloth, of



which a great proportion went to Germany, and that the only means



whereby the League could regain its ancient privileges in England,



was to prohibit the import of English cloth into Germany. According



to Anderson, a decree of the Reichstag to that effect was seriously



contemplated, if not actually drawn up, but that author asserts



that Gilpin, the English ambassador to the Reichstag, contrived to



prevent its being passed. A hundred and fifty years after the



formal dissolution of the Hanseatic League, so completely had all



memory of its former greatness disappeared in the Hanseatic cities



that Justus Möser asserts (in some passage in his works) that when



he visited those cities, and narrated to their merchants the power



and greatness which their predecessors had enjoyed, they would



scarcely believe him. Hamburg, formerly the terror of pirates in



every sea, and renowned throughout Christendom for the services



which she had rendered to civilisation in suppressing sea-robbers,



had sunk so low that she had to purchase safety for her vessels by



paying an annual tribute to the pirates of Algiers. Afterwards,



when the dominion of the seas had passed into the hands of the



Dutch another policy became prevalent in reference to piracy. When



the Hanseatic League were supreme at sea, the pirate was considered



as the enemy of the civilised world, and extirpated wherever that



was possible. The Dutch, on the contrary, regarded the corsairs of



Barbary as useful partisans, by whose means the marine commerce of



other nations could be destroyed in times of peace, to the



advantage of the Dutch. Anderson avails himself of the quotation of



an observation of De Witt in favour of this policy to make the



laconic comment, 'Fas est et ab hoste doceri', a piece of advice



which, in spite of its brevity, his countrymen comprehended and



followed so well that the English, to the disgrace of Christianity,



tolerated even until our days the abominable doings of the



sea-robbers on the North African coasts, until the French performed



the great service to civilisation of extirpating them.(16*)



    The commerce of these Hanseatic cities was not a national one;



it was neither based on the equal preponderance and perfect



development of internal powers of production, nor sustained by



adequate political power. The bonds which held together the members



of the League were too lax, the striving among them for predominant



power and for separate interests (or, as the Swiss or the Americans



would say, the cantonal spirit, the spirit of separate state right)



was too predominant, and superseded Hanseatic patriotism, which



alone could have caused the general common weal of the League to be



considered before the private interests of individual cities. Hence



arose jealousies, and not unfrequently treachery. Thus Cologne



turned to her own private advantage the hostility of England



towards the League, and Hamburg sought to utilise for her own



advantage a quarrel which arose between Denmark and Lübeck.



    The Hanseatic cities did not base their commerce on the



production and consumption, the agriculture or the manufactures, of



the land to which their merchants belonged. They had neglected to



favour in any way the agricultural industry of their own



fatherland, while that of foreign lands was greatly stimulated by



their commerce. They found it more convenient to purchase



manufactured goods in Belgium, than to establish manufactories in



their own country. They encouraged and promoted the agriculture of



Poland, the sheep-farming of England, the iron industry of Sweden,



and the manufactures of Belgium. They acted for centuries on the



maxim which the theoretical economists of our day commend to all



nations for adoption -- they 'bought only in the cheapest market.'



But when the nations from whom they bought, and those to whom they



sold, excluded them from their markets, neither their own native



agriculture nor their own manufacturing industry was sufficiently



developed to furnish employment for their surplus commercial



capital. it consequently flowed over into Holland and England, and



thus went to increase the industry, the wealth, and the power of



their enemies; a striking proof that mere private industry when



left to follow its own course does not always promote the



prosperity and the power of nations. In their exclusive efforts to



gain material wealth, these cities had utterly neglected the



promotion of their political interests. During the period of their



power, they appeared no longer to belong at all to the German



Empire. It flattered these selfish, proud citizens, within their



circumscribed territories, to find themselves courted by emperors,



kings, and princes, and to act the part of sovereigns of the seas.



How easy would it have been for them during the period of their



maritime supremacy, in combination with the cities of North



Germany, to have founded a powerful Lower House as a counterpoise



to the aristocracy of the empire, and by means of the imperial



power to have thus brought about national unity -- to have united



under one nationality the whole sea-coast from Dunkirk to Riga --



and by these means to have won and maintained for the German nation



supremacy in manufactures, commerce, and maritime power. But in



fact, when the sceptre of the seas fell from their grasp, they had



not sufficient influence left to induce the German Reichstag to



regard their commerce as a matter of national concern. On the



contrary, the German aristocracy did all in their power thoroughly



to oppress these humbled citizens. Their inland cities fell



gradually under the absolute dominion of the various princes, and



hence their maritime ones were deprived of their inland



connections.



    All these faults had been avoided by England. Her merchant



shipping and her foreign commerce rested on the solid basis of her



native agriculture and native industry; her internal trade



developed itself in just proportion to her foreign trade, and



individual freedom grew up without prejudice to national unity or



to national power: in her case the interests of the Crown, the



aristocracy, and the people became consolidated and united in the



happiest manner.



    If these historical facts are duly considered, can anyone



possibly maintain that the English could ever have so widely



extended their manufacturing power, acquired such an immeasurably



great commerce, or attained such overwhelming naval power, save by



means of the commercial policy which they adopted and pursued? No;



the assertion that the English have attained to their present



commercial eminence and power, not by means of their commercial



policy, but in spite of it, appears to us to be one of the greatest



falsehoods promulgated in the present century.



    Had the English left everything to itself -- 'Laissé faire et



laissé aller,' as the popular economical school recommends -- the



merchants of the Steelyard would be still carrying on their trade



in London, the Belgians would be still manufacturing cloth for the



English, England would have still continued to be the sheep-farm of



the Hansards, just as Portugal became the vineyard of England, and



has remained so till our days, owing to the stratagem of a cunning



diplomatist. Indeed, it is more than probable that without her



commercial policy Eng1and would never have attained to such a large



measure of municipal and individual freedom as she now possesses,



for such freedom is the daughter of industry and of wealth.



    In view of such historical considerations, how has it happened



that Adam Smith has never attempted to follow the history of the



industrial and commercial rivalry between the Hanseatic League and



England from its origin until its close? Yet some passages in his



work show clearly that he was not unacquainted with the causes of



the fall of the League and its results. 'A merchant,' he says, 'is



not necessarily the citizen of any particular country. It is in a



great measure indifferent to him from what place he carries on his



trade; and a very trifling disgust will make him remove his



capital, and together with it all the industry which it supports,



from one country to another. No part of it can be said to belong to



any particular country till it has been spread, as it were, over



the face of that country, either in buildings or in the lasting



improvement of lands. No vestige now remains of the great wealth



said to have been possessed by the greater part of the Hanse Towns



except in the obscure histories of the thirteenth and fourteenth



centuries. it is even uncertain where some of them were situated,



or to what towns in Europe the Latin names given to some of them



belong.'(17*)



    How strange that Adam Smith, having such a clear insight into



the secondary causes of the downfall of the Hanseatic League, did



not feel himself compelled to examine into its primary causes! For



this purpose it would not have been at all necessary to have



ascertained the sites where the fallen cities had stood, or to



which cities belonged the Latin names in the obscure chronicles. He



need not even have consulted those chronicles at all. His own



countrymen, Anderson, Macpherson, King, and Hume could have



afforded him the necessary explanation.



    How, therefore, and for what reason could such a profound



inquirer permit himself to abstain from an investigation at once so



interesting and so fruitful in results? We can see no other reason



than this -- that it would have led to conclusions which would have



tended but little to support his principle of absolute free trade.



He would infallibly have been confronted with the fact that after



free commercial intercourse with the Hansards had raised English



agriculture from a state of barbarism, the protective commercial



policy adopted by the English nation at the expense of the



Hansards, the Belgians, and the Dutch helped England to attain to



manufacturing supremacy, and that from the latter, aided by her



Navigation Acts, arose her commercial supremacy.



    These facts, it would appear, Adam Smith was not willing to



know or to acknowledge; for indeed they belong to the category of



those inconvenient facts of which J.B. Say observes that they would



have proved very adverse to his system.







NOTES:







1. Anderson, Origins of Commerce, pt. I, p. 46.







2. Wealth of Nations, Book IV, ch. ii.







3. Hume, History of England, Part IV, ch. xxi.







4. The revenues of the kings of England were derived at that time



more from export duties than from import duties. Freedom of export



and duties on imports (viz. of manufactures) betoken at once an



advanced state of industry and an enlightened State administration.



The governments and countries of the North stood at about the same



stage of culture and statemanship as the Sublime Porte does in our



day. The Sultan has, notably, only recently concluded commercial



treaties, by which he engages not to tax exports of raw materials



and manufactures higher than fourteen per cent but imports not



higher than five per cent. And there accordingly that system of



finance which professes to regard revenue as its chief object



continues in full operation. Those statesmen and public writers who



follow or advocate that system ought to betake themselves to



Turkey; there they might really stand at the head of the times.







5. The Hansards were formerly termed 'Easterlings' or Eastern



merchants, in England, in contradistinction to those of the West,



or the Belgians and Dutch. From this term is derived 'sterling' or



'pound sterling', an abbreviation of the word 'Easterlings' because



formerly all the coin in circulation in England was that of the



Hanseatic League.







6. Hume, History of England, ch. xxxv.







7. M. I. Sartorius, Geschichte der Hansa.







8. II Edward III, cap. 5.







9. Rymer's Foedera, p. 496. De Witte, Interest of Holland, p. 45.







10. Hume, History of England, chap. xxv.







11. Edward IV, cap. iv. The preamble to this Act is so



characteristic that we cannot refrain from quoting it verbatim.



    'Whereas to the said Parliament, by the artificers men and



women inhabitant and resident in the city of London and in other



cities, towns, boroughs and villages within this realm and Wales,



it has been piteously shewed and complained, how that all they in



general and every of them he greatly impoverished and much injured



and prejudiced of their worldly increase and living, by the great



multitude of divers chaffers and wares pertaining to their



mysteries and occupations, being fully wrought and ready made to



sale, as well by the hand of strangers being the king's enemies as



others, brought into this realm and Wales from beyond the sea, as



well by merchant strangers as denizens or other persons, whereof



the greatest part is deceitful and nothing worth in regard of any



man's occupation or profits, by occasion whereof the said



artificers cannot live by their mysteries and occupations, as they



used to do in times past, but divers of them -- as well



householders as hirelings and other servants and apprentices -- in



great number be at this day unoccupied, and do hardly live, in



great idleness, poverty and ruin, whereby many inconveniences have



grown before this time, and hereafter more are like to come (which



God defend), if due remedy be not in their behalf provided.'







12. Hume, chap. xxvi.







13. Hume, chap. xxxv; also Sir J. Hayward, Life and Reign of Edward



VI.







14. Hume, chap. xxxvii; Heylyn.







15. Campbell's Lives of the Admirals, vol. i, p. 386.







16. Our author would appear to have forgotten, or else unfairly



ignored, the exploits of the British fleet under Lord Exmouth.







17. Smith, Wealth of Nations, Book III, ch. iv.











Chapter 3







The Netherlanders







    In respect to temperament and manners, to the origin and



language of their inhabitants, no less than to their political



connection and geographical position, Holland, Flanders, and



Brabant constituted portions of the German Empire. The more



frequent visits of Charlemagne and his residence in the vicinity of



these countries must have exercised a much more powerful influence



on their civilisation than on that of more distant German



territories. Furthermore, Flanders and Brabant were specially



favoured by nature as respects agriculture and manufactures, as



Holland was as respects cattle-farming and commerce.



    Nowhere in Germany was internal trade so powerfully aided by



extensive and excellent sea and river navigation as in these



maritime states. The beneficial effects of these means of water



transport on the improvement of agriculture and on the growth of



the towns must in these countries, even at an early period, have



led to the removal of impediments which hindered their progress and



to the construction of artificial canals. The prosperity of



Flanders was especially promoted by the circumstance that her



ruling Counts recognised the value of public security, of good



roads, manufactures, and flourishing cities before all other German



potentates, Favoured by the nature of their territory, they devoted



themselves with zeal to the extirpation of the robber knights and



of wild beasts. Active commercial intercourse between the cities



and the country, the extension of cattle-farming, especially of



sheep, and of the culture of flax and hemp, naturally followed; and



wherever the raw material is abundantly produced, and security of



property and of intercourse is maintained, labour and skill for



working up that material will soon be found. Meanwhile the Counts



of Flanders did not wait until chance should furnish them with



woollen weavers, for history informs us that they imported such



artificers from foreign countries.



    Supported by the reciprocal trade of the Hanseatic League and



of Rolland, Flanders soon rose by her woollen manufactures to be



the central point of the commerce of the North, just as Venice by



her industry and her shipping had become the centre of the commerce



of the South. The merchant shipping, and reciprocal trade of the



Hanseatic League and the Dutch, together with the manufacturing



trade of Flanders, constituted one great whole, a real national



industry. A policy of commercial restriction could not in their



case be deemed necessary, because as yet no competition had arisen



against the manufacturing supremacy of Flanders. That under such



circumstances manufacturing industry thrives best under free trade,



the Counts of Flanders understood without having read Adam Smith.



Quite in the spirit of the present popular theory, Count Robert



III, when the King of England requested him to exclude the Scotch



from the Flemish markets, replied, 'Flanders has always considered



herself a free market for all nations, and it does not consist with



her interests to depart from that principle.'



    After Flanders had continued for centuries to be the chief



manufacturing country, and Bruges the chief market, of Northern



Europe, their manufactures and commerce passed over to the



neighbouring province of Brabant, because the Counts of Flanders



would not continue to grant them those concessions to which in the



period of their great prosperity they had laid claim. Antwerp then



became the principal seat of commerce, and Louvain the chief



manufacturing city of Northern Europe. In consequence of this



change of circumstances, the agriculture of Brabant soon rose to a



high state of prosperity. The change in early times from payment of



imposts in kind to their payment in money, and, above all, the



limitation of the feudal system, also tended especially to its



advantage.



    In the meantime the Dutch, who appeared more and more upon the



scene, with united power, as rivals to the Hanseatic League, laid



the foundation of their future power at sea. Nature had conferred



benefits on this small nation both by her frowns and smiles. Their



perpetual contests with the inroads of the sea necessarily



developed in them a spirit of enterprise, industry, and thrift,



while the land which they had reclaimed and protected by such



indescribable exertions must have seemed to them a property to



which too much care could not be devoted. Restricted by Nature



herself to the pursuits of navigation, of fisheries, and the



production of meat, cheese, and butter, the Dutch were compelled to



supply their requirements of grain, timber, fuel, and clothing



materials by their marine carrying trade, their exports of dairy



produce, and their fisheries.



    Those were the principal causes why the Hansards were at a



later period gradually excluded by the Dutch from the trade with



the north-eastern countries. The Dutch required to import far



greater quantities of agricultural produce and of timber than did



the Hansards, who were chiefly supplied with these articles by the



territories immediately adjoining their cities. And, further, the



vicinity to Holland of the Belgian manufacturing districts, and of



the Rhine with its extensive, fertile, and vine-clad banks, and its



stream navigable up to the mountains of Switzerland, constituted



great advantages for the Dutch.



    It may be considered as an axiom that the commerce and



prosperity of countries on the sea coast is dependent on the



greater or less magnitude of the river territories with which they



have communication by water.(1*) If we look at the map of Italy, we



shall find in the great extent and fertility of the valley of the



Po the natural reason why the commerce of Venice so greatly



surpassed that of Genoa or of Pisa. The trade of Holland has its



chief sources in the territories watered by the Rhine and its



tributary streams, and in the same proportion as these territories



were much richer and more fertile than those watered by the Elbe



and the Weser must the commerce of Holland exceed that of the Hanse



Towns. To the advantages above named was added another fortunate



incident -- the invention by Peter Böckels of the best mode of



salting herrings. The best mode of catching and of 'böckelling'



these fish (the latter term derived from the inventor) remained for



a long period a secret known only to the Dutch, by which they knew



how to prepare their herrings with a peculiar excellence surpassing



those of all other persons engaged in sea fishery, and secured for



themselves a preference in the markets as well as better



prices.(2*) Anderson alleges that after the lapse of centuries from



the date of these inventions in Holland, the English and Scotch



fishermen, notwithstanding their enjoyment of a considerable bounty



on export, could not find purchasers for their herrings in foreign



markets, eves at much lower prices, in competition with the Dutch.



If we bear in mind how great was the consumption of sea fish in all



countries before the Reformation, we can well give credit to the



fact that at a time when the Hanseatic shipping trade had already



begun to decline, the Dutch found occasion for building 2,000 new



vessels annually.



    From the period when all the Belgian and Batavian provinces



were united under the dominion of the House of Burgundy, these



countries partly acquired the great benefit of national unity, a



circumstance which must not be left out of sight in connection with



Holland's success in maritime trade in competition with the cities



of Northern Germany. Under the Emperor Charles V the United



Netherlands constituted a mass of power and capacity which would



have insured to their imperial ruler supremacy over the world, both



by land and at sea, far more effectually than all the gold mines on



earth and all the papal favours and bulls could have done, had he



only comprehended the nature of those powers and known how to



direct and to make use of them.



    Had Charles V cast away from him the crown of Spain as a man



casts away a burdensome stone which threatens to drag him down a



precipice, how different would have been the destiny of the Dutch



and the German peoples! As Ruler of the United Netherlands, as



Emperor of Germany, and as Head of the Reformation, Charles



possessed all the requisite means, both material and intellectual,



for establishing the mightiest industrial and commercial empire,



the greatest military and naval power which had ever existed -- a



maritime power which would have united under one flag all the



shipping from Dunkirk as far as Riga.



    The conception of but one idea, the exercise of but one man's



will, were all that were seeded to have raised Germany to the



position of the wealthiest and mightiest empire in the world, to



have extended her manufacturing and commercial supremacy over every



quarter of the globe, and probably to have maintained it thus for



many centuries.



    Charles V and his morose son followed the exactly opposite



policy. Placing themselves at the head of the fanatical party, they



made it their chief object to hispanicise the Netherlands. The



result of that policy is matter of history. The northern Dutch



provinces, strong by means of the element over which they were



supreme, conquered their independence. In the southern provinces



industry, the arts, and commerce, perished under the hand of the



executioner, save only where they managed to escape that fate by



emigrating to other countries. Amsterdam became the central point



of the world's commerce instead of Antwerp. The cities of Holland,



which already at an earlier period, in consequence of the



disturbances in Brabant, had attracted a great number of Belgian



woollen weavers, had now not room enough to afford refuge to all



the Belgian fugitives, of whom a great number were consequently



compelled to emigrate to England and to Saxony.



    The struggle for liberty begot in Holland an heroic spirit at



sea, to which nothing appeared too difficult or too adventurous,



while on the contrary the spirit of fanaticism enfeebled the very



nerves of Spain. Holland enriched herself principally by



privateering against Spain, especially by the capture of the



Spanish treasure fleets. By that means she carried on an enormous



contraband trade with the Peninsula and with Belgium. After the



union of Portugal with Spain, Holland became possessed of the most



important Portuguese colonies in the East indies, and acquired a



part of Brazil. Up to the first half of the seventeenth century the



Dutch surpassed the English in respect of manufactures and of



colonial possessions, of commerce and of navigation, as greatly as



in our times the English have surpassed the French in these



respects. But with the English Revolution a mighty change developed



itself. The spirit of freedom had become only a citizen spirit in



Holland. As in all mere mercantile aristocracies, all went on well



for a time; so long as the preservation of life and limbs and of



property, and mere material advantages, were the objects clearly in



view, they showed themselves capable of great deeds. But



statesmanship of a more profound character was beyond their ken.



They did not perceive that the supremacy which they had won, could



only be maintained if it were based on a great nationality and



supported by a mighty national spirit. On the other hand, those



states which had developed their nationality on a large scale by



means of monarchy, but which were yet behindhand in respect of



commerce and industry, became animated by a sentiment of shame that



so small a country as Holland should act the part of master over



them in manufactures and commerce, in fisheries, and naval power.



In England this sentiment was accompanied by all the energy of the



new-born Republic. The Navigation Laws were the challenge glove



which the rising supremacy of England cast into the face of the



reigning supremacy of Holland. And when the conflict came, it



became evident that the English nationality was of far larger



calibre than that of the Dutch. The result could not remain



doubtful.



    The example of England was followed by France. Colbert had



estimated that the entire marine transport trade employed about



20,000 vessels, of which 16,000 were owned by the Dutch -- a number



altogether out of proportion for so small a nation. In consequence



of the succession of the Bourbons to the Spanish throne, France was



enabled to extend her trade over the Peninsula (to the great



disadvantage of the Dutch), and equally so in the Levant.



Simultaneously the protection by France of her native manufactures,



navigation, and fisheries, made immense inroads on the industry and



commerce of Holland.



    England had gained from Holland the greater part of the trade



of the latter with the northern European states, her contraband



trade with Spain and the Spanish colonies, and the greater part of



her trade with the East and West Indies, and of her fisheries. But



the most serious blow was inflicted on her by the Methuen Treaty of



1703. From that the commerce of Holland with Portugal, the



Portuguese colonies, and the East indies, received a deadly wound.



    When Holland thus commenced to lose so large a portion of her



foreign trade, the same result took place which had previously been



experienced by the Hanseatic cities and by Venice : the material



and mental capital which could now find no employment in Holland,



was diverted by emigration or in the shape of loans to those



countries which had acquired the supremacy from Holland which she



had previously possessed.



    If Holland in union with Belgium, with the Rhenish districts,



and with North Germany, had constituted one national territory, it



would have been difficult for England and France to have weakened



her naval power, her foreign commerce, and her internal industry by



wars and by commercial policy, as they succeeded in doing. A nation



such as that would have been, could have placed in competition with



the commercial systems of other nations a commercial system of her



own. And if owing to the development of the manufactures of those



other nations her industry suffered some injury, her own internal



resources, aided by founding colonies abroad, would have abundantly



made good that loss. Holland suffered decline because she, a mere



strip of sea coast, inhabited by a small population of German



fishermen, sailors, merchants, and dairy farmers, endeavoured to



constitute herself a national power, while she considered and acted



towards the inland territory at her back (of which she properly



formed a part) as a foreign land.



    The example of Holland, like that of Belgium, of the Hanseatic



cities, and of the italian republics, teaches us that mere private



industry does not suffice to maintain the commerce, industry, and



wealth of entire states and nations, if the public circumstances



under which it is carried on are unfavourable to it; and further,



that the greater part of the productive powers of individuals are



derived from the political constitution of the government and from



the power of the nation. The agricultural industry of Belgium



became flourishing again under Austrian rule. When united to France



her manufacturing industry rose again to its ancient immense



extent. Holland by herself was never in a position to establish and



maintain an independent commercial system of her own in competition



with great nations. But when by means of her union with Belgium



after the general peace (in 1815) her internal resources,



population, and national territory were increased to such an extent



that she could rank herself among the great nationalities, and



became possessed in herself of a great mass and variety of



productive powers, we see the protective system established also in



the Netherlands, and under its influence agriculture, manufactures,



and commerce make a remarkable advance. This union has now been



again dissolved (owing to causes which lie outside the scope and



purpose of our present work), and thus the protective system in



Holland has been deprived of the basis on which it rested, while in



Belgium it is still maintained.



    Holland is now maintained by her colonies and by her transport



trade with Germany. But the next great naval war may easily deprive



her of the former; and the more the German Zollverein attains to a



clear perception of its interests, and to the exercise of its



powers, the more clearly will it recognize the necessity of



including Holland within the Zollverein.







NOTES:







1. The construction of good roads, and still more of railways,



which has taken place in quite recent times, has materially



modified this axiom.







2. It has been recently stated that the excellence of the Dutch



herrings is attributable not only to the superior methods above



named, but also to the casks in which they are 'böckelled' and



exported being constructed of oak.







Chapter 4







The English











    In our account of the Hanseatic League we have shown how in



England agriculture and sheep farming have been promoted by foreign



trade; how at a subsequent period, through the immigration of



foreign artificers, fleeing from persecution in their native land,



and also owing to the fostering measures adopted by the British



Government, the English woollen manufacturing industry had



gradually attained to a flourishing condition; and how, as a direct



consequence of that progress in manufacturing industry, as well as



of the wise and energetic measures adopted by Queen Elizabeth, all



the foreign trade which formerly had been monopolised by foreigners



had been successfully diverted into the hands of the merchants at



home.



    before we continue our exposition of the development of English



national economy from the point where we left off in Chapter 2, we



venture here to make a few remarks as to the origin of British



industry.



    The source and origin of England's industrial and commercial



greatness must be traced mainly to the breeding of sheep and to the



woollen manufacture.



    before the first appearance of the Hansards on British soil the



agriculture of England was unskilful and her sheep farming of



little importance. There was a scarcity of winter fodder for the



cattle, consequently a large proportion had to be slaughtered in



autumn, and hence both stock and manure were alike deficient. Just



as in all uncultivated territories -- as formerly in Germany, and



in the uncleared districts, of America up to the present time --



hog breeding furnished the principal supply of meat, and that for



obvious reasons. The pigs needed little care -- foraged for



themselves, and found a plentiful supply of food on the waste lands



and in the forests; and by keeping only a moderate number of



breeding sows through the winter, one was sure in the following



spring of possessing considerable herds.



    but with the growth of foreign trade hog breeding diminished,



sheep farming assumed larger proportions, and agriculture and the



breeding of horned cattle rapidly improved.



    Hume, in his 'History of England,'(1*) gives a very interesting



account of the condition of English agriculture at the beginning of



the fourteenth century:



    'In the year 1327 Lord Spencer counted upon 63 estates in his



possession, 28,000 sheep, 1,000 oxen, 1,200 cows, 560 horses, and



2,000 hogs: giving a proportion of 450 sheep, 35 head of cattle, 9



horses, and 22 hogs to each estate.'



    From this statement we may perceive how greatly, even in those



early days, the number of sheep in England exceeded that of all the



other domestic animals put together. The great advantages derived



by the English aristocracy from the business of sheep farming gave



them an interest in industry and in improved methods of agriculture



even at that early period, when noblemen in most Continental states



knew no better mode of utilising the greater part of their



possessions than by preserving large herds of deer, and when they



knew no more honourable occupation than harassing the neighbouring



cities and their trade by hostilities of various kinds.



    And at this period, as has been the case in Hungary more



recently, the flocks so greatly increased that many estates could



boast of the possession of from 10,000 to 24,000 sheep. Under these



circumstances it necessarily followed that, under the protection



afforded by the measures introduced by Queen Elizabeth, the woollen



manufacture, which had already progressed very considerably in the



days of former English rulers, should rapidly reach a very high



degree of prosperity.(2*)



    In the petition of the Hansards to the Imperial Diet, mentioned



in Chapter II, which prayed for the enactment of retaliatory



measures, England's export of cloth was estimated at 200,000



pieces; while in the days of James I the total value of English



cloths exported had already reached the prodigious amount of two



million pounds sterling, while in the year 1354 the total money



value of the wool exported had amounted only to 277,000 l., and



that of all other articles of export to no more than 16,400 l. Down



to the reign of the last-named monarch the great bulk of the cloth



manufactured in England used to be exported to belgium in the rough



state and was there dyed and dressed; but owing to the measures of



protection and encouragement introduced under James I and Charles



I the art of dressing cloth in England attained so high a pitch of



perfection that thenceforward the importation of the finer



descriptions of cloth nearly ceased, while only dyed and finely



dressed cloths were exported.



    In order fully to appreciate the importance of these results of



the English commercial policy, it must be here observed that, prior



to the great development of the linen, cotton, silk, and iron



manufactures in recent times, the manufacture of cloth constituted



by far the largest proportion of the medium of exchange in the



trade with all European nations, particularly with the northern



kingdoms, as well as in the commercial intercourse with the Levant



and the East and West Indies. To what a great extent this was the



case we may infer from the undoubted fact that as far back as the



days of James I the export of woollen manufactures represented



nine-tenths of all the English exports put together.(3*)



    This branch of manufacture enabled England to drive the



Hanseatic League out of the markets of Russia, Sweden, Norway, and



Denmark, and to acquire for herself the best part of the profits



attaching to the trade with the Levant and the East and West



Indies. It was this industry that stimulated that of coal mining,



which again gave rise to an extensive coasting trade and the



fisheries, both which, as constituting the basis of naval power,



rendered possible the passing of the famous Navigation Laws which



really laid the foundation of England's maritime supremacy. It was



round the woollen industry of England that all other branches of



manufacture grew up as round a common parent stem; and it thus



constitutes the foundation of England's greatness in industry,



commerce, and naval power.



    At the same time the other branches of English manufacture were



in no way neglected.



    Already under the reign of Elizabeth the importation of metal



and leather goods, and of a great many other manufactured articles,



had been prohibited, while the immigration of German miners and



metal workers was encouraged. Formerly ships had been bought of the



Hansards or were ordered to be built in the baltic ports. But she



contrived, by restrictions on the one hand and encouragements on



the other, to promote shipbuilding at home.



    The timber required for the purpose was brought to England from



the baltic ports, whereby again a great impetus was given to the



British export trade to those regions.



    The herring fishery had been learned from the Dutch, whale



fishing from the dwellers on the shores of the Bay of Biscay; and



both these fisheries were now stimulated by means of bounties.



James I more particularly took a lively interest in the



encouragement of shipbuilding and of fisheries. Though we may smile



at his unceasing exhortations to his people to eat fish, yet we



must do him the justice to say that he very clearly perceived on



what the future greatness of England depended. The immigration into



England, moreover, of the Protestant artificers who had been driven



from Belgium and France by Philip II and Louis XIV gave to England



an incalculable increase of industrial skill and manufacturing



capital. To these men England owes her manufactures of fine woollen



cloth, her progress in the arts of making hats, linen, glass,



paper, silk, clocks and watches, as well as a part of her metal



manufacture; branches of industry which she knew how speedily to



increase by means of prohibition and high duties.



    The island kingdom borrowed from every country of the Continent



its skill in special branches of industry, and planted them on



English soil, under the protection of her customs system. Venice



had to yield (amongst other trades in articles of luxury) the art



of glass manufacture, while Persia had to give up the art of carpet



weaving and dyeing.



    Once possessed of any one branch of industry, England bestowed



upon it sedulous care and attention, for centuries treating it as



a young tree which requires support and care. Whoever is not yet



convinced that by means of diligence, skill, and economy, every



branch of industry must become profitable in time -- that in any



nation already advanced in agriculture and civilisation, by means



of moderate protection, its infant manufactures, however defective



and dear their productions at first may be, can by practice,



experience, and internal competition readily attain ability to



equal in every respect the older productions of their foreign



competitors; whoever is ignorant that the success of one particular



branch of industry depends on that of several other branches, or to



what a high degree a nation can develop its productive powers, if



she takes care that each successive generation shall continue the



work of industry where former generations have left it; let him



first study the history of English industry before he ventures to



frame theoretical systems, or to give counsel to practical



statesmen to whose hands is given the power of promoting the weal



or the woe of nations.



    Under George I English statesmen had long ago clearly perceived



the grounds on which the greatness of the nation depends. At the



opening of Parliament in 1721, the King is made to say by the



Ministry, that 'it is evident that nothing so much contributes to



promote the public well-being as the exportation of manufactured



goods and the importation of foreign raw material.(4*)



    This for centuries had been the ruling maxim of English



commercial policy, as formerly it had been that of the commercial



policy of the Venetian Republic. It is in force at this day (1841)



just as it was in the days of Elizabeth. The fruits it has borne



lie revealed to the eyes of the whole world. The theorists have



since contended that England has attained to wealth and power not



by means of, but in spite of, her commercial policy. As well might



they argue that trees have grown to vigour and fruitfulness, not by



means of, but in spite of, the props and fences with which they had



been supported when they were first planted.



    Nor does English history supply less conclusive evidence of the



intimate connection subsisting between a nation's general political



policy and political economy. Clearly the rise and growth of



manufactures in England, with the increase of population resulting



from it, tended to create an active demand for salt fish and for



coals, which led to a great increase of the mercantile marine



devoted to fisheries and the coasting trade. Both the fisheries and



the coasting trade were previously in the hands of the Dutch.



Stimulated by high customs duties and by bounties, the English now



directed their own energies to the fishery trade, and by the



Navigation Laws they secured chiefly to British sailors not only



the transport of sea-borne coal, but the whole of the carrying



trade by sea. The consequent increase in England's mercantile



marine led to a proportionate augmentation of her naval power,



which enabled the English to bid defiance to the Dutch fleet.



Shortly after the passing of the Navigation Laws, a naval war broke



out between England and Holland, whereby the trade of the Dutch



with countries beyond the English Channel suffered almost total



suspension, while their shipping in the North Sea and the Baltic



was almost annihilated by English privateers. Hume estimates the



number of Dutch vessels which thus fell into the hands of English



cruisers at 1,600, while Davenant, in his 'Report on the Public



Revenue,' assures us that in the course of the twenty-eight years



next following the passing of the English Navigation Laws, the



English shipping trade had increased to double its previous



extent.(5*)



    Amongst the more important results of the Navigation Laws, the



following deserve special mention, viz.:



    1. The expansion of the English trade with all the northern



kingdoms, with Germany and Belgium (export of manufactures and



import of raw material), from which, according to Anderson's



account, up to the year 1603 the English had been almost entirely



shut out by the Dutch.



    2. An immense extension of the contraband trade with Spain and



Portugal, and their West Indian colonies.



    3. A great increase of England's herring and whale fisheries,



which the Dutch had previously almost entirely monopolised.



    4. The conquest of the most important English colony in the



West Indies -- Jamaica -- in 1655; and with that, the command of



the West Indian sugar trade.



    5. The conclusion of the Methuen Treaty (1703) with Portugal,



of which we have fully treated in the chapters devoted to Spain and



Portugal in this work. By the operation of this treaty the Dutch



and the Germans were entirely excluded from the important trade



with Portugal and her colonies: Portugal sank into complete



political dependence upon England, while England acquired the



means, through the gold and silver earned in her trade with



Portugal, of extending enormously her own commercial intercourse



with China and the East Indies, and thereby subsequently of laying



the foundation for her great Indian empire, and dispossessing the



Dutch from their most important trading stations.



    The two results last enumerated stand in intimate connection



one with the other. And the skill is especially noteworthy with



which England contrived to make these two countries -- Portugal and



India -- the instruments of her own future greatness. Spain and



Portugal had in the main little to dispose of besides the precious



metals, while the requirements of the East, with the exception of



cloths, consisted chiefly of the precious metals. So far everything



suited most admirably. But the East had principally only cotton and



silk manufactures to offer in exchange, and that did not fit in



with the principle of the English Ministry before referred to,



namely, to export manufactured articles and import raw materials.



How, then, did they act under the circumstances? Did they rest



content with the profits accruing from the trade in cloths with



Portugal and in cotton and silk manufactures with India? By no



means. The English Ministers saw farther than that.



    Had they sanctioned the free importation into England of Indian



cotton and silk goods, the English cotton and silk manufactories



must of necessity soon come to a stand. India had not only the



advantage of cheaper labour and raw material, but also the



experience, the skill, and the practice of centuries. The effect of



these advantages could not fail to tell under a system of free



competition.



    But England was unwilling to found settlements in Asia in order



to become subservient to Asia in manufacturing industry. She strove



for commercial supremacy, and felt that of two countries



maintaining free trade between one another, that one would be



supreme which sold manufactured goods, while that one would be



subservient which could only sell agricultural produce. In her



North American colonies England had already acted on those



principles in disallowing the manufacture in those colonies of even



a single horseshoe nail, and, still more, that no horseshoe nails



made there should be imported into England. How could it be



expected of her that she would give up her own market for



manufactures, the basis of her future greatness, to a people so



numerous, so thrifty, so experienced and perfect in the old systems



of manufacture as the Hindoos?



    Accordingly, England prohibited the import of the goods dealt



in by her own factories, the Indian cotton and silk fabrics.(6*)



The prohibition was complete and peremptory. Not so much as a



thread of them would England permit to be used. She would have none



of these beautiful and cheap fabrics, but preferred to consume her



own inferior and more costly stuffs. She was, however, quite



willing to supply the Continental nations with the far finer



fabrics of India at lower prices, and willingly yielded to them all



the benefit of that cheapness; she herself would have none of it.



    Was England a fool in so acting? Most assuredly, according to



the theories of Adam Smith and J. B. Say the Theory of Values. For,



according to them, England should have bought what she required



where she could buy them cheapest and best: it was an act of folly



to manufacture for herself goods at a greater cost than she could



buy them at elsewhere, and at the same time give away that



advantage to the Continent.



    The case is quite the contrary, according to our theory, which



we term the Theory of the Powers of Production, and which the



English Ministry, without having examined the foundation on which



it rests, yet practically adopted when enforcing their maxim of



importing produce and exporting fabrics.



    The English Ministers cared not for the acquisition of



low-priced and perishable articles of manufacture, but for that of



a more costly but enduring manufacturing power.



    They have attained their object in a brilliant degree. At this



day England produces seventy million pounds' worth of cotton and



silk goods, and supplies all Europe, the entire world, India itself



included, with British manufactures. Her home production exceeds by



fifty or a hundred times the value of her former trade in Indian



manufactured goods.



    What would it have profited her had she been buying for a



century the cheap goods of Indian manufacture?



    And what have they gained who purchased those goods so cheaply



of her? The English have gained power, incalculable power, while



the others have gained the reverse of power.



    That in the face of results like these, historically attested



upon unimpeachable evidence, Adam Smith should have expressed so



warped a judgment upon the Navigation Laws, can only be accounted



for upon the same principle on which we shall in another chapter



explain this celebrated author's fallacious conclusions respecting



commercial restrictions. These facts stood in the way of his pet



notion of unrestricted free trade. It was therefore necessary for



him to obviate the objection that could be adduced against his



principle from the effects of the Navigation Laws, by drawing a



distinction between their political objects and their economical



objects. He maintained that, although the Navigation Laws had been



politically necessary and beneficial, yet that they were



economically prejudicial and injurious. How little this distinction



can be justified by the nature of things or by experience, we trust



to make apparent in the course of this treatise.



    J. B. Say, though he might have known better from the



experience of North America, here too, as in every instance where



the principles of free trade and protection clash, goes still



farther than his predecessor. Say reckons up what the cost of a



sailor to the French nation is, owing to the fishery bounties, in



order to show how wasteful and unremunerative these bounties are.



    The subject of restrictions upon navigation constitutes a



formidable stumbling-block in the path of the advocates of



unrestricted free trade, which they are only too glad to pass over



in silence, especially if they are members of the mercantile



community in seaport towns.



    The truth of the matter is this. Restrictions on navigation are



governed by the same law as restrictions upon any other kind of



trade. Freedom of navigation and the carrying trade conducted by



foreigners are serviceable and welcome to communities in the early



stages of their civilisation, so long as their agriculture and



manufactures still remain undeveloped. Owing to want of capital and



of experienced seamen, they are willing to abandon navigation and



foreign trade to other nations. Later on, however, when they have



developed their producing power to a certain point and acquired



skill in shipbuilding and navigation, then they will desire to



extend their foreign trade, to carry it on in their own ships, and



become a naval power themselves. Gradually their own mercantile



marine grows to such a degree that they feel themselves in a



position to exclude the foreigner and to conduct their trade to the



most distant places by means of their own vessels. Then the time



has come when, by means of restrictions on navigation, a nation can



successfully exclude the more wealthy, more experienced, and more



powerful foreigner from participation in the profits of that



business. When the highest degree of progress in navigation and



maritime power has been reached, a new era will set in, no doubt;



and such was that stage of advancement which Dr Priestley had in



his mind when he wrote 'that the time may come when it may be as



politic to repeal this Act as it was to make it.'(7*)



    Then it is that, by means of treaties of navigation based upon



equality of rights, a nation can, on the one hand, secure undoubted



advantages as against less civilised nations, who will thus be



debarred from introducing restrictions on navigation in their own



special behalf; while, on the other hand, it will thereby preserve



its own seafaring population from sloth, and spur them on to keep



pace with other countries in shipbuilding and in the art of



navigation. While engaged in her struggle for supremacy, Venice was



doubtless greatly indebted to her policy of restrictions on



navigation; but as soon as she had acquired supremacy in trade,



manufactures, and navigation, it was folly to retain them. For



owing to them she was left behind in the race, both as respects



shipbuilding, navigation, and seamanship of her sailors, with other



maritime and commercial nations which were advancing in her



footsteps. Thus England by her policy increased her naval power,



and by means of her naval power enlarged the range of her



manufacturing and commercial powers, and again, by the latter,



there accrued to her fresh accessions of maritime strength and of



colonial possessions. Adam Smith, when he maintains that the



Navigation Laws have not been beneficial to England in commercial



respects, admits that, in any case, these laws have increased her



power. And power is more important than wealth. That is indeed the



fact. Power is more important than wealth. And why? Simply because



national power is a dynamic force by which new productive resources



are opened out, and because the forces of production are the tree



on which wealth grows, and because the tree which bears the fruit



is of greater value than the fruit itself. Power is of more



importance than wealth because a nation, by means of power, is



enabled not only to open up new productive sources, but to maintain



itself in possession of former and of recently acquired wealth, and



because the reverse of power -- namely, feebleness -- leads to the



relinquishment of all that we possess, not of acquired wealth



alone, but of our powers of production, of our civilisation, of our



freedom, nay, even of our national independence, into the hands of



those who surpass us in might, as is abundantly attested by the



history of the Italian republics, of the Hanseatic League, of the



Belgians, the Dutch, the Spaniards, and the Portuguese.



    But how came it that, unmindful of this law of alternating



action and reaction between political power, the forces of



production and wealth, Adam Smith could venture to contend that the



Methuen Treaty and the Act of Navigation had not been beneficial to



England from a commercial point of view? We have shown how England



by the policy which she pursued acquired power, and by her



political power gained productive power, and by her productive



power gained wealth. Let us now see further how, as a result of



this policy, power has been added to power, and productive forces



to productive forces.



    England has got into her possession the keys of every sea, and



placed a sentry over every nation: over the Germans, Heligoland;



over the French, Guernsey and Jersey; over the inhabitants of North



America, Nova Scotia and the Bermudas; over Central America, the



island of Jamaica; over all countries bordering on the



Mediterranean, Gibraltar, Malta, and the Ionian Islands. She



possesses every important strategical position on both the routes



to India with the exception of the Isthmus of Suez, which she is



striving to acquire; she dominates the Mediterranean by means of



Gibraltar, the Red Sea by Aden, and the Persian Gulf by Bushire and



Karrack. She needs only the further acquisition of the Dardanelles,



the Sound, and the Isthmuses of Suez and Panama, in order to be



able to open and close at her pleasure every sea and every maritime



highway. Her navy alone surpasses the combined maritime forces of



all other countries, if not in number of vessels, at any rate in



fighting strength.



    Her manufacturing capacity excels in importance that of all



other nations. And although her cloth manufactures have increased



more than tenfold (to forty-four and a half millions) since the



days of James I, we find the yield of another branch of industry,



which was established only in the course of the last century,



namely, the manufacture of cotton, amounting to a much larger sum,



fifty-two and a half millions.(8*)



    Not content with that, England is now attempting to raise her



linen manufacture, which has been long in a backward state as



compared with that of other countries, to a similar position,



possibly to a higher one than that of the two above-named branches



of industry: it now amounts to fifteen and a half millions



sterling. In the fourteenth century, England was still so poor in



iron that she thought it necessary to prohibit the exportation of



this indispensable metal; she now, in the nineteenth century,



manufactures more iron and steel wares than all the other nations



on earth (namely, thirty-one millions' worth), while she produces



thirty-four millions in value of coal and other minerals. These two



sums exceed by over sevenfold the value of the entire gold and



silver production of all other nations, which amount to about two



hundred and twenty million francs, or nine millions sterling.



    At this day she produces more silk goods than all the Italian



republics produced in the Middle Ages together, namely, thirteen



and a half million pounds. Industries which at the time of Henry



VIII and Elizabeth scarcely deserved classification, now yield



enormous sums; as, for instance, the glass, china, and stoneware



manufactures, representing eleven millions; the copper and brass



manufactures, four and a half millions; the manufactures of paper,



books, colours, and furniture, fourteen millions.



    England produces, moreover, sixteen millions' worth of leather



goods, besides ten millions' worth of unenumerated articles. The



manufacture of beer and spirituous liquors in England alone greatly



exceeds in value the aggregate of national production in the days



of James I, namely, forty-seven millions sterling.



    The entire manufacturing production of the United Kingdom at



the present time, is estimated to amount to two hundred and



fifty-nine and a half millions sterling.



    As a consequence, and mainly as a consequence, of this gigantic



manufacturing production, the productive power of agriculture has



been enabled to yield a total value exceeding twice that sum (five



hundred and thirty-nine millions sterling).



    It is true that for this increase in her power, and in her



productive capacity, England is not indebted solely to her



commercial restrictions, her Navigation Laws, or her commercial



treaties, but in a large measure also to her conquests in science



and in the arts.



    But how comes it, that in these days one million of English



operatives can perform the work of hundreds of millions? It comes



from the great demand for manufactured goods which by her wise and



energetic policy she has known how to create in foreign lands, and



especially in her colonies; from the wise and powerful protection



extended to her home industries; from the great rewards which by



means of her patent laws she has offered to every new discovery;



and from the extraordinary facilities for her inland transport



afforded by public roads, canals, and railways.



    England has shown the world how powerful is the effect of



facilities of transport in increasing the powers of production, and



thereby increasing the wealth, the population, and the political



power of a nation. She has shown us what a free, industrious, and



well-governed community can do in this respect within the brief



space of half a century, even in the midst of foreign wars. That



which the Italian republics had previously accomplished in these



respects was mere child's play. It is estimated that as much as a



hundred and eighteen millions sterling have been expended in



England upon these mighty instruments of the nation's productive



power.



    England, however, only commenced and carried out these works



when her manufacturing power began to grow strong. Since then, it



has become evident to all observers that that nation only whose



manufacturing power begins to develop itself upon an extensive



scale is able to accomplish such works; that only in a nation which



develops concurrently its internal manufacturing and agricultural



resources will such costly engines of trade repay their cost; and



that in such a nation only will they properly fulfil their purpose.



    It must be admitted, too, that the enormous producing capacity



and the great wealth of England are not the effect solely of



national power and individual love of gain. The people's innate



love of liberty and of justice, the energy, the religious and moral



character of the people, have a share in it. The constitution of



the country, its institutions, the wisdom and power of the



Government and of the aristocracy, have a share in it. The



geographical position, the fortunes of the country, nay, even good



luck, have a share in it.



    It is not easy to say whether the material forces exert a



greater influence over the moral forces, or whether the moral



outweigh the material in their operation; whether the social forces



act upon the individual forces the more powerfully, or whether the



latter upon the former. This much is certain, however, namely, that



between the two there subsists an interchanging sequence of action



and reaction, with the result that the increase of one set of



forces promotes the increase of the other, and that the



enfeeblement of the one ever involves the enfeeblement of the



other.



    Those who seek for the fundamental causes of England's rise and



progress in the blending of Anglo-Saxon with the Norman blood,



should first cast a glance at the condition of the country before



the reign of Edward III. Where were then the diligence and the



habits of thrift of the nation? Those again who would look for them



in the constitutional liberties enjoyed by the people will do well



to consider how Henry VIII and Elizabeth treated their Parliaments.



Wherein did England's constitutional freedom consist under the



Tudors? At that period the cities of Germany and Italy enjoyed a



much greater amount of individual freedom than the English did.



    Only one jewel out of the treasure-house of freedom was



preserved by the Anglo-Saxon-Norman race -- before other peoples of



Germanic origin; and that was the germ from which all the English



ideas of freedom and justice have sprung -- the right of trial by



jury.



    While in Italy the Pandects were being unearthed, and the



exhumed remains (no doubt of departed greatness and wisdom in their



day) were spreading the pestilence of the Codes amongst Continental



nations, we find the English Barons declaring they would not hear



of any change in the law of the land. What a store of intellectual



force did they not thereby secure for the generations to come! How



much did this intellectual force subsequently influence the forces



of material production!



    How greatly did the early banishment of the Latin language from



social and literary circles, from the State departments, and the



courts of law in England, influence the development of the nation,



its legislation, law administration, literature, and industry! What



has been the effect upon Germany of the long retention of the Latin



in conjunction with foreign Codes, and what has been its effect in



Hungary to the present day? What an effect have the invention of



gunpowder, the art of printing, the Reformation, the discovery of



the new routes to India and of America, had on the growth of



English liberties, of English civilisation, and of English



industry? Compare with this their effect upon Germany and France.



In Germany -- discord in the Empire, in the provinces, even within



the walls of cities; miserable controversies, barbarism in



literature, in the administration of the State and of the law;



civil war, persecutions, expatriation, foreign invasion,



depopulation, desolation; the ruin of cities, the decay of



industry, agriculture, and trade, of freedom and civic



institutions; supremacy of the great nobles; decay of the imperial



power, and of nationality; severance of the fairest provinces from



the Empire. In France -- subjugation of the cities and of the



nobles in the interest of despotism; alliance with the priesthood



against intellectual freedom, but at the same time national unity



and power; conquest with its gain and its curse, but, as against



that, downfall of freedom and of industry. In England -- the rise



of cities, progress in agriculture, commerce, and manufactures;



subjection of the aristocracy to the law of the land, and hence a



preponderating participation by the nobility in the work of



legislation, in the administration of the State and of the law, as



also in the advantages of industry; development of resources at



home, and of political power abroad; internal peace; influence over



all less advanced communities; limitation of the powers of the



Crown, but gain by the Crown in royal revenues, in splendour and



stability. Altogether, a higher degree of well-being, civilisation,



and freedom at home, and preponderating might abroad.



    But who can say how much of these happy results is attributable



to the English national spirit and to the constitution; how much to



England's geographical position and circumstances in the past; or



again, how much to chance, to destiny, to fortune?



    Let Charles V and Henry VIII change places, and, in consequence



of a villanous divorce trial, it is conceivable (the reader will



understand why we say 'conceivable') that Germany and the



Netherlands might have become what England and Spain have become.



Place in the position of Elizabeth, a weak woman allying herself to



a Philip II, and how would it have fared with the power, the



civilisation, and the liberties of Great Britain?



    If the force of national character will alone account for



everything in this mighty revolution, must not then the greatest



share of its beneficial results have accrued to the nation from



which it sprang, namely, to Germany? Instead of that, it is just



the German nation which reaped nothing save trouble and weakness



from this movement in the direction of progress.



    In no European kingdom is the institution of an aristocracy



more judiciously designed than in England for securing to the



nobility, in their relation to the Crown and the commonalty,



individual independence, dignity, and stability; to give them a



Parliamentary training and position; to direct their energies to



patriotic and national aims; to induce them to attract to their own



body the élite of the commonalty, to include in their ranks every



commoner who earns distinction, whether by mental gifts,



exceptional wealth, or great achievements; and, on the other hand,



to cast back again amongst the commons the surplus progeny of



aristocratic descent, thus leading to the amalgamation of the



nobility and the commonalty in future generations. By this process



the nobility is ever receiving from the Commons fresh accessions of



civic and patriotic energy, of science, learning, intellectual and



material resources, while it is ever restoring to the people a



portion of the culture and of the spirit of independence peculiarly



its own, leaving its own children to trust to their own resources,



and supplying the commonalty with incentives to renewed exertion.



In the case of the English lord, however large may be the number of



his descendants, only one can hold the title at a time. The other



members of the family are commoners, who gain a livelihood either



in one of the learned professions, or in the Civil Service, in



commerce, industry, or agriculture. The story goes that some time



ago one of the first dukes in England conceived the idea of



inviting all the blood relations of his house to a banquet, but he



was fain to abandon the design because their name was legion,



notwithstanding that the family pedigree had not reached farther



back than for a few centuries. It would require a whole volume to



show the effect of this institution upon the spirit of enterprise,



the colonisation, the might and the liberties, and especially upon



the forces of production of this nation.(9*)



    The geographical position of England, too, has exercised an



immense influence upon the independent development of the nation.



England in its relation to the continent of Europe has ever been a



world by itself; and was always exempt from the effects of the



rivalries, the prejudices, the selfishness, the passions, and the



disasters of her Continental neighbours. To this isolated condition



she is mainly indebted for the independent and unalloyed growth of



her political constitution, for the undisturbed consummation of the



Reformation, and for the secularisation of ecclesiastical property



which has proved so beneficial to her industries. To the same cause



she is also indebted for that continuous peace, which, with the



exception of the period of the civil war, she has enjoyed for a



series of centuries, and which enabled her to dispense with



standing armies, while facilitating the early introduction of a



consistent customs system.



    By reason of her insular position, England not only enjoyed



immunity from territorial wars, but she also derived immense



advantages for her manufacturing supremacy from the Continental



wars. Land wars and devastations of territory inflict manifold



injury upon the manufactures at the seat of hostilities; directly,



by interfering with the farmer's work and destroying the crops,



which deprives the tiller of the soil of the means wherewithal to



purchase manufactured goods, and to produce raw material and food



for the manufacturer; indirectly, by often destroying the



manufactories, or at any rate ruining them, because hostilities



interfere with the importation of raw material and with the



exportation of goods, and because it becomes a difficult matter to



procure capital and labour just at the very time when the masters



have to bear extraordinary imposts and heavy taxation; and lastly



the injurious effects continue to operate even after the cessation



of the war, because both capital and individual effort are ever



attracted towards agricultural work and diverted from manufactures,



precisely in that proportion in which the war may have injured the



farmers and their crops, and thereby opened up a more directly



profitable field for the employment of capital and of labour than



the manufacturing industries would then afford. While in Germany



this condition of things recurred twice in every hundred years, and



caused German manufactures to retrograde, those of England made



uninterrupted progress. English manufacturers, as opposed to their



Continental competitors, enjoyed a double and treble advantage



whenever England, by fitting out fleets and armies, by subsidies,



or by both these means combined, proceeded to take an active part



in foreign wars.



    We cannot agree with the defenders of unproductive expenditure,



namely, of that incurred by wars and the maintenance of large



armies, nor with those who insist upon the positively beneficial



character of a public debt; but neither do we believe that the



dominant school are in the right when they contend that all



consumption which is not directly reproductive -- for instance,



that of war -- is absolutely injurious without qualification. The



equipment of armies, wars, and the debts contracted for these



purposes, may, as the example of England teaches, under certain



circumstances, very greatly conduce to the increase of the



productive powers of a nation. Strictly speaking, material wealth



may have been consumed unproductively, but this consumption may,



nevertheless, stimulate manufacturers to extraordinary exertions,



and lead to new discoveries and improvements, especially to an



increase of productive powers. This productive power then becomes



a permanent acquisition; it will increase more and more, while the



expense of the war is incurred only once for all.(10*) And thus it



may come to pass, under favouring conditions such as have occurred



in England, that a nation has gained immeasurably more than it has



lost from that very kind of expenditure which theorists hold to be



unproductive. That such was really the case with England, may be



shown by figures. For in the course of the war, that country had



acquired in the cotton manufacture alone a power of production



which yields annually a much larger return in value than the amount



which the nation has to find to defray the interest upon the



increased national debt, not to mention the vast development of all



other branches of industry, and the additions to her colonial



wealth.



    Most conspicuous was the advantage accruing to the English



manufacturing interest during the Continental wars, when England



maintained army corps on the Continent or paid subsidies. The whole



expenditure on these was sent, in the shape of English



manufactures, to the seat of war, where these imports then



materially contributed to crush the already sorely suffering



foreign manufacturers, and permanently to acquire the market of the



foreign country for English manufacturing industry. It operated



precisely like an export bounty instituted for the benefit of



British and for the injury of foreign manufacturers.(11*)



    In this way, the industry of the Continental nations has ever



suffered more from the English as allies, than from the English as



enemies. In support of this statement we need refer only to the



Seven Years' War, and to the wars against the French Republic and



Empire.



    Great, however, as have been the advantages heretofore



mentioned, they have been greatly surpassed in their effect by



those which England derived from immigrations attracted by her



political, religious, and geographical conditions.



    As far back as the twelfth century political circumstances



induced Flemish woollen weavers to emigrate to Wales. Not many



centuries later exiled Italians came over to London to carry on



business as money changers and bankers. That from Flanders and



Brabant entire bodies of manufacturers thronged to England at



various periods, we have shown in Chapter II. From Spain and



Portugal came persecuted Jews; from the Hanse Towns, and from



Venice in her decline, merchants who brought with them their ships,



their knowledge of business, their capital, and their spirit of



enterprise. Still more important were the immigrations of capital



and of manufacturers in consequence of the Reformation and the



religious persecutions in Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium,



Germany, and Italy; as also of merchants and manufacturers from



Holland in consequence of the stagnation of trade and industry in



that country occasioned by the Act of Navigation and the Methuen



Treaty. Every political movement, every war upon the Continent,



brought England vast accessions of fresh capital and talents, so



long as she possessed the privileges of freedom, the right of



asylum, internal tranquillity and peace, the protection of the law,



and general well-being. So more recently did the French Revolution



and the wars of the Empire; and so did the political commotions,



the revolutionary and reactionary movements and the wars in Spain,



in Mexico, and in South America. By means of her Patent Laws,



England long monopolised the inventive genius of every nation. It



is no more than fair that England, now that she has attained the



culminating point of her industrial growth and progress, should



restore again to the nations of Continental Europe a portion of



those productive forces which she originally derived from them.







NOTES:







1. Hume, vol. ii, p. 143.







2. No doubt the decrees prohibiting the export of wool, not to



mention the restrictions placed on the trade in wool in markets



near the coast, were vexations and unfair; yet at the same time the



operated beneficially in the promotion of English industry, and in



the suppression of that of the Flemings.







3. Hume (in 1603). Macpherson, Histoire du Commerce (in 1651).







4. See Ustaritz, Théorie du Commerce, ch. xxviii. Thus we see



George I did not want to export goods and import nothing but specie



in return, which is stated as the fundamental principle of the



so-called 'mercantile system', and which in any case would be



absurd. What he desired was to export manufactures and import raw



material.







5. Hume, vol. v. p. 39.







6. Anderson for the year 1721.







7. Priestley, Lectures on History and General Policy, Pt. II, p.



289.







8. These and the following figures relating to English statistics



are taken from a paper written by McQueen, the celebrated English



statistician, and appearing in the July number of Tait's Edinburgh



Magazine for the year 1839. Possibly they may be somewhat



exaggerated for the moment. But even if so, it is more than



probable that the figures as stated will be reached within the



present decade.







9. Before his lamented death, the gifted author of this remark, in



his Letters on England, read the nobles of his native country a



lesson in this respect which they would do well to lay to heart.







10. England's national debt would not be so great an evil as it now



appears to us, if England's aristocracy would concede that this



burden should be borne by the class who were benefited by the cost



of wars, namely, by the rich. McQueen estimates the capitalised



value of property in the three kingdoms at 4,000 million pounds



sterling, and Martin estimates the capital invested in the colonies



at about 2,600 millions sterling. Hence we see that one-ninth part



of Englishmen's private property would suffice to cover the entire



national debt. Nothing could be more just than such an



appropriation, or at least than the payment of the interest on the



national debt out of the proceeds of an income tax. The English



aristocracy, however, deem it more convenient to provide for this



charge by the imposition of taxes upon articles of consumption, by



which the existence of the working classes is embittered beyond the



point of endurance.







11. See Appendix A.











Chapter 5







The Spaniards and Portuguese







    Whilst the English were busied for centuries in raising the



structure of their national prosperity upon the most solid



foundations, the Spaniards and the Portuguese made a fortune



rapidly by means of their discoveries and attained to great wealth



in a very short space of time. But it was only the wealth of a



spendthrift who had won the first prize in a lottery, whereas the



wealth of the English may be likened to the fortune accumulated by



the diligent and saving head of a family. The former may for a time



appear more to be envied than the latter on account of his lavish



expenditure and luxury; but wealth in his case is only a means for



prodigality and momentary enjoyment, whereas the latter will regard



wealth chiefly as a means of laying a foundation for the moral and



material well-being of his latest posterity.



    The Spaniards possessed flocks of well-bred sheep at so early



a period that Henry I of England was moved to prohibit the



importation of Spanish wool in 1172, and that as far back as the



tenth and eleventh centuries Italian woollen manufacturers used to



import the greater portion of their wool supplies from Spain. Two



hundred years before that time the dwellers on the shores of the



Bay of Biscay had already distinguished themselves in the



manufacture of iron, in navigation, and in fisheries. They were the



first to carry on the whale fishery, and even in the year 1619 they



still so far excelled the English in that business that they were



asked to send fishermen to England to instruct the English in this



particular branch of the fishing trade.(1*)



    Already in the tenth century, under Abdulrahman III (912 to



950), the Moors had established in the fertile plains around



Valencia extensive plantations of cotton, sugar, and rice, and



carried on silk cultivation. Cordova, Seville, and Granada



contained at the time of the Moors important cotton and silk



manufactories.(2*) Valencia, Segovia, Toledo, and several other



cities in Castile were celebrated for their woollen manufactures.



Seville alone at an early period of history contained as many as



16,000 looms, while the woollen manufactories of Segovia in the



year 1552 were employing 13,000 operatives. Other branches of



industry, notably the manufacture of arms and of paper, had become



developed on a similar scale. In Colbert's day the French were



still in the habit of procuring supplies of cloth from Spain.(3*)



The Spanish seaport towns were the seat of an extensive trade and



of important fisheries, and up to the time of Philip II Spain



possessed a most powerful navy. In a word, Spain possessed all the



elements of greatness and prosperity, when bigotry, in alliance



with despotism, set to work to stifle the high spirit of the



nation. The first commencement of this work of darkness was the



expulsion of the Jews, and its crowning act the expulsion of the



Moors, whereby two millions of the most industrious and well-to-do



inhabitants were driven out of Spain with their capital.



    While the Inquisition was thus occupied in driving native



industry into exile, it at the same time effectually prevented



foreign manufacturers from settling down in the country. The



discovery of America and of the route round the Cape only increased



the wealth of both kingdoms after a specious and ephemeral fashion



-- indeed, by these events a death-blow was first given to their



national industry and to their power. For then, instead of



exchanging the produce of the East and West Indies against home



manufactures, as the Dutch and the English subsequently did, the



Spaniards and Portuguese purchased manufactured goods from foreign



nations with the gold and the silver which they had wrung from



their colonies.(4*) They transformed their useful and industrious



citizens into slave-dealers and colonial tyrants: thus they



promoted the industry; the trade, and the maritime power of the



Dutch and English, in whom they raised up rivals who soon grew



strong enough to destroy their fleets and rob them of the sources



of their wealth. In vain the kings of Spain enacted laws against



the exportation of specie and the importation of manufactured



goods. The spirit of enterprise, industry, and commerce can only



strike root in the soil of religious and political liberty; gold



and silver will only abide where industry knows how to attract and



employ them.



    Portugal, however, under the auspices of an enlightened and



powerful minister, did make an attempt to develop her manufacturing



industry, the first results of which strike us with astonishment.



That country like Spain, had possessed from time immemorial fine



flocks of sheep. Strabo tells us that a fine breed of sheep had



been introduced into Portugal from Asia, the cost of which amounted



to one talent per head. When the Count of Ereceira became minister



in 1681, he conceived the design of establishing cloth



manufactories, and of thus working up the native raw material in



order to supply the mother country and the colonies with



home-manufactured goods. With that view cloth workers were invited



from England, and so speedily did the native cloth manufactories



flourish in consequence of the protection secured to them, that



three years later (in 1684) it became practicable to prohibit the



importation of foreign cloths. From that period Portugal supplied



herself and her colonies with native goods manufactured of



home-grown raw material, and prospered exceedingly in so doing for



a period of nineteen years, as attested by the evidence of English



writers themselves.(5*)



    It is true that even in those days the English gave proof of



that ability which at subsequent times they have managed to bring



to perfection. In order to evade the tariff restrictions of



Portugal, they manufactured woollen fabrics, which slightly



differed from cloth though serving the same purpose, and imported



these into Portugal under the designation of woollen serges and



woollen druggets. This trick of trade was, however, soon detected



and rendered innocuous by a decree prohibiting the importation of



such goods.(6*) The success of these measures is all the more



remarkable because the country, not a very great while before, had



been drained of a large amount of capital, which had found its way



abroad owing to the expulsion of the Jews, and was suffering



especially from all the evils of bigotry, of bad government, and of



a feudal aristocracy, which ground down popular liberties and



agriculture.(7*)



    In the year 1703, after the death of Count Ereceira, however,



the famous British ambassador Paul Methuen succeeded in persuading



the Portuguese Government that Portugal would be immensely



benefited if England were to permit the importation of Portuguese



wines at a duty one-third less than the duty levied upon wines of



other countries, in consideration of Portugal admitting English



cloths at the same rate of import duty (viz. twenty-three per



cent.) which had been charged upon such goods prior to the year



1684. It seems as though on the part of the King the hope of an



increase in his customs revenue, and on the part of the nobility



the hope of an increased income from rents, supplied the chief



motives for the conclusion of that commercial treaty in which the



Queen of England (Anne) styles the King of Portugal 'her oldest



friend and ally' -- on much the same principle as the Roman Senate



was formerly wont to apply such designations to those rulers who



had the misfortune to be brought into closer relations with that



assembly.



    Directly after the conclusion of this treaty, Portugal was



deluged with English manufactures, and the first result of this



inundation was the sudden and complete ruin of the Portuguese



manufactories -- a result which had its perfect counterparts in the



subsequent so-called Eden treaty with France and in the abrogation



of the Continental system in Germany.



    According to Anderson's testimony, the English, even in those



days, had become such adepts in the art of understating the value



of their goods in their custom-house bills of entry, that in effect



they paid no more than half the duty chargeable on them by the



tariff.(8*)



    'After the repeal of the prohibition,' says 'The British



Merchant,' 'we managed to carry away so much of their silver



currency that there remained but very little for their necessary



occasions; thereupon we attacked their gold.'(9*) This trade the



English continued down to very recent times. They exported all the



precious metals which the Portuguese had obtained from their



colonies, and sent a large portion of them to the East Indies and



to China, where, as we saw in Chapter IV, they exchanged them for



goods which they disposed of on the continent of Europe against raw



materials. The yearly exports of England to Portugal exceed the



imports from that country by the amount of one million sterling.



This favourable balance of trade lowered the rate of exchange to



the extent of fifteen per cent to the disadvantage of Portugal.



'The balance of trade is more favourable to us in our dealings with



Portugal than it is with any other country,' says the author of



'The British Merchant' in his dedication to Sir Paul Methuen, the



son of the famous minister, 'and our imports of specie from that



country have risen to the sum of one and a half millions sterling,



whereas formerly they amounted only to 300,000 l.'(10*)



    All the merchants and political economists, as well as all the



statesmen of England, have ever since eulogised this treaty as the



masterpiece of English commercial policy. Anderson himself, who had



a clear insight enough into all matters affecting English



commercial policy and who in his way always treats of them with



great candour call's it 'an extremely fair and advantageous



treaty;' nor could he forbear the naïve exclamation, 'May it endure



for ever and ever!'(11*)



    For Adam Smith alone it was reserved to set up a theory



directly opposed to this unanimous verdict, and to maintain that



the Methuen Treaty had in no respect proved a special boon to



British commerce. Now, if anything will suffice to show the blind



reverence with which public opinion has accepted the (partly very



paradoxical) views of this celebrated man, surely it is the fact



that the particular opinion above mentioned has hitherto been left



unrefuted.



    In the sixth chapter of his fourth book Adam Smith says, that



inasmuch as under the Methuen Treaty the wines of Portugal were



admitted upon paying only two-thirds of the duty which was paid on



those of other nations, a decided advantage was conceded to the



Portuguese; whereas the English, being bound to pay quite as high



a duty in Portugal on their exports of cloth as any other nation,



had, therefore, no special privilege granted to them by the



Portuguese. But had not the Portuguese been previously importing a



large proportion of the foreign goods which they required from



France, Holland, Germany, and Belgium? Did not the English



thenceforth exclusively command the Portuguese market for a



manufactured product, the raw material for which they possessed in



their own country? Had they not discovered a method of reducing the



Portuguese customs duty by one-half? Did not the course of exchange



give the English consumer of Portuguese wines a profit of fifteen



per cent? Did not the consumption of French and German wines in



England almost entirely cease? Did not the Portuguese gold and



silver supply the English with the means of bringing vast



quantities of goods from India and of deluging the continent of



Europe with them? Were not the Portuguese cloth manufactories



totally ruined, to the advantage of the English? Did not all the



Portuguese colonies, especially the rich one of Brazil, by this



means become practically English colonies? Certainly this treaty



conferred a privilege upon Portugal, but only in name; whereas it



conferred a privilege upon the English in its actual operation and



effects. A like tendency underlies all subsequent treaties of



commerce negotiated by the English. By profession they were always



cosmopolites and philanthropists, while in their aims and



endeavours they were always monopolists.



    According to Adam Smith's second argument, the English gained



no particular advantages from this treaty, because they were to a



great extent obliged to send away to other countries the money



which they received from the Portuguese for their cloth, and with



it to purchase goods there; whereas it would have been far more



profitable for them to make a direct exchange of their cloths



against such commodities as they might need, and thus by one



exchange accomplish that which by means of the trade with Portugal



they could only effect by two exchanges. Really, but for the very



high opinion which we entertain of the character and the acumen of



this celebrated savant, we should in the face of this argument be



driven to despair either of his candour or of his clearness of



perception. To avoid doing either, nothing is left for us but to



bewail the weakness of human nature, to which Adam Smith has paid



a rich tribute in the shape of these paradoxical, almost laughable,



arguments among other instances; being evidently dazzled by the



splendour of the task, so noble in itself, of pleading a



justification for absolute freedom of trade.



    In the argument just named there is no more sound sense or



logic than in the proposition that a baker, because he sells bread



to his customers for money, and with that money buys flour from the



miller, does an unprofitable trade, because if he had exchanged his



bread directly for flour, he would have effected his purpose by a



single act of exchange instead of by two such acts. It needs surely



no great amount of sagacity to answer such an allegation by hinting



that the miller might possibly not want so much bread as the baker



could supply him with, that the miller might perhaps understand and



undertake baking himself, and that, therefore, the baker's business



could not go on at all without these two acts of exchange. Such in



effect were the commercial conditions of Portugal and England at



the date of the treaty. Portugal received gold and silver from



South America in exchange for manufactured goods which she then



exported to those regions; but too indolent or too shiftless to



manufacture these goods herself, she bought them of the English in



exchange for the precious metals. The latter employed the precious



metals, in so far as they did not require them for the circulation



at home, in exportation to India or China, and bought goods there



which they sold again on the European continent, whence they



brought home agricultural produce, raw material, or precious metals



once again.



    We now ask, in the name of common sense, who would have



purchased of the English all those cloths which they exported to



Portugal, if the Portuguese had chosen either to make them at home



or procure them from other countries? The English could not in that



case have sold them to Portugal, and to other nations they were



already selling as much as those nations would take. Consequently



the English would have manufactured so much less cloth than they



had been disposing of to the Portuguese; they would have exported



so much less specie to India than they had obtained from Portugal.



They would have brought to Europe and sold on the Continent just



that much less of East Indian merchandise, and consequently would



have taken home with them that much less of raw material.



    Quite as untenable is Adam Smith's third argument that, if



Portuguese money had not flowed in upon them, the English might



have supplied their requirements of this article in other ways.



Portugal, he conceived, must in any case have exported her



superfluous store of precious metals, and these would have reached



England through some other channel. We here assume that the



Portuguese had manufactured their cloths for themselves, had



themselves exported their superfluous stock of precious metals to



India and China, and had purchased the return cargoes in other



countries; and we take leave to ask the question whether under



these circumstances the English would have seen much of Portuguese



money? It would have been just the same if Portugal had concluded



a Methuen Treaty with Holland or France. In both these cases, no



doubt, some little of the money would have gone over to England,



but only so much as she could have acquired by the sale of her raw



wool. In short, but for the Methuen Treaty, the manufactures, the



trade, and the shipping of the English could never have reached



such a degree of expansion as they have attained to.



    But whatever be the estimate formed of the effects of the



Methuen Treaty as respects England, this much at least appears to



be made out, that, in respect to Portugal, they have in no way been



such as to tempt other nations to deliver over their home markets



for manufactured goods to English competition, for the sake of



facilitating the exportation of agricultural produce. Agriculture



and trade, commerce and navigation, instead of improving from the



intercourse with England, went on sinking lower and lower in



Portugal. In vain did Pombal strive to raise them, English



competition frustrated all his efforts. At the same time it must



not be forgotten that in a country like Portugal, where the whole



social conditions are opposed to progress in agriculture, industry,



and commerce, commercial policy can effect but very little.



Nevertheless, the little which Pombal did effect proves how much



can be done for the benefit of industry by a government which is



anxious to promote its interests, if only the internal hindrances



which the social condition of a country presents can first be



removed.



    The same experience was made in Spain in the reigns of Philip



V and his two immediate successors. Inadequate as was the



protection extended to home industries under the Bourbons, and



great as was the lack of energy in fully enforcing the customs



laws, yet the remarkable animation which pervaded every branch of



industry and every district of the country as the result of



transplanting the commercial policy of Colbert from France to Spain



was unmistakable.(12*) The statements of Ustaritz and Ulloa(13*) in



regard to these results under the then prevailing circumstances are



astonishing. For at that time were found everywhere only the most



wretched mule-tracks, nowhere any well-kept inns, nowhere any



bridges, canals, or river navigation, every province was closed



against the rest of Spain by an internal customs cordon, at every



city gate a royal toll was demanded, highway robbery and mendicancy



were pursued as regular professions, the contraband trade was in



the most flourishing condition, and the most grinding system of



taxation existed; these and such as these the above named writers



adduce as the causes of the decay of industry and agriculture. The



causes of these evils -- fanaticism, the greed and the vices of the



clergy, the privileges of the nobles, the despotism of the



Government, the want of enlightenment and freedom amongst the



people -- Ustaritz and Ulloa dare not denounce.



    A worthy counterpart to the Methuen Treaty with Portugal is the



Assiento Treaty of 1713 with Spain, under which power was granted



to the English to introduce each year a certain number of African



negroes into Spanish America, and to visit the harbour of



Portobello with one ship once a year, whereby an opportunity was



afforded them of smuggling immense quantities of goods into these



countries.



    We thus find that in all treaties of commerce concluded by the



English, there is a tendency to extend the sale of their



manufactures throughout all the countries with whom they negotiate,



by offering them apparent advantages in respect of agricultural



produce and raw materials. Everywhere their efforts are directed to



ruining the native manufacturing power of those countries by means



of cheaper goods and long credits. If they cannot obtain low



tariffs, then they devote their exertions to defrauding the



custom-houses, and to organising a wholesale system of contraband



trade. The former device, as we have seen, succeeded in Portugal,



the latter in Spain. The collection of import dues upon the ad



valorem principle has stood them in good stead in this matter, for



which reason of late they have taken so much pains to represent the



principle of paying duty by weight -- as introduced by Prussia --



as being injudicious.







NOTES:







1. Anderson, vol. i. p. 127, vol. ii. p. 350.







2. M. G. Simon, Recueil d'Observations sur l'Angleterre. Mémoires



et Considérations sur le Commerce et les Finances d'Espagne.



Ustaritz, Théorie et Pratique du Commerce.







3. Chaptal, De l'Industrie Française, vol. ii. p. 245.







4. The chief export trade of the Portuguese from Central and



Southern America consisted of the precious metals. From 1748 to



1753, the exports amounted to 18 millions of piastres. See



Humboldt's Essai Politique sur le Royaume de la Nouvelle Espagne,



vol. ii. p. 652. The goods trade with those regions, as well as



with the West Indies, first assumed important proportions, by the



introduction of the sugar, coffee, and cotton planting.







5. British Merchant, vol. iii. p. 69.







6. Ibid. p. 71.







7. Ibid. p. 76.







8. Anderson, vol. iii. p. 67.







9. British Merchant, vol. iii. p. 267.







10. Ibid. vol. iii. pp. 15, 20, 33, 38, 110, 253, 254.







11. Anderson for the year 1703.







12. Macpherson, Annals of Commerce for the years 1771 and 1774. The



obstacles thrown in the way of the importation of foreign goods



greatly promoted the development of Spanish manufactures. Before



that time Spain had been obtaining nineteen-twentieths of her



supplies of manufactured goods from England. -- Brougham, Inquiry



into the Colonial Policy of the European Powers, Part I. p. 421.







13. Ustaritz, Théorie du Commerce. Ulloa, Rétablissement des



Manufactures d'Espagne.











Chapter 6







The French







    France, too, inherited many a remnant of Roman Civilisation. On



the irruption of the German Franks, who loved nothing but the



chase, and changed many districts again into forests and waste



which had been long under cultivation, almost everything was lost



again. To the monasteries, however, which subsequently became such



a great hindrance to civilisation, France, like all other European



countries, is indebted for most of her progress in agriculture



during the Middle Ages. The inmates of religious houses kept up no



feuds like the nobles, nor harassed their vassals with calls to



military service, while their lands and cattle were less exposed to



rapine and extermination. The clergy loved good living, were averse



to quarrels, and sought to gain reputation and respect by



supporting the necessitous. Hence the old adage 'It is good to



dwell under the crosier.' The Crusades, the institution of civic



communities and of guilds by Louis IX (Saint Louis), and the



proximity of Italy and Flanders, had considerable effect at an



early period in developing industry in France. Already in the



fourteenth century, Normandy and Brittany supplied woollen and



linen cloths for home consumption and for export to England. At



this period also the export trade in wines and salt, chiefly



through the agency of Hanseatic middlemen, had become important.



    By the influence of Francis I the silk manufacture was



introduced into the South of France. Henry IV favoured this



industry, as well as the manufacture of glass, linen, and woollens;



Richelieu and Mazarin favoured the silk manufactories, the velvet



and woollen manufactures of Rouen and Sedan, as well as the



fisheries and navigation.



    On no country did the discovery of America produce more



favourable effects than upon France. From Western France quantities



of corn were sent to Spain. Many peasants migrated every year from



the Pyrenean districts to the north-east of Spain in search of



work. Great quantities of wine and salt were exported to the



Spanish Netherlands, while the silks, the velvets, as also



especially the articles of luxury of French manufacture, were sold



in considerable quantities in the Netherlands, England, Spain, and



Portugal. Owing to this cause a great deal of Spanish gold and



silver got into circulation in France at an early period.



    But the palmy days of French industry first commenced with



Colbert.



    At the time of Mazarin's death, neither manufacturing industry,



commerce, navigation, nor the fisheries had attained to importance,



while the financial condition of the country was at its worst.



    Colbert had the courage to grapple single-handed with an



undertaking which England could only br ing to a successful issue



by the persevering efforts of three centuries, and at the cost of



two revolutions. From all countries he obtained the most skilful



workmen, bought up trade secrets, and procured better machinery and



tools. By a general and efficient tariff he secured the home



markets for native industry. By abolishing, or by limiting as much



as possible, the provincial customs collections, by the



construction of highways and canals, he promoted internal traffic.



These measures benefited agriculture even more than manufacturing



industry because the number of consumers was thereby doubled and



trebled, and the producers were brought into easy and cheap



communication with the consumers. He further promoted the interests



of agriculture by lowering the amounts of direct imposts levied



upon landed property, by mitigating the severity of the stringent



measures previously adopted in collecting the revenue, by



equalising the incidence of taxation, and lastly by introducing



measures for the reduction of the rate of interest. He prohibited



the exportation of corn only in times of scarcity and high prices.



To the extension of the foreign trade and the promotion of



fisheries he devoted special attention. He re-established the trade



with the Levant, enlarged that with the colonies, and opened up a



trade with the North. Into all branches of the administration he



introduced the most stringent economy and perfect order. At his



death France possessed 50,000 looms engaged in the manufacture of



woollens; she produced annually silk manufactures to the value of



50 millions of francs. The State revenues had increased by 28



millions of francs. The kingdom was in possession of flourishing



fisheries, of an extensive mercantile marine, and a powerful



navy.(1*)



    A century later, the economists have sharply censured Colbert,



and maintained that this statesman had been anxious to promote the



interests of manufactures at the expense of agriculture: a reproach



which proves nothing more than that these authorities were



themselves incapable of appreciating the nature of manufacturing



industry.(2*)



    If, however, Colbert was in error in opposing periodical



obstacles to the exportation of raw materials, yet by fostering the



growth and progress of native industries he so greatly increased



the demand for agricultural produce that he gave the agricultural



interest tenfold compensation for any injury which he caused to it



by the above-named obstacles. If, contrary to the dictates of



enlightened statesmanship, he prescribed new processes of



manufacture, and compelled the manufacturers by penal enactments to



adopt them, it should be borne in mind that these processes were



the best and the most profitable known in his day, and that he had



to deal with a people which, sunk into the utmost apathy by reason



of a long despotic rule, resisted every innovation even though it



was an improvement.



    The reproach, however, that France had lost a large portion of



her native industry through Colbert's protective system, could be



levelled against Colbert only by that school which utterly ignored



the revocation of the Edict of Nantes with its disastrous



consequences. In consequence of these deplorable measures, in the



course of three years after Colbert's death half a million of the



most industrious, skilful, and thriving inhabitants of France were



banished; who, consequently, to the double injury of France which



they had enriched, transplanted their industry and their capital to



Switzerland, to every Protestant country in Germany, especially to



Prussia, as also to Holland and England. Thus the intrigues of a



bigoted courtesan ruined in three years the able and gifted work of



a whole generation, and cast France back again into its previous



state of apathy; while England, under the aegis of her



Constitution, and invigorated by a Revolution which called forth



all the energies of the nation, was prosecuting with increasing



ardour and without intermission the work commenced by Elizabeth and



her predecessors.



    The melancholy condition to which the industry and the finances



of France had been reduced by a long course of misgovernment, and



the spectacle of the great prosperity of England, aroused the



emulation of French statesmen shortly before the French Revolution.



Infatuated with the hollow theory of the economists, they looked



for a remedy, in opposition to Colbert's policy, in the



establishment of free trade. It was thought that the prosperity of



the country could be restored at one blow if a better market were



provided for French wines and brandies in England, at the cost of



permitting the importation of English manufactures upon easy terms



(a twelve per cent duty). England, delighted at the proposal,



willingly granted to the French a second edition of the Methuen



Treaty, in the shape of the so-called Eden Treaty of 1786; a copy



which was soon followed by results not less ruinous than those



produced by the Portuguese original.



    The English, accustomed to the strong wines of the Peninsula,



did not increase their consumption to the extent which had been



expected, whilst the French perceived with horror that all they had



to offer the English were simply fashions and fancy articles, the



total value of which was insignificant : whereas the English



manufacturers, in all articles of prime necessity, the total amount



of which was enormous, could greatly surpass the French



manufacturers in cheapness of prices, as well as in quality of



their goods, and in granting of credit. When, after a brief



competition, the French manufacturers were brought to the brink of



ruin, while French wine-growers had gained but little, then the



French Government sought to arrest the progress of this ruin by



terminating the treaty, but only acquired the conviction that it is



much easier to ruin flourishing manufactories in a few years than



to revive ruined manufactories in a whole generation. English



competition had engendered a taste for English goods in France, the



consequence of which was an extensive and long-continued contraband



trade which it was difficult to suppress. Meanwhile it was not so



difficult for the English, after the termination of the treaty, to



accustom their palates again to the wines of the Peninsula.



    Notwithstanding that the commotions of the Revolution and the



incessant wars of Napoleon could not have been favourable to the



prosperity of French industry notwithstanding that the French lost



during this period most of their maritime trade and all their



colonies, yet French manufactories, solely from their exclusive



possession of their home markets, and from the abrogation of feudal



restrictions, attained during the Empire to a higher degree of



prosperity than they had ever enjoyed under the preceding ancien



régime. The same effects were noticeable in Germany and in all



countries over which the Continental blockade extended.



    Napoleon said in his trenchant style, that under the existing



circumstances of the world any State which adopted the principle of



free trade must come to the ground. In these words he uttered more



political wisdom in reference to the commercial policy of France



than all contemporary political economists in all their writings.



We cannot but wonder at the sagacity with which this great genius,



without any previous study of the systems of political economy,



comprehended the nature and importance of manufacturing power. Well



was it for him and for France that he had not studied these



systems. 'Formerly,' said Napoleon, 'there was but one description



of property, the possession of land; but a new property has now



risen up, namely, industry.' Napoleon saw, and in this way clearly



enunciated, what contemporary economists did not see, or did not



clearly enunciate, namely, that a nation which combines in itself



the power of manufactures with that of agriculture is an



immeasurably more perfect and more wealthy nation than a purely



agricultural one. What Napoleon did to found and promote the



industrial education of France, to improve the country's credit, to



introduce and set going new inventions and improved processes, and



to perfect the means of internal communication in France, it is not



necessary to dwell upon in detail, for these things are still too



well remembered. But what, perhaps, does call for special notice in



this connection, is the biassed and unfair judgment passed upon



this enlightened and powerful ruler by contemporary theorists.



    With the fall of Napoleon, English competition, which had been



till then restricted to a contraband trade, recovered its footing



on the continents of Europe and America. Now for the first time the



English were heard to condemn protection and to eulogise Adam



Smith's doctrine of free trade, a doctrine which heretofore those



practical islanders considered as suited only to an ideal state of



Utopian perfection. But an impartial, critical observer might



easily discern the entire aBsence of mere sentimental motives of



philanthropy in this conversion, for only when increased facilities



for the exportation of English goods to the continents of Europe



and America were in question were cosmopolitan arguments resorted



to; but so soon as the question turned upon the free importation of



corn, or whether foreign goods might be allowed to compete at all



with British manufactures in the English market, in that case quite



different principles were appealed to.(3*) Unhappily, it was said,



the long continuance in England of a policy contrary to natural



principles had created an artificial state of things, which could



not Be interfered with suddenly without incurring the risk of



dangerous and mischievous consequences. It was not to be attempted



without the greatest caution and prudence. It was England's



misfortune, not her fault. All the more gratifying ought it to be



for the nations of the European and American continents, that their



happy lot and condition left them quite free to partake without



delay of the blessings of free trade.



    In France, although her ancient dynasty reascended the throne



under the protection of the banner of England, or at any rate by



the influence of English gold, the above arguments did not obtain



currency for very long. England's free trade wrought such havoc



amongst the manufacturing industries which had prospered and grown



strong under the Continental blockade system, that a prohibitive



régime was speedily resorted to, under the protecting aegis of



which, according to Dupin's testimony,(4*) the producing power of



French manufactories was doubled between the years 1815 and 1827.







NOTES:







1. 'Eloge de Jean Baptiste Colbert, par Necker' (1773) (OEuvres



Completes, vol. xv.).







2. See Quesnay's paper entitled, 'Physiocratie, ou du Gouvernement



le plus avantageux au Genre Humain (1768),' Note 5, 'sur la maxime



viii,' wherein Quesnay contradicts and condemns Colbert in two



brief pages, whereas Necker devoted a hundred pages to the



exposition of Colbert's system and of what he accomplished. It is



hard to say whether we are to wonder most at the ignorance of



Quesnay on matters of industry, history, and finance, or at the



presumption with which he passes judgment upon such a man as



Colbert without adducing grounds for it. Add to that, that this



ignorant dreamer was not even candid enough to mention the



expulsion of the Huguenots; nay, that he was not ashamed to allege,



contrary to all truth, that Colbert had restricted the trade in



corn between province and province by vexatious police ordinances.







3. A highly accomplished American orator, Mr Baldwin, Chief Justice



of the United States, when referring to the Canning-Huskisson



system of free trade, shrewdly remarked, that, like most English



productions, it had been manufactured not so much for home



consumption as for exportation.



    Shall we laugh most or weep when we call to mind the rapture of



enthusiasm with which the Liberals in France and Germany, more



particularly the cosmopolitan theorists of the philanthropic



school, and notably Mons. J. B. Say, hailed the announcement of the



Canning-Huskisson system? So great was their jubilation, that one



might have thought the millennium had come. But let us see what Mr



Canning's own biographer says about this minister's views on the



subject of free trade.



    'Mr Canning was perfectly convinced of the truth of the



abstract principle, that commerce is sure to flourish most when



wholly unfettered; but since such had not been the opinion either



of our ancestors or of surrounding nations, and since in



consequence restraints had been imposed upon all commercial



transactions, a state of things had grown up to which the unguarded



application of the abstract principle, however true it was in



theory, might have been somewhat mischievous in practice.' (The



Political Life of Mr Canning, by Stapleton, p. 3.) In the year



1828, these same tactics of the English had again assumed a



prominence so marked that Mr Hume, the Liberal member of



Parliament, felt no hesitation in stigmatising them in the House as



the strangling of Continental industries.







4. Forces productives de la France.







Chapter 7







The Germans







    In the chapter on the Hanseatic League we saw how; next in



order to Italy, Germany had flourished, through extensive commerce,



long before the other European states. We have now to continue the



industrial history of that nation, after first taking a rapid



survey of its earliest industrial circumstances and their



development.



    In ancient Germania, the greater part of the land was devoted



to pasturage and parks for game. The insignificant and primitive



agriculture was abandoned to serfs and to women. The sole



occupation of the freemen was warfare and the chase; and that is



the origin of all the German nobility.



    The German nobles firmly adhered to this system throughout the



Middle Ages, oppressing agriculturists and opposing manufacturing



industry, while quite blind to the benefits which must accrued to



them, as the lords of the soil, from the prosperity of both.



    Indeed, so deeply rooted has the passion for their hereditary



favourite occupation ever continued with the German nobles, that



even in the our days, long after they have been enriched by the



ploughshare and shuttle, they still dream in legislative the about



the preservation of game and the game laws, as though the wolf and



the sheep, the bear and the bee, could dwell in peace side by side;



as though landed property could be devoted at one and the same time



to gardening, timber growing, and scientific farming, and to the



preservation of wild boars, deer, and hares.



    German husbandry long remained in a barbarous condition,



notwithstanding that the influence of towns and monasteries on the



districts in their immediate vicinity could not be ignored.



    Towns sprang up in the ancient Roman colonies, at the seats of



the temporal and ecclesiastical princes and lords, near



monasteries, and, where favoured by the Emperor, to a certain



extent within their domains and inclosures, also on sites where the



fisheries, combined with facilities for land and water transport,



offered inducements to them. They flourished in most cases only by



supplying the local requirements, and by the foreign transport



trade. An extensive system of native industry capable Of supplying



an export trade could only have grown up by means of extensive



sheep farming and extensive cultivation of flax. But flax



cultivation implies a high standard of agriculture, while extensive



sheep farming needs protection against wolves and robbers. Such



protection could not be maintained amid the perpetual feuds of the



nobles and princes between themselves and against the towns. Cattle



pastures served always as the principal field for robbery; while



the total extermination of beasts of prey was out of the question



with those vast tracts of forest which the nobility so carefully



preserved for their indulgence in the chase. The scanty number of



cattle, the insecurity of life and property, the entire lack of



capital and of freedom on the part of the cultivators of the soil,



or of any interest in agriculture on the part of those who owned



it, necessarily tended to keep agriculture, and with it the



prosperity of the towns, in a very low state.



    If these circumstances are duly considered, it is easy to



understand the reason why Flanders and Brabant under totally



opposite conditions attained at so early a period to a high degree



of liberty and prosperity.



    Notwithstanding these impediments, the German cities on the



Baltic and the German Ocean flourished, owing to the fisheries, to



navigation, and the foreign trade at sea; in Southern Germany and



at the foot of the Alps, owing to the influence of Italy, Greece,



and the transport trade by land; on the Rhine, the Elbe, and the



Danube, by means of viticulture and the wine trade, owing to the



exceptional fertility of the soil and the facilities of water



communication, which in the Middle Ages was of still greater



importance than even in our days, because of the wretched condition



of the roads and the general state of insecurity.



    This diversity of origin will explain the diversity



characterising the several confederations of German cities, such as



the Hanseatic, the Rhenish, the Swabian, the Dutch, and the



Helvetic.



    Though they continued powerful for a time owing to the spirit



of youthful freedom which pervaded them, yet these leagues lacked



the internal guarantee of stability, the principle of unity, the



cement. Separated from each other by the estates of the nobility,



by the serfdom of the population of the country, their union was



doomed sooner or later to break down, owing to the gradual increase



and enrichment of the agricultural population, among whom, through



the power of the princes, the principle of unity was maintained.



The cities, inasmuch as they tended to promote the prosperity of



agriculture, by so doing necessarily were working at their own



effacement, unless they contrived to incorporate the agricultural



classes or the nobility as members of their unions. For the



accomplishment of that object, however, they lacked the requisite



higher political instincts and knowledge. Their political vision



seldom extended beyond their own city walls.



    Two only of these confederations, Switzerland and the Seven



United Provinces, actually carried out this incorporation, and that



not as the result of reflection, but because they were compelled to



it, and favoured by circumstances, and for that reason those



confederations still exist. The Swiss Confederation is nothing but



a conglomerate of German imperial cities, established and cemented



together by the free populations occupying the intervening tracts



of country.



    The remaining leagues of German cities were ruined owing to



their contempt for the rural population, and from their absurd



burgher arrogance, which delighted in keeping that population in



subjection, rather than in raising them to their own level.



    These cities could only have attained unity by means of an



hereditary royal authority. But this authority in Germany lay in



the hands of the princes, who, in order to avert restraints upon



their own arbitrary rule, and to keep both the cities and the minor



nobles in subjection, were interested in resisting the



establishment of an hereditary empire.



    Hence the persevering adherence to the idea of the Imperial



Roman Empire amongst German kings. Only at the head of armies were



the emperors rulers; only when they went to war were they able to



bring together princes and cities under their banner. Hence their



protection of civic liberty in Germany, and their hostility to it



and persecution of it in Italy.



    The expeditions to Rome not only weakened more and more the



kingly power in Germany, they weakened those very dynasties through



which, within the Empire, in the heart of the nation, a



consolidated power might have grown up. But with the extinction of



the House of Hohenstaufen the nucleus of consolidated power was



broken up into a thousand fragments.



    The sense of the impossibility of consolidating the heart of



the nation impelled the House of Hapsburg, originally so weak and



poor, to utilise the nation's vigour in founding a consolidated



hereditary monarchy on the south-eastern frontier of the German



Empire, by subjugating alien races, a policy which in the northeast



was imitated by the Margraves of Brandenburg. Thus in the



south-east and north-east there arose hereditary sovereignties



founded upon the dominion over alien races, while in the two



western corners of the land two republics grew into existence which



continually separated themselves more and more from the parent



nation; and within, in the nation's heart, disintegration,



impotence, and dissolution continually progressed. The misfortunes



of the German nation were completed by the inventions of gunpowder



and of the art of printing, the revival of the Roman law, the



Reformation, and lastly the discovery of America and of the new



route to India.



    The intellectual, social, and economic revolution which we have



described produced divisions and disruption between the constituent



members of the Empire, disunion between the princes, disunion



between the cities, disunion even between the various guilds of



individual cities, and between neighbours of every rank. The



energies of the nation were now diverted from the pursuit of



industry, agriculture, trade, and navigation; from the acquisition



of colonies, the amelioration of internal institutions, in fact



from every kind of substantial improvement, the people contended



about dogmas and the heritage of the Church.



    At the same time came the decline of the Hanseatic League and



of Venice, and with it the decline of Germany's wholesale trade,



and of the power and liberties of the German cities both in the



north and in the south.



    Then came the Thirty Years' War with its devastations of all



territories and cities. Holland and Switzerland seceded, while the



fairest provinces of the Empire were conquered by France. Whereas



formerly single cities, such as Strasburg, Nürnberg, Augsburg, had



surpassed in power entire electorates, they now sank into utter



impotence in consequence of the introduction of standing armies.



    If before this revolution the cities and the royal power had



been more consolidated -- if a king exclusively belonging to the



German nation had obtained a complete mastery of the Reformation,



and had carried it out in the interests of the unity, power, and



freedom of the nation -- how very differently would the



agriculture, industry, and trade of the Germans have been



developed. By the side of considerations such as these, how



pitiable and unpractical seems that theory of political economy



which would have us refer the material welfare of nations solely to



the production of individuals, wholly losing sight of the fact that



the producing power of all individuals is to a great extent



determined by the social and political circumstances of the nation.



The introduction of the Roman law weakened no nation so much as the



German. The unspeakable confusion which it brought into the legal



status and relations of private individuals, was not the worst of



its bad effects. More mischievous was it by far, in that it created



a caste of learned men and jurists differing from the people in



spirit and language, which treated the people as a class unlearned



in the law, as minors, which denied the authority of all sound



human understanding, which everywhere set up secrecy in the room of



publicity, which, living in the most abject dependence and living



upon arbitrary power, everywhere advocated it and defended its



interests, everywhere gnawed at the roots of liberty. Thus we see



even to the beginning of the eighteenth century in Germany,



barbarism in literature and language, barbarism in legislation,



State administration and administration of justice; barbarism in



agriculture, decline of industry and of all trade upon a large



scale, want of unity and of force in national cohesion;



powerlessness and weakness on all hands in dealing with foreign



nations.



    One thing only the Germans had preserved; that was their



aboriginal character, their love of industry, order, thrift, and



moderation, their perseverance and endurance in research and in



business, their honest striving after improvement, and a



considerable natural measure of morality, prudence, and



circumspection.



    This character both the rulers and the ruled had in common.



After the almost total decay of nationality and the restoration of



tranquillity, people began in some individual isolated circles to



introduce order, improvement, and progress. Nowhere was witnessed



more zeal in cherishing education, manners, religion, art, and



science; nowhere was absolute power exercised with greater



moderation or with more advantage to general enlightenment, order,



and morality, to the reform of abuses and the advancement of the



common welfare.



    The foundation for the revival of German nationality was



undoubtedly laid by the Governments them selves, by their



conscientious devotion of the proceeds of the secularised Church



lands to the uses of education and instruction, of art and science,



of morality and objects of public utility. By these measures light



made its way into the State administration and the administration



of justice, into education and literature, into agriculture,



industry, and commerce, and above all amongst the masses. Thus



Germany developed herself in a totally different way from all other



nations. Elsewhere high mental culture rather grew out of the



evolution of the material powers of production, whilst in Germany



the growth of material powers of production was the outcome chiefly



of an antecedent intellectual development. Hence at the present day



the whole culture of the Germans is theoretical. Hence also those



many unpractical and odd traits in the German character which other



nations notice in us.



    For the moment the Germans are in the position of an individual



who, having been formerly deprived of the use of his limbs, first



learned theoretically the arts of standing and walking, of eating



and drinking, of laughing and weeping, and then only proceeded to



put them in practice. Hence comes the German predilection for



philosophic systems and cosmopolitan dreams. The intellect, which



was not allowed to stir in the affairs of this world, strove to



exercise itself in the realms of speculation. Hence, too, we find



that nowhere has the doctrine of Adam Smith and of his disciples



obtained a larger following than in Germany; nowhere else have



people more thoroughly believed in the cosmopolitan magnanimity of



Messrs Canning and Huskisson.



    For the first progress in manufactures Germany is indebted to



the revocation of the Edict of Nantes and to the numerous refugees



who by that insane measure were driven to emigrate to almost every



part of Germany, and established everywhere manufactures of wool,



silk, jewellery, hats, glass, china, gloves, and industries of



every kind.



    The first Government measures for the promotion of manufactures



in Germany were introduced by Austria and Prussia; in Austria under



Charles VI and Maria Theresa, but even more under Joseph II.



Austria had formerly suffered enormously from the banishment of the



Protestants, her most industrious citizens; nor can it be exactly



affirmed that she distinguished herself in the immediate sequel by



promoting enlightenment and mental culture. Afterwards, in



consequence of a protective tariff, improved sheep farming, better



roads, and other encouragements, industry made considerable strides



even under Maria Theresa.



    More energetically still was this work pushed forward under



Joseph II and with immensely greater success. At first, indeed, the



results could not be called important, because the Emperor,



according to his wont, was too precipitate in these as in all his



other schemes of reform, and Austria, in relation to other states,



still occupied too backward a position. Here as elsewhere it became



evident that one might get 'too much of a good thing' at once, and



that protective duties, in order to work beneficially and not as a



disturbing element upon an existing state of things, must not be



made too high at the commencement. But the longer that system



continued, the more clearly was its wisdom demonstrated. To that



tariff Austria is indebted for her present prosperous industries



and the flourishing condition of her agriculture.



    The industry of Prussia had suffered more than that of any



other country from the devastations of the Thirty Years' War. Her



most important industry, the manufacture of cloth in the Margravate



of Brandenburg, was almost entirely annihilated. The majority of



cloth workers had migrated to Saxony, while English imports at the



time held every competition in check. To the advantage of Prussia



now came the revocation of the Edict of Nantes and the persecution



of the Protestants in the Palatinate and in Salzburg. The great



Elector saw at a glance what Elizabeth before him had so clearly



understood. In consequence of the measures devised by him a great



number of the fugitives directed their steps to Prussia, fertilised



the agricultural industry of the land, established a large number



of manufactures, and cultivated science and art. All his successors



followed in his footsteps, none with more zeal than the great King



-- greater by his policy in times of peace than by his successes in



war. Space is wanting to treat at length of the countless measures



whereby Frederick II attracted to his dominions large numbers of



foreign agriculturists, brought tracts of waste land into



cultivation, and established the cultivation of meadows, of cattle



fodder, vegetables, potatoes, and tobacco, improved sheep farming,



cattle breeding, horse breeding, the use of mineral manures, &c.,



by which means he created capital and credit for the benefit of the



agricultural classes. Still more than by these direct measures he



promoted indirectly the interests of agriculture by means of those



branches of manufacture which, in consequence of the customs tariff



and the improved means of transport which he established, as well



as the establishment of a bank, made greater advances in Prussia



than in any other German state, notwithstanding that that country's



geographical position, and its division into several provinces



separated from one another, were much less favourable for the



success of such measures, and that the disadvantages of a customs



cordon, namely, the damaging effects of a contraband trade, must be



felt more acutely there than in great states whose territories are



compact and well protected by boundaries of seas, rivers, and



chains of mountains.



    At the same time we are nowise anxious, under cover of this



eulogy, to defend the faults of the system, such as, for example,



the restrictions laid upon the exportation of raw material. Still,



that in despite of these faults the national industry was



considerably advanced by it, no enlightened and impartial historian



would venture to dispute.



    To every unprejudiced mind, unclouded by false theories, it



must be clear that Prussia gained her title to rank amongst the



European powers not so much by her conquests as by her wise policy



in promoting the interests of agriculture, industry, and trade, and



by her progress in literature and science; and all this was the



work of one great genius alone.



    And yet the Crown was not yet supported by the energy of free



institutions, but simply by an administrative system, well ordered



and conscientious, but unquestionably trammelled by the dead



mechanical routine of a hierarchical bureaucracy.



    Meanwhile all the rest of Germany had for centuries been under



the influence of free trade -- that is to say, the whole world was



free to export manufactured products into Germany, while no one



consented to admit German manufactured goods into other countries.



This rule had its exceptions, but only a few. It cannot, however,



be asserted that the predictions and the promises of the school



about the great benefits of free trade have been verified by the



experience of this country, for everywhere the movement was rather



retrograde than progressive. Cities like Augsburg, Nürnberg,



Mayence, Cologne, &c., numbered no more than a third or a fourth



part of their former population, and wars were often wished for



merely for the sake of getting rid of a valueless surplus of



produce.



    The wars came in the train of the French Revolution, and with



them English subsidies together with increased English competition.



Hence a new downward tendency in manufactures coupled with an



increase in agricultural prosperity, which, however, was only



apparent and transitory.



    Next followed Napoleon's Continental Blockade, an event which



marked an era in the history of both German and French industry,



notwithstanding that Mons. J. B. Say, Adam Smith's most famous



pupil, denounced it as a calamity. Whatever theorists, and notably



the English, may urge against it, this much is clearly made out --



and all who are conversant with German industry must attest it, for



there is abundant evidence of the fact in all statistical writings



of that day -- that, as a result of this blockade, German



manufactures of all and every kind for the first time began to make



an important advance;(1*) that then only did the improved breeding



of sheep (which had been commenced some time before) become general



and successful; that then only was activity displayed in improving



the means of transport. It is true, on the other hand, that Germany



lost the greater part of her former export trade, especially in



linens. Yet the gain was considerably greater than the loss,



particularly for the Prussian and Austrian manufacturing



establishments, which had previously gained a start over all other



manufactories in the German states.



    But with the return of peace the English manufacturers again



entered into a fearful competition with the German; for during the



reciprocal blockade, in consequence of new inventions and a great



and almost exclusive export trade to foreign lands, the



manufactories of the island had far outstripped that of Germany;



and for this reason, as well as because of their large acquired



capital, the former were first in a position to sell at much lower



prices, to offer much superior articles, and to give much longer



credit than the latter, which had still to battle with the



difficulties of a first beginning. Consequently general ruin



followed and loud wailings amongst the latter, especially in the



lower Rhenish provinces, in those regions which, having formerly



belonged to France, were now excluded from the French market.



Besides, the Prussian customs tariff had undergone many changes in



the direction of absolute free trade, and no longer afforded any



sufficient protection against English competition. At the same time



the Prussian bureaucracy long strove against the country's cry for



help. They had become too strongly imbued with Adam Smith's theory



at the universities to discern the want of the times with



sufficient promptness. There even still existed political



economists in Prussia who harboured the bold design of reviving the



long-exploded 'physiocratic' system. Meanwhile the nature of things



here too proved a mightier force than the power of theories. The



cry of distress raised by the manufacturers, hailing as it did from



districts still yearning after their former state of connection



with France, whose sympathies it was necessary to conciliate, could



not be safely disregarded too long. More and more the opinion



spread at the time that the English Government were favouring in an



unprecedented manner a scheme for glutting the markets on the



Continent with manufactured goods in order to stifle the



Continental manufactures in the cradle. This idea has been



ridiculed, but it was natural enough that it should prevail, first,



because this glutting really took place in such a manner as though



it had been deliberately planned; and, secondly, because a



celebrated member of Parliament, Mr Henry Brougham (afterwards Lord



Brougham), had openly said, in 1815, 'that it was well worth while



to incur a loss on the exportation of English manufactures in order



to stifle in the cradle the foreign manufactures.'(2*) This idea of



this lord, since so renowned as a philanthropist, cosmopolist, and



Liberal, was repeated ten years later almost in the same words by



Mr Hume, a member of Parliament not less distinguished for



liberalism, when he expressed a wish that 'Continental manufactures



might be nipped in the bud.'



    At length the prayer of the Prussian manufacturers found a



hearing -- late enough, indeed, as must be admitted when one



considers how painful it is to be wrestling with death year after



year -- but at last their cry was heard to real good purpose. The



Prussian customs tariff of 1818 answered, for the time in which it



was established, all the requirements of Prussian industry, without



in any way overdoing the principle of protection or unduly



interfering with the country's beneficial intercourse with foreign



countries. Its scale of duties was much lower than those of the



English and French customs systems, and necessarily so; for in this



case there was no question of a gradual transition from a



prohibitive to a protective system, but of a change from free trade



(so called) to a protective system. Another great advantage of this



tariff, considered as a whole, was that the duties were mostly



levied according to the weight of goods and not according to their



value. By this means not only were smuggling and too low valuations



obviated, but also the great object was gained, that articles of



general consumption, which every country can most easily



manufacture for itself, and the manufacture of which, because of



their great total money value, is the most important of any for the



country, were burdened with the highest import duty, while the



protective duty fell lower and lower in proportion to the fineness



and costliness of the goods, also as the difficulty of making such



articles at home increased, and also as both the inducements and



the facilities for smuggling increased.



    But this mode of charging the duty upon the weight would of



course, for very obvious reasons, affect the trade with the



neighbouring German states much more injuriously than the trade



with foreign nations. The second-rate and smaller German states had



now to bear, in addition to their exclusion from the Austrian,



French, and English markets, almost total exclusion from that of



Prussia, which hit them all the harder, since many of them were



either totally or in great part hemmed in by Prussian provinces.



    Just in proportion as these measures pacified the Prussian



manufacturers, was the loudness of the outcry against them on the



part of the manufacturers of the other German states. Add to that,



that Austria had shortly before imposed restrictions on the



importation of German goods into Italy, notably of the linens of



Upper Swabia. Restricted on all sides in their export trade to



small strips of territory, and further being separated from one



another by smaller internal lines of customs duties, the



manufacturers of these countries were well-nigh in despair.



    It was this state of urgent necessity which led to the



formation of that private union of five to six thousand German



manufacturers and merchants, which was founded in the year 1819 at



the spring fair held in Frankfort-on-the-Main, with the object of



abolishing all the separate tariffs of the various German states,



and on the other hand of establishing a common trade and



custom-house system for the whole of Germany.



    This union was formally organised. Its articles of association



were submitted to the Diet, and to all the rulers and governments



of the German states for approval. In every German town a local



correspondent was appointed; each German state had its provincial



correspondent. All the members and correspondents bound themselves



to promote the objects of the union to the best of their ability.



The city of Nürnberg was selected as the head-quarters of the



union, and authorised to appoint a central committee, which should



direct the business of the union, under the advice of an assessor,



for which office the author of this book was selected. In a weekly



journal of the union, bearing the title of 'Organ des deutschen



Handels- und Fabrikantenstandes,'(3*) the transactions and measures



of the central committee were made known, and ideas, proposals,



treatises, and statistical papers relating to the objects of the



union were published. Each year at the spring fair in Frankfort a



general meeting of the union was held, at which the central



committee gave an account of its stewardship.



    After this union had presented a petition to the German Diet



showing the need and expediency of the measures proposed by their



organisation, the central committee at Nürnberg commenced



operations. Deputations were sent to every German Court, and



finally one to the Congress of Plenipotentiaries held at Vienna in



1820. At this congress so much at least was gained, that several of



the second-class and smaller German states agreed to hold a



separate congress on the subject at Darmstadt. The effect of the



deliberations of this last-named congress was, first, to bring



about a union between Würtemberg and Bavaria; secondly, a union of



some of the German states and Prussia; then a union between the



middle German states; lastly, and chiefly in consequence of the



exertions of Freiherr von Cotta to fuse the above-named three



unions into a general customs confederation, so that at this



present time, with the exception of Austria, the two Mecklenburgs,



Hanover, and the Hanse Towns, the whole of Germany is associated in



a single customs union, which has abolished the separate customs



lines amongst its members, and has established a uniform tariff in



common against the foreigner, the revenue derived from which is



distributed pro rata amongst the several states according to their



populations.



    The tariff of this union is substantially the same as that



established by Prussia in 1818; that is to say, it is a moderate



protectionist tariff.



    In consequence of this unification of customs, the industry,



trade, and agriculture of the German states forming the union have



already made enormous strides.











NOTES:







1. The system must necessarily have affected France in a different



manner than Germany, because Germany was mostly shut out from the



French markets, while the German markets were all open to the



French manufacturer.







2. Report of the Committee of Commerce and Manufactures to the



House of Representatives of the Congress of the United States, Feb.



13, 1816.







3. Organ of the German Commercial and Manufacturing Interests.











Chapter 8







The Russians







    Russia owes her first progress in civilisation and industry to



her intercourse with Greece, to the trade of the Hanseatic Towns



with Novgorod and (after the destruction of that town by Ivan



Wassiljewitsch) to the trade which arose with the English and



Dutch, in consequence of the discovery of the water communication



with the coasts of the White Sea.



    But the great increase of her industry, and especially of her



civilisation, dates from the reign of Peter the Great. The history



of Russia during the last hundred and forty years offers a most



striking proof of the great influence of national unity and



political circumstances on the economic welfare of a nation.



    To the imperial power which established and maintained this



union of innumerable Barbaric hordes, Russia owes the foundations



of her manufactures, her vast progress in agriculture and



population, the facilities offered to her interior traffic by the



construction of canals and roads, a very large foreign trade, and



her standing as a commercial power.



    Russia's independent system of trade dates, however, only from



the year 1821.



    Under Catherine II. trade and manufactures had certainly made



some progress, on account of the privileges she offered to foreign



artisans and manufacturers; but the culture of the nation was still



too imperfect to allow of its getting beyond the first stages in



the manufacture of iron, glass, linen, &c., and especially in those



branches of industry in which the country was specially favoured by



its agricultural and mineral wealth.



    Besides this, further progress in manufactures would not, at



that time, have been conducive to the economic interests of the



nation. If foreign countries had taken in payment the provisions,



raw material, and rude manufactures which Russia was able to



furnish if, further, no wars and exterior events had intervened,



Russia by means of intercourse with nations more advanced than



herself would have been much more prosperous, and her culture in



general would in consequence of this intercourse have made greater



progress than under the manufacturing system. But wars and the



Continental blockade, and the commercial regulations of foreign



nations, compelled her to seek prosperity in other ways than by the



export of raw materials and the import of manufactures. In



consequence of these, the previous commercial relations of Russia



by sea were disturbed. Her overland trade with the western



continent could not make up for these losses; and she found it



necessary, therefore, to work up her raw materials herself. After



the establishiment of the general peace, a desire arose to return



to the old system. The Government, and even the Emperor, were



inclined to favour free trade. In Russia, the writings of Herr



Storch enjoyed as high a reputation as those of Mons Say in



Germany. People were not alarmed by the first shocks which the home



manufactories, which had arisen during the Continental Blockade,



suffered owing to English competition. The theorists maintained



that if these shocks could only be endured once for all, the



blessings of free trade would follow. And indeed the circumstances



of the commercial world at the time were uncommonly favourable to



this transition. The failure of crops in Western Europe caused a



great export of agricultural produce, by which Russia for a long



time gained ample means to balance her large importation of



manufactured goods.



    But when this extraordinary demand for Russian agricultural



produce had ceased, when, on the other hand, England had imposed



restrictions on the import of corn for the benefit of her



aristocracy, and on that of foreign timber for the benefit of



Canada, the ruin of Russia's home manufactories and the excessive



import of foreign manufactures made itself doubly felt. Although



people had formerly, with Herr Storch, considered the balance of



trade as a chimera, to believe in the existence of which was, for



a reasonable and enlightened man, no less outrageous and ridiculous



than the belief in witchcraft in the seventeenth century had been,



it was now seen with alarm that there must be something of the



nature of a balance of trade as between independent nations. The



most enlightened and discerning statesman of Russia, Count



Nesselrode, did not hesitate to confess to this belief. He declared



in an official circular of 1821: 'Russia finds herself compelled by



circumstances to take up an independent system of trade; the



products of the empire have found no foreign market, the home



manufactures are ruined or on the point of being so, all the ready



money of the country flows towards foreign lands, and the most



substantial trading firms are nearly ruined.' The beneficial



effects of the Russian protective system contributed no less than



the injurious consequences of the re-establishment of free trade



had done to bring into discredit the principles and assertions of



the theorists. Foreign capital, talent, and labour flowed into the



country from all civilised lands, especially from England and



Germany, in order to share in the advantages offered by the home



manufactories.



    The nobility imitated the policy of the Empire at large. As



they could obtain no foreign market for their produce, they



attempted to solve the problem inversely by bringing the market



into proximity with the produce -- they established manufactories



on their estates. In consequence of the demand for fine wool



produced by the newly created woollen manufactories, the breed of



sheep was rapidly improved. Foreign trade increased, instead of



declining, particularly that with China, Persia, and other



neighbouring countries of Asia. The commercial crises entirely



ceased, and one need only read the latest reports of the Russian



Minister of Commerce to be convinced that Russia owes a large



measure of prosperity to this system, and that she is increasing



her national wealth and power by enormous strides.



    It is foolish for Germans to try to make little of this



progress and to complain of the injury which it has caused to the



north-eastern provinces of Germany. Each nation, like each



individual, has its own interests nearest at heart. Russia is not



called upon to care for the welfare of Germany; Germany must care



for Germany, and Russia for Russia. It would be much better,



instead of complaining, instead of hoping and waiting and expecting



the Messiah of a future free trade, to throw the cosmopolitan



system into the fire and take a lesson from the example of Russia.



    That England should look with jealousy on this commercial



policy of Russia is very natural. By its means Russia has



emancipated herself from England, and has qualified herself to



enter into competition with her in Asia. Even if England



manufactures more cheaply, this advantage will in the trade with



Central Asia be outweighed by the proximity of the Russian Empire



and by its political influence. Although Russia may still be, in



comparison with Europe, but a slightly civilised country, yet, as



compared with Asia, she is a civilised one.



    Meantime, it cannot be denied that the want of civilisation and



political institutions will greatly hinder Russia in her further



industrial and commercial progress, especially if the Imperial



Government does not succeed in harmonising her political conditions



with the requirements of industry, by the introduction of efficient



municipal and provincial constitutions, by the gradual limitation



and final abolition of serfdom, by the formation of an educated



middle class and a free peasant class, and by the completion of



means of internal transport and of communication with Central Asia.



These are the conquests to which Russia is called in the present



century, and on them depends her further progress in agriculture



and industry, in trade, navigation and naval power. But in order to



render reforms of this kind possible and practicable, the Russian



aristocracy must first learn to feel that their own material



interests will be most promoted by them.







Chapter 9







The North Americans







    After our historical examination of the commercial policy of



the European nations, with the exception of those from which there



is nothing of importance to be learnt, we will cast a glance beyond



the Atlantic Ocean at a people of colonists which has been raising



itself almost before our eyes from the condition of entire



dependence on the mother country, and of separation into a number



of colonial provinces having no kind of political union between



themselves, to that of a united, well-organised, free, powerful,



industrious, rich, and independent nation, which will perhaps in



the time of our grandchildren exalt itself to the rank of the first



naval and commercial power in the world. The history of the trade



and industry of North America is more instructive for our subject



than any other can be, Because here the course of development



proceeds rapidly, the periods of free trade and protection follow



closely on each other, their consequences stand out clearly and



sharply defined, and the whole machinery of national industry and



State administration moves exposed before the eyes of the



spectator.



    The North American colonies were kept, in respect of trade and



industry, in such complete thraldom by the mother country, that no



sort of manufacture was permitted to them beyond domestic



manufacture and the ordinary handicrafts. So late as the year 1750



a hat manufactory in the State of Massachusetts created so great



sensation and jealousy in Parliament, that it declared all kinds of



manufactories to be 'common nuisances,' not excepting iron works,



notwithstanding that the country possessed in the greatest



abundance all the requisite materials for the manufacture of iron.



Even more recently, namely, in 1770, the great Chatham, made uneasy



by the first manufacturing attempts of the New Englanders, declared



that the colonies should not be permitted to manufacture so much as



a horseshoe nail.



    To Adam Smith belongs the merit of having first pointed out the



injustice of this policy.



    The monopoly of all manufacturing industry by the mother



country was one of the chief causes of the American Revolution; the



tea duty merely afforded an opportunity for its outbreak.



    Freed from restrictions, in possession of all material and



intellectual resources for manufacturing work, and separated from



that nation from which they had previously been supplied with



manufactured goods, and to which they had been selling their



produce, and thus thrown with all their wants upon their own



resources: manufactures of every kind in the North American free



states received a mighty stimulus during the war of revolution,



which in its turn had the effect of benefiting agriculture to such



an extent that, notwithstanding the burdens and the devastation



consequent upon the then recent war, the value of land and the rate



of wages in these states everywhere rose immensely but as, after



the peace of Paris, the faulty constitution of the free states made



the introduction of a united commercial system impossible, and



consequently English manufactured goods again obtained free



admission, competition with which the newly established American



manufactories had not strength enough to bear, the prosperity which



had arisen during the war vanished much more quickly than it had



grown up. An orator in Congress said afterwards of this crisis: 'We



did buy, according to the advice of modem theorists, where we could



buy cheapest, and our markets were flooded with foreign goods;



English goods sold cheaper in our seaport towns than in Liverpool



or London. Our manufacturers were being ruined; our merchants, even



those who thought to enrich themselves by importation, became



bankrupt; and all these causes together were so detrimental to



agriculture, that landed property became very generally worthless,



and consequently bankruptcy became general even among our



landowners.'



    This condition of things was by no means temporary; it lasted



from the peace of Paris until the establishment of the federal



constitution, and contributed more than any other circumstance to



bring about a more intimate union between the free states and to



impel them to give to Congress full powers for the maintenance of



a united commercial policy. Congress was inundated with petitions



from all the states -- New York and South Carolina not excepted --



in favour of protective measures for internal industry; and



Washington, on the day of his inauguration, wore a suit of



home-manufactured cloth, 'in order,' said a contemporary New York



journal, 'in the simple and impressive manner so peculiar to this



great man, to give to all his successors in office and to all



future legislators a memorable lesson upon the way in which the



welfare of this country is to be promoted.' Although the first



American tariff (1789) levied only light duties on the importation



of the most important manufactured articles, it yet worked so



beneficially from the very first years of its introduction that



Washington in his 'Message' in 1791 was able to congratulate the



nation on the flourishing condition of its manufactures,



agriculture, and trade.



    The inadequacy of this protection was, however, soon apparent;



for the effect of the slight import duties was easily overcome by



English manufacturers, who had the advantage of improved methods of



production. Congress did certainly raise the duty on the most



important manufactured articles to fifteen per cent, but this was



not till the year 1804, when it was compelled, owing to deficient



customs receipts, to raise more revenue, and long after the inland



manufacturers had exhausted every argument in favour of having more



protection, while the interests opposed to them were equally



strenuous upon the advantages of free trade and the injurious



effects of high import duties.



    In striking contrast with the slight progress which had, on the



whole, been made by the manufacturers of the country, stood the



improved condition of its navigation, which since the year 1789,



upon the motion of James Madison, had received effectual



protection. From a tonnage of 200,000 in 1789 their mercantile



marine had increased in 1801 to more than 1,000,000 tons. Under the



protection of the tariff of 1804, the manufacturing interest of the



United States could just barely maintain itself against the English



manufactories, which were continually being improved, and had



attained a colossal magnitude, and it would doubtless have had to



succumb entirely to English competition, had it not been for the



help of the embargo and declaration of war of 1812. In consequence



of these events, just as at the time of the War of Independence,



the American manufactories received such an extraordinary impetus



that they not only sufficed for the home demand, but soon began to



export as well. According to a report of the Committee on Trade and



Manufactures to Congress in 1815, 100,000 hands were employed in



the woollen and cotton manufactures alone, whose yearly production



amounted to the value of more than sixty million dollars. As in the



days of the War of Independence, and as a necessary consequence of



the increase in manufacturing power, there occurred a rapid rise in



all prices, not only of produce and in wages, but also of landed



property, and hence universal prosperity amongst landowners,



labourers, and all engaged in internal trade.



    After the peace of Ghent, Congress, warned by the experience of



1786, decreed that for the first year the previous duties should be



doubled, and during this period the country continued to prosper.



Coerced, however, by powerful private interests which were opposed



to those of the manufacturers, and persuaded by the arguments of



theorists, it resolved in the year 1816 to make a considerable



reduction in the import duties, whereupon the same effects of



external competition reappeared which had been experienced from



1786 to 1789, viz. ruin of manufactories, unsaleability of produce,



fall in the value of property and general calamity among



landowners. After the country had for a second time enjoyed in war



time the blessings of peace, it suffered, for a second time,



greater evils through peace than the most devastating war could



have brought upon it. It was only in the year 1824, after the



effects of the English corn laws had been made manifest to the full



extent of their unwise tendency thus compelling the agricultural



interest of the central, northern, and western states to make



common cause with the manufacturing interest, that a somewhat



higher tariff was passed in Congress, which, however, as Mr



Huskisson immediately brought forward counteracting measures with



the view of paralysing the effects of this tariff on English



competition, soon proved insufficient, and had to be supplemented



by the tariff of 1828, carried through Congress after a violent



struggle.



    Recently published official statistics(1*) of Massachusetts



give a tolerable idea of the start taken by the manufactures of the



United States, especially in the central and northern states of the



Union, in consequence of the protective system, and in spite of the



subsequent modification of the tariff of 1828. In the year 1837,



there were in this State (Massachusetts) 282 cotton mills and



565,031 spindles in operation, employing 4,997 male and 14,757



female hands; 37,275,917 pounds of cotton were worked up, and



126,000,000 yards of textile fabrics manufactured, of the value of



13,056,659 dollars, produced by a capital of 14,369,719 dollars.



    In the woollen manufacture there were 192 mills, 501 machines,



and 3,612 male and 3,485 female operatives employed, who worked up



10,858,988 pounds of wool, and produced 11,313,426 yards of cloth,



of the value of 10,399,807 dollars on a working capital of



5,770,750 dollars.



    16,689,877 pairs of shoes and boots were manufactured (large



quantities of shoes being exported to the western states), to the



value of 14,642,520 dollars.



    The other branches of manufacture stood in relative proportion



to the above.



    The combined value of the manufactures of the State (deducting



shipbuilding) amounted to over 86 million dollars, with a working



capital of about 60 million dollars.



    The number of operatives (men) was 117,352; and the total



number of inhabitants of the State (in 1837) was 701,331.



    Misery, brutality, and crime are unknown among the



manufacturing population here. On the contrary, among the numerous



male and female factory workers the strictest morality,



cleanliness, and neatness in dress, exist; libraries are



established to furnish them with useful and instructive books; the



work is not exhausting, the food nourishing and good. Most of the



women save a dowry for themselves.(2*)



    This last is evidently the effect of the cheap prices of the



common necessaries of life, light taxation, and an equitable



customs tariff. Let England repeal the restrictions on the import



of agricultural produce, decrease the existing taxes on consumption



by one-half or two-thirds, cover the loss by an income tax, and her



factory workers will be put into the same position.



    No nation has been so misconstrued and so misjudged as respects



its future destiny and its national economy as the United States of



North America, by theorists as well as by practical men. Adam Smith



and J. B. Say had laid it down that the United States were, 'like



Poland,' destined for agriculture. This comparison was not very



flattering for the union of some dozen of new, aspiring, youthful



republics, and the prospect thus held out to them for the future



not very encouraging. The above-mentioned theorists had



demonstrated that Nature herself had singled out the people of the



United States exclusively for agriculture, so long as the richest



arable land was to be had in their country for a mere trifle. Great



was the commendation which had been bestowed upon them for so



willingly acquiescing in Nature's ordinances, and thus supplying



theorists with a beautiful example of the splendid working of the



principle of free trade. The school, however, soon had to



experience the mortification of losing this cogent proof of the



correctness and applicability of their theories in practice, and



had to endure the spectacle of the United States seeking their



nation's welfare in a direction exactly opposed to that of absolute



freedom of trade.



    As this youthful nation had previously been the very apple of



the eye of the schoolmen, so she now became the object of the



heaviest condemnation on the part of the theorists of every nation



in Europe. It was said to be a proof of the slight progress of the



New World in political knowledge, that while the European nations



were striving with the most honest zeal to render universal free



trade possible, while England and France especially were actually



engaged in endeavouring to make important advances towards this



great philanthropic object, the United States of North America were



seeking to promote their national prosperity by a return to that



long-exploded mercantile system which had been clearly refuted by



theory. A country like the United States, in which such measureless



tracts of fruitful land still remained uncultivated and where wages



ruled so high, could not utilise its material wealth and increase



of population to better purpose than in agriculture; and when this



should have reached complete development, then manufactures would



arise in the natural course of events without artificial forcing.



But by an artificial development of manufactures the United States



would injure not only the countries which had long before enjoyed



civilisation, but themselves most of all.



    With the Americans, however, sound common sense, and the



instinct of what was necessary for the nation, were more potent



than a belief in theoretical propositions. The arguments of the



theorists were thoroughly investigated, and strong doubts



entertained of the infallibility of a doctrine which its own



disciples were not willing to put in practice.



    To the argument concerning the still uncultivated tracts of



fruitful land, it was answered that tracts of such land in the



populous, well-cultivated states of the Union which were ripe for



manufacturing industry, were as rare as in Great Britain; that the



surplus population of those states would have to migrate at great



expense to the west, in order to bring tracts of land of that



description into cultivation, thus not only annually causing the



eastern states large losses in material and intellectual resources,



but also, inasmuch as such emigration would transform customers



into competitors, the value of landed property and agricultural



produce would thereby be lessened. It could not be to the advantage



of the Union that all waste land belonging to it should be



cultivated up to the Pacific Ocean before either the population,



the civilisation, or the military power of the old states had been



fully developed. On the contrary, the cultivation of distant virgin



lands could confer no benefit on the eastern states unless they



themselves devoted their attention to manufacturing, and could



exchange their manufactures against the produce of the west. People



went still further: Was not England, it was asked, in much the same



position? Had not England also under her dominion vast tracts of



fertile land still uncultivated in Canada, in Australia, and in



other quarters of the world? Was it not almost as easy for England



to transplant her surplus population to those countries as for the



North Americans to transplant theirs from the shores of the



Atlantic to the banks of the Missouri? If so, what occasion had



England not only continuously to protect her home manufactures, but



to strive to extend them more and more?



    The argument of the school, that with a high rate of wages in



agriculture, manufactures could not succeed by the natural course



of things, but only by being forced like hothouse plants, was found



to be partially well-founded; that is to say, it was applicable



only to those manufactured goods which, being small in bulk and



weight as compared to their value, are produced principally by hand



labour, but was not applicable to goods the price of which is less



influenced by the rate of wages, and as to which the disadvantage



of higher wages can be neutralised by the use of machinery, by



water power as yet unused, by cheap raw materials and food, by



abundance of cheap fuel and building materials, by light taxation



and increased efficiency of labour.



    Besides, the Americans had long ago learnt from experience that



agriculture cannot rise to a high state of prosperity unless the



exchange of agricultural produce for manufactures is guaranteed for



all future time; but that, when the agriculturist lives in America



and the manufacturer in England, that exchange is not unfrequently



interrupted by wars, commercial crises, or foreign tariffs, and



that consequently, if the national well-being is to rest on a



secure foundation, 'the manufacturer,' to use Jefferson's words,



'must come and settle down in close proximity to the



agriculturist.'



    At length the Americans came to realise the truth that it



behoves a great nation not exclusively to set its heart upon the



enjoyment of proximate material advantages; that civilisation and



power -- more important and desirable possessions than mere



material wealth, as Adam Smith himself allows -- can only be



secured and retained by the creation of a manufacturing power of



its own; that a country which feels qualified to take and to



maintain its place amongst the powerful and civilised nations of



the earth must not shrink from any sacrifice in order to secure



such possessions for itself; and that at that time the Atlantic



states were clearly the region marked out for such possessions.



    It was on the shores of the Atlantic that European settlers and



European civilisation first set a firm foot. Here, at the first,



were populous, wealthy, and civilised states created; here was the



cradle and seat of their sea fisheries, coasting trade, and naval



power; here their independence was won and their union founded.



Through these states on the coast the foreign trade of the Union is



carried on; through them it is connected with the civilised world;



through them it acquires the surplus population, material, capital,



and mental powers of Europe; upon the civilisation, power, and



wealth of these sea-board states depend the future civilisation,



power, wealth, and independence of the whole nation and its future



influence over less civilised communities. Suppose that the



population of these Atlantic states decreased instead of growing



larger, that their fisheries, coasting trade, shipping engaged in



foreign trade and foreign trade itself, and, above all, their



general prosperity, were to fall off or remain stationary instead



of progressing, then we should see the resources of civilisation of



the whole nation, the guarantees for its independence and external



power, diminish too in the same degree. It is even conceivable



that, were the whole territory of the United States laid under



cultivation from sea to sea, covered with agricultural states, and



densely populated in the interior, the nation itself might



nevertheless be left in a low grade as respects civilisation,



independence, foreign power, and foreign trade. There are certainly



many nationalities who are in such a position and whose shipping



and naval power are nil, though possessing a numerous inland



population!



    If a power existed that cherished the project of keeping down



the rise of the American people and bringing them under subjection



to itself industrially, commercially, or politically, it could only



succeed in its aim by trying to depopulate the Atlantic states of



the Union and driving all increase of population, capital, and



intellectual power into the interior. By that means it would not



only check the further growth of the nation's naval power, but



might also indulge the hope of getting possession in time of the



principal defensive strategical positions on the Atlantic coast and



at the mouths of the rivers. The means to this end would not be



difficult to imagine; it would only be necessary to hinder the



development of manufacturing power in the Atlantic states and to



insure the acceptance of the principle of absolute freedom of



foreign trade in America. If the Atlantic states do not become



manufacturers, they will not only be unable to keep up their



present degree of civilisation, but they must sink, and sink in



every respect. Without manufactures how are the towns along the



Atlantic coast to prosper? Not by the forwarding of inland produce



to Europe and of English manufactured goods to the interior, for a



very few thousand people would be sufficient to transact this



business. How are the fisheries to prosper? The majority of the



population who have moved inland prefer fresh meat and fresh-water



fish to salted; they require no train oil, or at least but a small



quantity. How is the coasting trade along the Atlantic sea-board to



thrive? As the largest portion of the coast states are peopled by



cultivators of land who produce for themselves all the provisions,



building materials, fuel, &c. which they require, there is nothing



along the coast to sustain a transport trade. How are foreign trade



and shipping to distant places to increase? The country has nothing



to offer but what less cultivated nations possess in



superabundance, and those manufacturing nations to which it sends



its produce encourage their own shipping. How can a naval power



arise when fisheries, the coasting trade, ocean navigation, and



foreign trade decay? How are the Atlantic states to protect them



selves against foreign attacks without a naval power? How is



agriculture even to thrive in these states, when by means of



canals, railways, &c. the produce of the much more fertile and



cheaper tracts of land in the west which require no manure, can be



carried to the east much more cheaply than it could be there



produced upon soil exhausted long ago? How under such circumstances



can civilisation thrive and population increase in the eastern



states, when it is clear that under free trade with England all



increase of population and of agricultural capital must flow to the



west? The present state of Virginia gives but a faint idea of the



condition into which the Atlantic states would be thrown by the



absence of manufactures in the east; for Virginia, like all the



southern states on the Atlantic coast, at present takes a



profitable share in providing the Atlantic states with agricultural



produce.



    All these things bear quite a different complexion, owing to



the existence of a flourishing manufacturing power in the Atlantic



states. Now population, capital, technical skill and intellectual



power, flow into them from all European countries; now the demand



for the manufactured products of the Atlantic states increases



simultaneously with their consumption of the raw materials supplied



by the west. Now the population of these states, their wealth, and



the number and extent of their towns increase in equal proportion



with the cultivation of the western virgin lands; now, on account



of the larger population, and the consequently increased demand for



meat, butter, cheese, milk, garden produce, oleaginous seeds,



fruit, &c., their own agriculture is increasing; now the sea



fisheries are flourishing in consequence of the larger demand for



salted fish and train oil; now quantities of provisions, building



materials, coal, &c. are being conveyed along the coast to furnish



the wants of the manufacturing population; now the manufacturing



population produce a large quantity of commodities for export to



all the nations of the earth, from whence result profitable return



freights; now the nation's naval power increases by means of the



coasting trade, the fisheries, and navigation to distant lands, and



with it the guarantee of national independence and influence over



other nations, particularly over those of South America; now



science and art, civilisation and literature, are improving in the



eastern states, whence they are being diffused amongst the western



states.



    These were the circumstances which induced the United States to



lay restrictions upon the importation of foreign manufactured



goods, and to protect their native manufactures. With what amount



of success this has been done, we have shown in the preceding



pages. That without such a policy a manufacturing power could never



have been maintained successfully in the Atlantic states, we may



learn from their own experience and from the industrial history of



other nations.



    The frequently recurring commercial crises in America have been



very often attributed to these restrictions on importation of



foreign goods, but without reasonable grounds. The earlier as well



as the later experience of North America shows, on the contrary,



that such crises have never been more frequent and destructive than



when commercial intercourse with England was least subject to



restrictions. Commercial crises amongst agricultural nations, who



procure their supplies of manufactured goods from foreign markets,



arise from the disproportion between imports and exports.



Manufacturing nations richer in capital than agricultural states,



and ever anxious to increase the quantity of their exports, deliver



their goods on credit and encourage consumption. In fact, they make



advances upon the coming harvest. But if the harvest turn out so



poor that its value falls greatly below that of the goods



previously consumed; or if the harvest prove so rich that the



supply of produce meets with no adequate demand and falls in price;



while at the same time the markets still continue to be overstocked



with foreign goods -- then a commercial crisis will occur by reason



of the disproportion existing between the means of payment and the



quantity of goods previously consumed, as also by reason of the



disproportion between supply and demand in the markets for produce



and manufactured goods. The operations of foreign and native banks



may increase and promote such a crisis, but they cannot create it.



In a future chapter we shall endeavour more closely to elucidatc



this subject.







NOTES:







1. Statistical Table of Massachusetts for the Year ending April 1,



1837, by J. P. Bigelow, Secretary of the Commonwealth (Boston,



1838). No American state but Massachusetts possesses similar



statistical abstracts. We owe those here referred to, to Governor



Everett, distinguished alike as a scholar, an author, and a



statesman.







2. The American papers of July 1839 report that in the



manufacturing town of Lowell alone there are over a hundred



workwomen who have each over a thousand dollars deposited to their



credit in the savings bank.











Chapter 10







The Teachings of History







    Everywhere and at all times has the well-being of the nation



been in equal proportion to the intelligence, morality, and



industry of its citizens; according to these, wealth has accrued or



been diminished; but industry and thrift, invention and enterprise,



on the part of individuals, have never as yet accomplished aught of



importance where they were not sustained by municipal liberty, by



suitable public institutions and laws, by the State administration



and foreign policy, but above all by the unity and power, of the



nation.



    History everywhere shows us a powerful process of reciprocal



action between the social and the individual powers and conditions.



In the Italian and the Hanseatic cities, in Holland and England, in



France and America, we find the powers of production, and



consequently the wealth of individuals, growing in proportion to



the liberties enjoyed, to the degree of perfection of political and



social institutions, while these, on the other hand, derive



material and stimulus for their further improvement from the



increase of the material wealth and of the productive power of



individuals.



    The real rise of the industry and power of England dates only



from the days of the actual foundation of England's national



freedom, while the industry and power of Venice, of the Hanse



Towns, of the Spanish and Portuguese, decayed concurrently with



their loss of freedom. However industrious, thrifty, inventive, and



intelligent, individual citizens might be, they could not make up



for the lack of free institutions. History also teaches that



individuals derive the greater part of their productive powers from



the social institutions and conditions under which they are placed.



    The influence of liberty, intelligence, and enlightenment over



the power, and therefore over the productive capacity and wealth of



a nation, is exemplified in no respect so clearly as in navigation.



Of all industrial pursuits, navigation most demands energy,



personal courage, enterprise, and endurance; qualifications that



can only flourish in an atmosphere of freedom. In no other calling



do ignorance, superstition, and prejudice, indolence, cowardice,



effeminacy, and weakness produce such disastrous consequences;



nowhere else is a sense of self-reliance so indispensable. Hence



history cannot point to a single example of an enslaved people



taking a prominent part in navigation. The Hindoos, the Chinese,



and the Japanese have ever strictly confined their efforts to canal



and river navigation and the coasting trade. In ancient Egypt



maritime navigation was held in abhorrence, probably because



priests and rulers dreaded lest by means of it the spirit of



freedom and independence should be encouraged. The freest and most



enlightened states of ancient Greece were also the most powerful at



sea; their naval power ceased with their freedom, and however much



history may narrate of the victories of the kings of Macedonia on



land, she is silent as to their victories at sea.



    When were the Romans powerful at sea, and when is nothing more



heard of their fleets? When did Italy lay down the law in the



Mediterranean, and since when has her very coasting trade fallen



into the hands of foreigners? Upon the Spanish navy the Inquisition



had passed sentence of death long ere the English and the Dutch



fleets had executed the decree. With the coming into power of the



mercantile oligarchies in the Hanse Towns, power and the spirit of



enterprise took leave of the Hanseatic League.



    Of the Spanish Netherlands only the maritime provinces achieved



their freedom, whereas those held in subjection by the Inquisition



had even to submit to the closing of their rivers. The English



fleet, victorious over the Dutch in the Channel, now took



possession of the dominion of the seas, which the spirit of freedom



had assigned to England long before; and yet Holland, down to our



own days, has retained a large proportion of her mercantile marine,



whereas that of the Spaniards and the Portuguese is almost



annihilated. In vain were the efforts of a great individual



minister now and then under the despotic kings of France to create



a fleet, for it invariably went again to ruin.



    But how is it that at the present day we witness the growing



strength of French navigation and naval power? Hardly had the



independence of the United States of North America come to life,



when we find the Americans contending with renown against the giant



fleets of the mother country. But what is the position of the



Central and South American nations? So long as their flags wave not



over every sea, but little dependence can be placed upon the



effectiveness of their republican forms of government. Contrast



these with Texas, a territory that has scarcely attained to



political life, and yet already claims its share in the realm of



Neptune.



    But navigation is merely one part of the industrial power of a



nation -- a part which can flourish and attain to importance only



in conjunction with all the other complementary parts. Everywhere



and at all times we see navigation, inland and foreign trade, and



even agriculture itself, flourish only where manufactures have



reached a high state of prosperity. But if freedom be an



indispensable condition for the prosperity of navigation, how much



wore must it be so for the prosperity of the manufacturing power,



for the growth of the entire producing power of a nation? History



contains no record of a rich, commercial, and industrial community



that was not at the same time in the enjoyment of freedom.



    Manufactures everywhere first brought into operation improved



weans of transport, improved river navigation, improved highways,



steam navigation and railways, which constitute the fundamental



elements of improved systems of agriculture and of civilisation.



    History teaches that arts and trades migrated from city to



city, from one country to another. Persecuted and oppressed at



home, they took refuge in cities and in countries where freedom,



protection, and support were assured to them. In this way they



migrated from Greece and Asia to Italy; from Italy to Germany,



Flanders, and Brabant; and from thence to Holland and England.



Everywhere it was want of sense and despotism that drove them away,



and the spirit of freedom that attracted them. But for the folly of



the Continental governments, England would have had difficulty in



attaining supremacy in industry. But does it appear more consistent



with wisdom for us in Germany to wait patiently until other nations



are impolitic enough to drive out their industries and thus compel



them to seek a refuge with us, or that we should, without waiting



for such contingencies, invite them by proffered advantages to



settle down amongst us?



    It is true that experience teaches that the wind bears the seed



from one region to another, and that thus waste moorlands have been



transformed into dense forests; but would it on that account be



wise policy for the forester to wait until the wind in the course



of ages effects this transformation?



    Is it unwise on his part if by sowing and planting he seeks to



attain the same object within a few decades? History tells us that



whole nations have successfully accomplished that which we see the



forester do? Single free cities, or small republics and



confederations of such cities and states, limited in territorial



possessions, of small population and insignificant military power,



but fortified by the energy of youthful freedom and favoured by



geographical position as well as by fortunate circumstances and



opportunities, flourished by means of manufactures and commerce



long before the great monarchies; and by free commercial



intercourse with the latter, by which they exported to them



manufactured goods and imported raw produce in exchange, raised



themselves to a high degree of wealth and power. Thus did Venice,



the Hanse Towns the Belgians and the Dutch.



    Nor was this system of free trade less profitable at first to



the great monarchies themselves, with whom these smaller



communities had commercial intercourse. For, having regard to the



wealth of their natural resources and to their undeveloped social



condition the free importation of foreign manufactured goods and



the exportation of native produce presented the surest and most



effectual means of developing their own powers of production, of



instilling habits of industry into their subjects who were addicted



to idleness and turbulence, of inducing their landowners and nobles



to feel an interest in industry, of arousing the dormant spirit of



enterprise amongst their merchants, and especially of raising their



own civilisation, industry, and power.



    These effects were learned generally by Great Britain from the



trade and manufacturing industry of the Italians, the Hansards, the



Belgians, and the Dutch. But having attained to a certain grade of



development by means of free trade, the great monarchies perceived



that the highest degree of civilisation, power, and wealth can only



be attained by a combination of manufactures and commerce with



agriculture. They perceived that their newly established native



manufactures could never hope to succeed in free competition with



the old and long established manufactures of foreigners; that their



native fisheries and native mercantile marine, the foundations of



their naval power, could never make successful progress without



special privileges; and that the spirit of enterprise of their



native merchants would always be kept down by the overwhelming



reserves of capital, the greater experience and sagacity of the



foreigners. Hence they sought, by a system of restrictions,



privileges, and encouragements, to transplant on to their native



soil the wealth, the talents, and the spirit of enterprise of the



foreigners. This policy was pursued with greater or lesser, with



speedier or more tardy success, just in proportion as the measures



adopted were more or less judiciously adapted to the object in



view, and applied and pursued with more or less energy and



perseverance.



    England, above all other nations, has adopted this policy.



Often interrupted in its execution from the want of intelligence



and self-restraint on the part of her rulers, or owing to internal



commotions and foreign wars, it first assumed the character of a



settled and practically efficient policy under Edward VI,



Elizabeth, and the revolutionary period. For how could the measures



of Edward III work satisfactorily when it was not till under Henry



VI that the law permitted the carriage of corn from one English



county to another, or the shipment of it to foreign parts; when



still under Henry VII and Henry VIII all interest on money, even



discount on bills, was held to be usury, and when it was still



thought at the time that trade might be encouraged by fixing by law



at a low figure the price of woollen goods and the rate of wages,



and that the production of corn could be increased by prohibiting



sheep farming on a large scale?



    And how much sooner would England's woollen manufactures and



maritime trade have reached a high standard of prosperity had not



Henry VIII regarded a rise in the prices of corn as an evil; had



he, instead of driving foreign workmen by wholesale from the



kingdom, sought like his predecessors to augment their number by



encouraging their immigration; and had not Henry VII refused his



sanction to the Act of Navigation as proposed by Parliament?



    In France we see native manufactures, free internal



intercourse, foreign trade, fisheries, navigation, and naval power



-- in a word, all the attributes of a great, mighty, and rich



nation (which it had cost England the persevering efforts of



centuries to acquire) -- called into existence by a great genius



within the space of a few years, as it were by a magician's wand;



and afterwards all of them yet more speedily annihilated by the



iron hand of fanaticism and despotism.



    We see the principle of free trade contending in vain under



unfavourable conditions against restriction powerfully enforced;



the Hanseatic League is ruined, while Holland sinks under the blows



of England and France.



    That a restrictive commercial policy can be operative for good



only so far as it is supported by the progressive civilisation and



free institutions of a nation, we learn from the decay of Venice,



Spain, and Portugal, from the relapse of France in consequence of



the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and from the history of



England, in which country liberty kept pace at all times with the



advance of industry, trade, and national wealth.



    That, on the contrary, a highly advanced state of civilisation,



with or without free institutions, unless supported by a suitable



system of commercial policy, will prove but a poor guarantee for a



nation's economic progress, may be learnt on the one hand from the



history of the North American free states, and on the other from



the experience of Germany.



    Modern Germany, lacking a system of vigorous and united



commercial policy, exposed in her home markets to competition with



a foreign manufacturing power in every way superior to her own,



while excluded at the same time from foreign markets by arbitrary



and often capricious restrictions, and very far indeed from making



that progress in industry to which her degree of culture entitles



her, cannot even maintain her previously acquired position, and is



made a convenience of (like a colony) by that very nation which



centuries ago was worked upon in like manner by the merchants of



Germany, until at last the German states have resolved to secure



their home markets for their own industry, by the adoption of a



united vigorous system of commercial policy.



    The North American free states, who, more than any other nation



before them, are in a position to benefit by freedom of trade, and



influenced even from the very cradle of their independence by the



doctrines of the cosmopolitan school, are striving more than any



other nation to act on that principle. But owing to wars with Great



Britain, we find that nation twice compelled to manufacture at home



the goods which it previously purchased under free trade from other



countries, and twice, after the conclusion of peace, brought to the



brink of ruin by free competition with foreigners, and thereby



admonished of the fact that under the present conditions of the



world every great nation must seek the guarantees of its continued



prosperity and independence, before all other things, in the



independent and uniform development of its own powers and



resources.



    Thus history shows that restrictions are not so much the



inventions of mere speculative minds, as the natural consequences



of the diversity of interests, and of the strivings of nations



after independence or overpowering ascendency, and thus of national



emulation and wars, and therefore that they cannot be dispensed



with until this conflict of national interests shall cease, in



other words until all nations can be united under one and the same



system of law. Thus the question as to whether, and how, the



various nations can be brought into one united federation, and how



the decisions of law can be invoked in the place of military force



to determine the differences which arise between independent



nations, has to be solved concurrently with the question how



universal free trade can be established in the place of separate



national commercial systems.



    The attempts which have been made by single nations to



introduce freedom of trade in face of a nation which is predominant



in industry, wealth, and power, no less than distinguished for an



exclusive tariff system -- as Portugal did in 1703, France in 1786,



North America in 1786 and 1816, Russia from 1815 till 1821, and as



Germany has done for centuries -- go to show us that in this way



the prosperity of individual nations is sacrificed, without benefit



to mankind in general, solely for the enrichment of the predominant



manufacturing and commercial nation. Switzerland (as we hope to



show in the sequel) constitutes an exception, which proves just as



much as it proves little for or against one or the other system.



    Colbert appears to us not to have been the inventor of that



system which the Italians have named after him; for, as we have



seen, it was fully elaborated by the English long before his time.



Colbert only put in practice what France, if she wished to fulfil



her destinies, was bound to carry out sooner or later. If Colbert



is to be blamed at all, it can only be charged against him that he



attempted to put into force under a despotic government a system



which could subsist only after a fundamental reform of the



political conditions. But against this reproach to Colbert's memory



it may very well be argued that, had his system been continued by



wise princes and sagacious ministers, it would in all probability



have removed by means of reforms all those hindrances which stood



in the way of progress in manufactures, agriculture, and trade, as



well as of national freedom; and France would then have undergone



no revolution, but rather, impelled along the path of development



by the reciprocating influences of industry and freedom, she might



for the last century and a half have been successfully competing



with England in manufactures, in the promotion of her internal



trade, in foreign commerce, and in colonisation, as well as in her



fisheries, her navigation, and her naval power.



    Finally, history teaches us how nations which have been endowed



by Nature with all resources which are requisite for the attainment



of the highest grade of wealth and power, may and must -- without



on that account forfeiting the end in view -- modify their systems



according to the measure of their own progress: in the first stage,



adopting free trade with more advanced nations as a means of



raising themselves from a state of barbarism, and of making



advances in agriculture; in the second stage, promoting the growth



of manufactures, fisheries, navigation, and foreign trade by means



of commercial restrictions; and in the last stage, after reaching



the highest degree of wealth and power, by gradually reverting to



the principle of free trade and of unrestricted competition in the



home as well as in foreign markets, that so their agriculturists,



manufacturers, and merchants may be preserved from indolence, and



stimulated to retain the supremacy which they have acquired. In the



first stage, we see Spain, Portugal, and the Kingdom of Naples; in



the second, Germany and the United States of North America; France



apparently stands close upon the boundary line of the last stage;



but Great Britain alone at the present time has actually reached



it.









End

