                                      1835


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                              THE AMBITIOUS GUEST


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   ONE SEPTEMBER NIGHT a family had gathered round their hearth, and


piled it high with the driftwood of mountain streams, the dry cones of


the pine, and the splintered ruins of great trees that had come


crashing down the precipice. Up the chimney roared the fire, and


brightened the room with its broad blaze. The faces of the father


and mother had a sober gladness; the children laughed; the eldest


daughter was the image of Happiness at seventeen; and the aged


grandmother, who sat knitting in the warmest place, was the image of


Happiness grown old. They had found the "herb, heart's-ease," in the


bleakest spot of all New England. This family were situated in the


Notch of the White Hills, where the wind was sharp throughout the


year, and pitilessly cold in the winter- giving their cottage all


its fresh inclemency before it descended on the valley of the Saco.


They dwelt in a cold spot and a dangerous one; for a mountain


towered above their heads, so steep, that the stones would often


rumble down its sides and startle them at midnight.


   The daughter had just uttered some simple jest that filled them all


with mirth, when the wind came through the Notch and seemed to pause


before their cottage- rattling the door, with a sound of wailing and


lamentation, before it passed into the valley. For a moment it


saddened them, though there was nothing unusual in the tones. But


the family were glad again when they perceived that the latch was


lifted by some traveller, whose footsteps had been unheard amid the


dreary blast which heralded his approach, and wailed as he was


entering, and went moaning away from the door.


   Though they dwelt in such a solitude, these people held daily


converse with the world. The romantic pass of the Notch is a great


artery, through which the life-blood of internal commerce is


continually throbbing between Maine, on one side, and the Green


Mountains and the shores of the St. Lawrence, on the other. The


stage-coach always drew up before the door of the cottage. The


way-farer, with no companion but his staff, paused here to exchange


a word, that the sense of loneliness might not utterly overcome him


ere he could pass through the cleft of the mountain, or reach the


first house in the valley. And here the teamster, on his way to


Portland market, would put up for the night; and, if a bachelor, might


sit an hour beyond the usual bedtime, and steal a kiss from the


mountain maid at parting. It was one of those primitive taverns


where the traveller pays only for food and lodging, but meets with a


homely kindness beyond all price. When the footsteps were heard,


therefore, between the outer door and the inner one, the whole


family rose up, grandmother, children, and all, as if about to welcome


someone who belonged to them, and whose fate was linked with theirs.


   The door was opened by a young man. His face at first wore the


melancholy expression, almost despondency, of one who travels a wild


and bleak road, at nightfall and alone, but soon brightened up when he


saw the kindly warmth of his reception. He felt his heart spring


forward to meet them all, from the old woman, who wiped a chair with


her apron, to the little child that held out its arms to him. One


glance and smile placed the stranger on a footing of innocent


familiarity with the eldest daughter.


   "Ah, this fire is the right thing!" cried he; "especially when


there is such a pleasant circle round it. I am quite benumbed; for the


Notch is just like the pipe of a great pair of bellows; it has blown a


terrible blast in my face all the way from Bartlett."


   "Then you are going towards Vermont?" said the master of the house,


as he helped to take a light knapsack off the young man's shoulders.


   "Yes; to Burlington, and far enough beyond," replied he. "I meant


to have been at Ethan Crawford's tonight; but a pedestrian lingers


along such a road as this. It is no matter; for, when I saw this


good fire, and all your cheerful faces, I felt as if you had kindled


it on purpose for me, and were waiting my arrival. So I shall sit down


among you, and make myself at home."


   The frank-hearted stranger had just drawn his chair to the fire


when something like a heavy footstep was heard without, rushing down


the steep side of the mountain, as with long and rapid strides, and


taking such a leap in passing the cottage as to strike the opposite


precipice. The family held their breath, because they knew the


sound, and their guest held his by instinct.


   "The old mountain has thrown a stone at us, for fear we should


forget him," said the landlord, recovering himself. "He sometimes nods


his head and threatens to come down; but we are old neighbors, and


agree together pretty well upon the whole. Besides we have a sure


place of refuge hard by if he should be coming in good earnest."


   Let us now suppose the stranger to have finished his supper of


bear's meat; and, by his natural felicity of manner, to have placed


himself on a footing of kindness with the whole family, so that they


talked as freely together as if he belonged to their mountain brood.


He was of a proud, yet gentle spirit- haughty and reserved among the


rich and great; but ever ready to stoop his head to the lowly


cottage door, and be like a brother or a son at the poor man's


fireside. In the household of the Notch he found warmth and simplicity


of feeling, the pervading intelligence of New England, and a poetry of


native growth, which they had gathered when they little thought of


it from the mountain peaks and chasms, and at the very threshold of


their romantic and dangerous abode. He had travelled far and alone;


his whole life, indeed, had been a solitary path; for, with the


lofty caution of his nature, he had kept himself apart from those


who might otherwise have been his companions. The family, too,


though so kind and hospitable, had that consciousness of unity among


themselves, and separation from the world at large, which, in every


domestic circle, should still keep a holy place where no stranger


may intrude. But this evening a prophetic sympathy impelled the


refined and educated youth to pour out his heart before the simple


mountaineers, and constrained them to answer him with the same free


confidence. And thus it should have been. Is not the kindred of a


common fate a closer tie than that of birth?


   The secret of the young man's character was a high and abstracted


ambition. He could have borne to live an undistinguished life, but not


to be forgotten in the grave. Yearning desire had been transformed


to hope; and hope, long cherished, had become like certainty, that,


obscurely as he journeyed now, a glory was to beam on all his pathway-


though not, perhaps, while he was treading it. But when posterity


should gaze back into the gloom of what was now the present, they


would trace the brightness of his footsteps, brightening as meaner


glories faded, and confess that a gifted one had passed from his


cradle to his tomb with none to recognize him.


   "As yet," cried the stranger- his cheek glowing and his eye


flashing with enthusiasm- "as yet, I have done nothing. Were I to


vanish from the earth tomorrow, none would know so much of me as


you: that a nameless youth came up at nightfall from the valley of the


Saco, and opened his heart to you in the evening, and passed through


the Notch by sunrise, and was seen no more. Not a soul would ask, 'Who


was he? Whither did the wanderer go?' But I cannot die till I have


achieved my destiny. Then, let Death come! I shall have built my


monument!"


   There was a continual flow of natural emotion, gushing forth amid


abstracted reverie, which enabled the family to understand this


young man's sentiments, though so foreign from their own. With quick


sensibility of the ludicrous, he blushed at the ardor into which he


had been betrayed.


   "You laugh at me," said he, taking the eldest daughter's hand,


and laughing himself. "You think my ambition as nonsensical as if I


were to freeze myself to death on the top of Mount Washington, only


that people might spy at me from the country round about. And,


truly, that would be a noble pedestal for a man's statue!"


   "It is better to sit here by this fire," answered the girl,


blushing, "and be comfortable and contented, though nobody thinks


about us."


   "I suppose," said her father, after a fit of musing, "there is


something natural in what the young man says; and if my mind had


been turned that way, I might have felt just the same. It is


strange, wife, how his talk has set my head running on things that are


pretty certain never to come to pass."


   "Perhaps they may," observed the wife. "Is the man thinking what he


will do when he is a widower?"


   "No, no!" cried he, repelling the idea with reproachful kindness.


"When I think of your death, Esther, I think of mine, too. But I was


wishing we had a good farm in Bartlett, or Bethlehem, or Littleton, or


some other township round the White Mountains; but not where they


could tumble on our heads. I should want to stand well with my


neighbors and be called Squire, and sent to General Court for a term


or two; for a plain, honest man may do as much good there as a lawyer.


And when I should be grown quite an old man, and you an old woman,


so as not to be long apart, I might die happy enough in my bed, and


leave you all crying around me. A slate gravestone would suit me as


well as a marble one- with just my name and age, and a verse of a


hymn, and something to let people know that I lived an honest man


and died a Christian."


   "There now!" exclaimed the stranger; "it is our nature to desire


a monument, be it slate or marble, or a pillar of granite, or a


glorious memory in the universal heart of man."


   "We're in a strange way, tonight," said the wife, with tears in her


eyes. "They say it's a sign of something, when folks' minds go


a-wandering so. Hark to the children!"


   They listened accordingly. The younger children had been put to bed


in another room, but with an open door between, so that they could


be heard talking busily among themselves. One and all seemed to have


caught the infection from the fireside circle, and were outvying


each other in wild wishes, and childish projects, of what they would


do when they came to be men and women. At length a little boy, instead


of addressing his brothers and sisters, called out to his mother.


   "I'll tell you what I wish, mother," cried he. "I want you and


father and grandma'm, and all of us, and the stranger too, to start


right away, and go and take a drink out of the basin of the Flume!"


   Nobody could help laughing at the child's notion of leaving a


warm bed, and dragging them from a cheerful fire, to visit the basin


of the Flume- a brook, which tumbles over the precipice, deep within


the Notch. The boy had hardly spoken when a wagon rattled along the


road, and stopped a moment before the door. It appeared to contain two


or three men, who were cheering their hearts with the rough chorus


of a song, which resounded, in broken notes, between the cliffs, while


the singers hesitated whether to continue their journey or put up here


for the night.


   "Father," said the girl, "they are calling you by name."


   But the good man doubted whether they had really called him, and


was unwilling to show himself too solicitous of gain by inviting


people to patronize his house. He therefore did not hurry to the door;


and the lash being soon applied, the travellers plunged into the


Notch, still singing and laughing, though their music and mirth came


back drearily from the heart of the mountain.


   "There, mother!" cried the boy, again. "They'd have given us a ride


to the Flume."


   Again they laughed at the child's pertinacious fancy for a night


ramble. But it happened that a light cloud passed over the


daughter's spirit; she looked gravely into the fire, and drew a breath


that was almost a sigh. It forced its way, in spite of a little


struggle to repress it. Then starting and blushing, she looked quickly


round the circle, as if they had caught a glimpse into her bosom.


The stranger asked what she had been thinking of.


   "Nothing," answered she, with a downcast smile. "Only I felt


lonesome just then."


   "Oh, I have always had a gift of feeling what is in other


people's hearts," said he, half seriously. "Shall I tell the secrets


of yours? For I know what to think when a young girl shivers by a warm


hearth, and complains of lonesomeness at her mother's side. Shall I


put these feelings into words?"


   "They would not be a girl's feelings any longer if they could be


put into words," replied the mountain nymph, laughing, but avoiding


his eye.


   All this was said apart. Perhaps a germ of love was springing in


their hearts, so pure that it might blossom in Paradise, since it


could not be matured on earth; for women worship such gentle dignity


as his; and the proud, contemplative, yet kindly soul is oftenest


captivated by simplicity like hers. But while they spoke softly, and


he was watching the happy sadness, the lightsome shadows, the shy


yearnings of a maiden's nature, the wind through the Notch took a


deeper and drearier sound. It seemed, as the fanciful stranger said,


like the choral strain of the spirits of the blast, who in old


Indian times had their dwelling among these mountains, and made


their heights and recesses a sacred region. There was a wail along the


road, as if a funeral were passing. To chase away the gloom, the


family threw pine branches on their fire, till the dry leaves crackled


and the flame arose, discovering once again a scene of peace and


humble happiness. The light hovered about them fondly, and caressed


them all. There were the little faces of the children, peeping from


their bed apart, and here the father's frame of strength, the mother's


subdued and careful mien, the high-browed youth, the budding girl, and


the good old grandam, still knitting in the warmest place. The aged


woman looked up from her task, and, with fingers ever busy, was the


next to speak.


   "Old folks have their notions," said she, "as well as young ones.


You've been wishing and planning; and letting your heads run on one


thing and another, till you've set my mind a-wandering too. Now what


should an old woman wish for, when she can go but a step or two before


she comes to her grave? Children, it will haunt me night and day


till I tell you."


   "What is it, mother?" cried the husband and wife at once.


   Then the old woman, with an air of mystery which drew the circle


closer round the fire, informed them that she had provided her


grave-clothes some years before- a nice linen shroud, a cap with a


muslin ruff, and everything of a finer sort than she had worn since


her wedding day. But this evening an old superstition had strangely


recurred to her. It used to be said, in her younger days, that if


anything were amiss with a corpse, if only the ruff were not smooth,


or the cap did not set right, the corpse in the coffin and beneath the


clods would strive to put up its cold hands and arrange it. The bare


thought made her nervous.


   "Don't talk so, grandmother!" said the girl, shuddering.


   "Now," continued the old woman, with singular earnestness, yet


smiling strangely at her own folly, "I want one of you, my children-


when your mother is dressed and in the coffin- I want one of you to


hold a looking-glass over my face. Who knows but I may take a


glimpse at myself, and see whether all's right?"


   "Old and young, we dream of graves and monuments," murmured the


stranger youth. "I wonder how mariners feel when the ship is


sinking, and they, unknown and undistinguished, are to be buried


together in the ocean- that wide and nameless sepulchre?"


   For a moment, the old woman's ghastly conception so engrossed the


minds of her hearers that a sound abroad in the night, rising like the


roar of a blast, had grown broad, deep, and terrible, before the fated


group were conscious of it. The house and all within it trembled;


the foundations of the earth seemed to be shaken, as if this awful


sound were the peal of the last trump. Young and old exchanged one


wild glance, and remained an instant, pale, affrighted, without


utterance, or power to move. Then the same shriek burst simultaneously


from all their lips.


   "The Slide! The Slide!"


   The simplest words must intimate, but not portray, the


unutterable horror of the catastrophe. The victims rushed from their


cottage, and sought refuge in what they deemed a safer spot- where, in


contemplation of such an emergency, a sort of barrier had been reared.


Alas! they had quitted their security, and fled right into the pathway


of destruction. Down came the whole side of the mountain, in a


cataract of ruin. Just before it reached the house, the stream broke


into two branches- shivered not a window there, but overwhelmed the


whole vicinity, blocked up the road, and annihilated everything in its


dreadful course. Long ere the thunder of the great Slide had ceased to


roar among the mountains, the mortal agony had been endured, and the


victims were at peace. Their bodies were never found.


   The next morning, the light smoke was seen stealing from the


cottage chimney up the mountain side. Within, the fire was yet


smouldering on the hearth, and the chairs in a circle round it, as


if the inhabitants had but gone forth to view the devastation of the


Slide, and would shortly return, to thank Heaven for their


miraculous escape. All had left separate tokens, by which those who


had known the family were made to shed a tear for each. Who has not


heard their name? The story has been told far and wide, and will


forever be a legend of these mountains. Poets have sung their fate.


   There were circumstances which led some to suppose that a


stranger had been received into the cottage on this awful night, and


had shared the catastrophe of all its inmates. Others denied that


there were sufficient grounds for such a conjecture. Wo for the


high-souled youth, with his dream of Earthly Immortality! His name and


person utterly unknown; his history, his way of life, his plans, a


mystery never to be solved, his death and his existence equally a


doubt! Whose was the agony of that death moment?








                        THE END


.




                                      1837


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                             THE PROPHETIC PICTURES


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   BUT THIS PAINTER!" cried Walter Ludlow, with animation. "He not


only excels in his peculiar art, but possesses vast acquirements in


all other learning and science. He talks Hebrew with Dr. Mather, and


gives lectures in anatomy to Dr. Boylston. In a word, he will meet the


best instructed man among us on his own ground. Moreover, he is a


polished gentleman- a citizen of the world- yes, a true cosmopolite;


for he will speak like a native of each clime and country of the globe


except our own forests, whither he is now going. Nor is all this


what I most admire in him."


   "Indeed!" said Elinor, who had listened with a woman's interest


to the description of such a man. "Yet this is admirable enough."


   "Surely it is," replied her lover, "but far less so than his


natural gift of adapting himself to every variety of character,


insomuch that all men- and all women too, Elinor- shall find a


mirror of themselves in this wonderful painter. But the greatest


wonder is yet to be told."


   "Nay, if he have more wonderful attributes than these," said


Elinor, laughing, "Boston is a perilous abode for the poor


gentleman. Are you telling me of a painter or a wizard?"


   "In truth," answered he, that question might be asked much more


seriously than you suppose. They say that he paints not merely a man's


features, but his mind and heart. He catches the secret sentiments and


passions, and throws them upon the canvas, like sunshine- or


perhaps, in the portraits of dark-souled men, like a gleam of infernal


fire. It is an awful gift," added Walter, lowering his voice from


its tone of enthusiasm. "I shall be almost afraid to sit to him."


   "Walter, are you in earnest?" exclaimed Elinor.


   "For Heaven's sake, dearest Elinor, do not let him paint the look


which you now wear," said her lover, smiling, though rather perplexed.


"There: it is passing away now, but when you spoke you seemed


frightened to death, and very sad besides. What were you thinking of?"


   "Nothing, nothing," answered Elinor hastily. "You paint my face


with your own fantasies. Well, come for me tomorrow, and we will visit


this wonderful artist."


   But when the young man had departed, it cannot be denied that a


remarkable expression was again visible on the fair and youthful


face of his mistress. It was a sad and anxious look, little in


accordance with what should have been the feelings of a maiden on


the eve of wedlock. Yet Walter Ludlow was the chosen of her heart.


   "A look!" said Elinor to herself. "No wonder that it startled


him, if it expressed what I sometimes feel. I know, by my own


experience, how frightful a look may be. But it was all fancy. I


thought nothing of it at the time- I have seen nothing of it since-


I did but dream it."


   And she busied herself about the embroidery of a ruff, in which she


meant that her portrait should be taken.


   The painter, of whom they had been speaking, was not one of those


native artists who, at a later period than this, borrowed their colors


from the Indians, and manufactured their pencils of the furs of wild


beasts. Perhaps, if he could have revoked his life and prearranged his


destiny, he might have chosen to belong to that school without a


master, in the hope of being at least original, since there were no


works of art to imitate nor rules to follow. But he had been born


and educated in Europe. People said that he had studied the grandeur


or beauty of conception, and every touch of the master hand, in all


the most famous pictures, in cabinets and galleries, and on the


walls of churches, till there was nothing more for his powerful mind


to learn. Art could add nothing to its lessons, but Nature might. He


had therefore visited a world whither none of his professional


brethren had preceded him, to feast his eyes on visible images that


were noble and picturesque, yet had never been transferred to


canvas. America was too poor to afford other temptations to an


artist of eminence, though many of the colonial gentry, on the


painter's arrival, had expressed a wish to transmit their lineaments


to posterity by means of his skill. Whenever such proposals were made,


he fixed his piercing eyes on the applicant, and seemed to look him


through and through. If he beheld only a sleek and comfortable visage,


though there were a gold-laced coat to adorn the picture and golden


guineas to pay for it, he civilly rejected the task and the reward.


But if the face were the index of any thing uncommon, in thought,


sentiment, or experience; or if he met a beggar in the street, with


a white beard and a furrowed brow; or if sometimes a child happened to


look up and smile, he would exhaust all the art on them that he denied


to wealth.


   Pictorial skill being so rare in the colonies, the painter became


an object of general curiosity. If few or none could appreciate the


technical merit of his productions, yet there were points, in regard


to which the opinion of the crowd was as valuable as the refined


judgment of the amateur. He watched the effect that each picture


produced on such untutored beholders, and derived profit from their


remarks, while they would as soon have thought of instructing Nature


herself as him who seemed to rival her. Their admiration, it must be


owned, was tinctured with the prejudices of the age and country.


Some deemed it an offence against the Mosaic law, and even a


presumptuous mockery of the Creator, to bring into existence such


lively images of his creatures. Others, frightened at the art which


could raise phantoms, at will, and keep the form of the dead among the


living, were inclined to consider the painter as a magician, or


perhaps the famous Black Man, of old witch times, plotting mischief in


a new guise. These foolish fancies were more than half believed


among the mob. Even in superior circles his character was invested


with a vague awe, partly rising like smoke wreaths from the popular


superstitions, but chiefly caused by the varied knowledge and


talents which he made subservient to his profession.


   Being on the eve of marriage, Walter Ludlow and Elinor were eager


to obtain their portraits, as the first of what, they doubtless hoped,


would be a long series of family pictures. The day after the


conversation above recorded they visited the painter's rooms. A


servant ushered them into an apartment, where, though the artist


himself was not visible, there were personages whom they could


hardly forbear greeting with reverence. They knew, indeed, that the


whole assembly were but pictures, yet felt it impossible to separate


the idea of life and intellect from such striking counterfeits.


Several of the portraits were known to them, either as distinguished


characters of the day or their private acquaintances. There was


Governor Burnett, looking as if he had just received an undutiful


communication from the House of Representatives, and were inditing a


most sharp response. Mr. Cooke hung beside the ruler whom he


opposed, sturdy, and somewhat puritanical, as befitted a popular


leader. The ancient lady of Sir William Phipps eyed them from the


wall, in ruff and farthingale- an imperious old dame, not


unsuspected of witchcraft. John Winslow, then a very young man, wore


the expression of war-like enterprise, which long afterwards made


him a distinguished general. Their personal friends were recognized at


a glance. In most of the pictures, the whole mind and character were


brought out on the countenance, and concentrated into a single look,


so that, to speak paradoxically, the originals hardly resembled


themselves so strikingly as the portraits did.


   Among these modern worthies there were two old bearded Saints,


who had almost vanished into the darkening canvas. There was also a


pale, but unfaded Madonna, who had perhaps been worshipped in Rome,


and now regarded the lovers with such a mild and holy look that they


longed to worship too.


   "How singular a thought," observed Walter Ludlow, "that this


beautiful face has been beautiful for above two hundred years! Oh,


if all beauty would endure so well! Do you not envy her, Elinor?"


   "If earth were heaven, I might," she replied. "But where all things


fade, how miserable to be the one that could not fade!"


   "This dark old St. Peter has a fierce and ugly scowl, saint


though he be," continued Walter. "He troubles me. But the Virgin looks


kindly at us."


   "Yes; but very sorrowfully, methinks," said Elinor.


   The easel stood beneath these three old pictures, sustaining one


that had been recently commenced. After a little inspection, they


began to recognize the features of their own minister, the Rev. Dr.


Colman, growing into shape and life, as it were, out of a cloud.


   "Kind old man!" exclaimed Elinor. "He gazes at me as if he were


about to utter a word of paternal advice."


   "And at me," said Walter, "as if he were about to shake his head


and rebuke me for some suspected iniquity. But so does the original. I


shall never feel quite comfortable under his eye till we stand


before him to be married."


   They now heard a footstep on the floor, and turning, beheld the


painter, who had been some moments in the room, and had listened to


a few of their remarks. He was a middle-aged man, with a countenance


well worthy of his own pencil. Indeed, by the picturesque, though


careless arrangement of his rich dress, and, perhaps, because his soul


dwelt always among painted shapes, he looked somewhat like a


portrait himself. His visitors were sensible of a kindred between


the artist and his works, and felt as if one of the pictures had


stepped from the canvas to salute them.


   Walter Ludlow, who was slightly known to the painter, explained the


object of their visit. While he spoke, a sunbeam was falling athwart


his figure and Elinor's, with so happy an effect that they also seemed


living pictures of youth and beauty, gladdened by bright fortune.


The artist was evidently struck.


   "My easel is occupied for several ensuing days, and my stay in


Boston must be brief," said he, thoughtfully; then, after an observant


glance, he added: "but your wishes shall be gratified, though I


disappoint the Chief Justice and Madam Oliver. I must not lose this


opportunity, for the sake of painting a few ells of broadcloth and


brocade."


   The painter expressed a desire to introduce both their portraits


into one picture, and represent them engaged in some appropriate


action. This plan would have delighted the lovers, but was necessarily


rejected, because so large a space of canvas would have been unfit for


the room which it was intended to decorate. Two half-length


portraits were therefore fixed upon. After they had taken leave,


Walter Ludlow asked Elinor, with a smile, whether she knew what an


influence over their fates the painter was about to acquire.


   "The old women of Boston affirm," continued he, "that after he


has once got possession of a person's face and figure, he may paint


him in any act or situation whatever- and the picture will be


prophetic. Do you believe it?"


   "Not quite," said Elinor, smiling. "Yet if he has such magic, there


is something so gentle in his manner that I am sure he will use it


well."


   It was the painter's choice to proceed with both the portraits at


the same time, assigning as a reason, in the mystical language which


he sometimes used, that the faces threw light upon each other.


Accordingly he gave now a touch to Walter, and now to Elinor, and


the features of one and the other began to start forth so vividly that


it appeared as if his triumphant art would actually disengage them


from the canvas. Amid the rich light and deep shade, they beheld their


phantom selves. But, though the likeness promised to be perfect,


they were not quite satisfied with the expression; it seemed more


vague than in most of the painter's works. He, however, was


satisfied with the prospect of success, and being much interested in


the lovers, employed his leisure moments, unknown to them, in making a


crayon sketch of their two figures. During their sittings, he


engaged them in conversation, and kindled up their faces with


characteristic traits, which, though continually varying, it was his


purpose to combine and fix. At length he announced that at their


next visit both the portraits would be ready for delivery.


   "If my pencil will but be true to my conception, in the few last


touches which I meditate," observed he, "these two pictures will be my


very best performances. Seldom, indeed, has an artist such subjects."


   While speaking, he still bent his penetrative eye upon them, nor


withdrew it till they had reached the bottom of the stairs.


   Nothing, in the whole circle of human vanities, takes stronger hold


of the imagination than this affair of having a portrait painted.


Yet why should it be so? The looking-glass, the polished globes of the


andirons, the mirror-like water, and all other reflecting surfaces,


continually present us with portraits, or rather ghosts, of ourselves,


which we glance at, and straightway forget them. But we forget them


only because they vanish. It is the idea of duration- of earthly


immortality- that gives such a mysterious interest to our own


portraits. Walter and Elinor were not insensible to this feeling,


and hastened to the painter's room, punctually at the appointed


hour, to meet those pictured shapes which were to be their


representatives with posterity. The sunshine flashed after them into


the apartment, but left it somewhat gloomy as they closed the door.


   Their eyes were immediately attracted to their portraits, which


rested against the farthest wall of the room. At the first glance,


through the dim light and the distance, seeing themselves in precisely


their natural attitudes, and with all the air that they recognized


so well, they uttered a simultaneous exclamation of delight.


   "There we stand," cried Walter, enthusiastically, "fixed in


sunshine forever! No dark passions can gather on our faces!"


   "No," said Elinor, more calmly; "no dreary change can sadden us."


   This was said while they were approaching, and had yet gained


only an imperfect view of the pictures. The painter, after saluting


them, busied himself at a table in completing a crayon sketch, leaving


his visitors to form their own judgment as to his perfected labors. At


intervals, he sent a glance from beneath his deep eyebrows, watching


their countenances in profile, with his pencil suspended over the


sketch. They had now stood some moments, each in front of the


other's picture, contemplating it with entranced attention, but


without uttering a word. At length, Walter stepped forward- then back-


viewing Elinor's portrait in various lights, and finally spoke.


   "Is there not a change?" said he, in a doubtful and meditative


tone. "Yes; the perception of it grows more vivid the longer I look.


It is certainly the same picture that I saw yesterday; the dress-


the features- all are the same; and yet something is altered."


   "Is then the picture less like than it was yesterday?" inquired the


painter, now drawing near, with irrepressible interest.


   "The features are perfect, Elinor," answered Walter, "and, at the


first glance, the expression seemed also hers. But, I could fancy that


the portrait has changed countenance, while I have been looking at it.


The eyes are fixed on mine with a strangely sad and anxious


expression. Nay, it is grief and terror! Is this like Elinor?"


   "Compare the living face with the pictured one," said the painter.


   Walter glanced sidelong at his mistress, and started. Motionless


and absorbed- fascinated, as it were- in contemplation of Walter's


portrait, Elinor's face had assumed precisely the expression of


which he had just been complaining. Had she practised for whole


hours before a mirror, she could not have caught the look so


successfully. Had the picture itself been a mirror, it could not


have thrown back her present aspect with stronger and more


melancholy truth. She appeared quite unconscious of the dialogue


between the artist and her lover.


   "Elinor," exclaimed Walter, in amazement, "what change has come


over you?"


   She did not hear him, nor desist from her fixed gaze, till he


seized her hand, and thus attracted her notice; then, with a sudden


tremor, she looked from the picture to the face of the original.


   "Do you see no change in your portrait?" asked she.


   "In mine? None!" replied Walter, examining it. "But let me see!


Yes; there is a slight change- an improvement, I think, in the


picture, though none in the likeness. It has a livelier expression


than yesterday, as if some bright thought were flashing from the eyes,


and about to be uttered from the lips. Now that I have caught the


look, it becomes very decided."


   While he was intent on these observations, Elinor turned to the


painter. She regarded him with grief and awe, and felt that he


repaid her with sympathy and commiseration, though wherefore, she


could but vaguely guess.


   "That look!" whispered she, and shuddered. "How came it there?"


   "Madam," said the painter, sadly, taking her hand, and leading


her apart, "in both these pictures, I have painted what I saw. The


artist- the true artist- must look beneath the exterior. It is his


gift- his proudest, but often a melancholy one- to see the inmost


soul, and, by a power indefinable even to himself, to make it glow


or darken upon the canvas, in glances that express the thought and


sentiment of years. Would that I might convince myself of error in the


present instance!"


   They had now approached the table, on which were heads in chalk,


hands almost as expressive as ordinary faces, ivied church towers,


thatched cottages, old thunder-stricken trees, Oriental and antique


costume, and all such picturesque vagaries of an artist's idle


moments. Turning them over, with seeming carelessness, a crayon sketch


of two figures was disclosed.


   "If I have failed," continued he, "if your heart does not see


itself reflected in your own portrait- if you have no secret cause


to trust my delineation of the other- it is not yet too late to


alter them. I might change the action of these figures too. But


would it influence the event?"


   He directed her notice to the sketch. A thrill ran through Elinor's


frame; a shriek was upon her lips; but she stifled it, with the


self-command that becomes habitual to all who hide thoughts of fear


and anguish within their bosoms. Turning from the table, she perceived


that Walter had advanced near enough to have seen the sketch, though


she could not determine whether it had caught his eye.


   "We will not have the pictures altered," said she, hastily. "If


mine is sad, I shall but look the gayer for the contrast."


   "Be it so," answered the painter, bowing. "May your griefs be


such fanciful ones that only your picture may mourn for them! For your


joys- may they be true and deep, and paint themselves upon this lovely


face till it quite belie my art!"


   After the marriage of Walter and Elinor, the pictures formed the


two most splendid ornaments of their abode. They hung side by side,


separated by a narrow panel, appearing to eye each other constantly,


yet always returning the gaze of the spectator. Travelled gentlemen,


who professed a knowledge of such subjects, reckoned these among the


most admirable specimens of modern portraiture; while common observers


compared them with the originals, feature by feature, and were


rapturous in praise of the likeness. But it was on a third class-


neither travelled connoisseurs nor common observers, but people of


natural sensibility- that the pictures wrought their strongest effect.


Such persons might gaze carelessly at first, but, becoming interested,


would return day after day, and study these painted faces like the


pages of a mystic volume. Walter Ludlow's portrait attracted their


earliest notice. In the absence of himself and his bride, they


sometimes disputed as to the expression which the painter had intended


to throw upon the features; all agreeing that there was a look of


earnest import, though no two explained it alike. There was less


diversity of opinion in regard to Elinor's picture. They differed,


indeed, in their attempts to estimate the nature and depth of the


gloom that dwelt upon her face, but agreed that it was gloom, and


alien from the natural temperament of their youthful friend. A certain


fanciful person announced, as the result of much scrutiny, that both


these pictures were parts of one design, and that the melancholy


strength of feeling, in Elinor's countenance, bore reference to the


more vivid emotion, or, as he termed it, the wild passion, in that


of Walter. Though unskilled in the art, he even began a sketch, in


which the action of the two figures was to correspond with their


mutual expression.


   It was whispered among friends that, day by day, Elinor's face


was assuming a deeper shade of pensiveness, which threatened soon to


render her too true a counterpart of her melancholy picture. Walter,


on the other hand, instead of acquiring the vivid look which the


painter had given him on the canvas, became reserved and downcast,


with no outward flashes of emotion, however it might be smouldering


within. In course of time, Elinor hung a gorgeous curtain of purple


silk, wrought with flowers and fringed with heavy golden tassels,


before the pictures, under pretence that the dust would tarnish


their hues, or the light dim them. It was enough. Her visitors felt,


that the massive folds of the silk must never be withdrawn, nor the


portraits mentioned in her presence.


   Time wore on; and the painter came again. He had been far enough to


the north to see the silver cascade of the Crystal Hills, and to


look over the vast round of cloud and forest from the summit of New


England's loftiest mountain. But he did not profane that scene by


the mockery of his art. He had also lain in a canoe on the bosom of


Lake George, making his soul the mirror of its loveliness and


grandeur, till not a picture in the Vatican was more vivid than his


recollection. He had gone with the Indian hunters to Niagara, and


there, again, had flung his hopeless pencil down the precipice,


feeling that he could as soon paint the roar, as aught else that


goes to make up the wondrous cataract. In truth, it was seldom his


impulse to copy natural scenery, except as a framework for the


delineations of the human form and face, instinct with thought,


passion, or suffering. With store of such his adventurous ramble had


enriched him: the stern dignity of Indian chiefs; the dusky loveliness


of Indian girls; the domestic life of wigwams; the stealthy march; the


battle beneath gloomy pine-trees; the frontier fortress with its


garrison; the anomaly of the old French partisan, bred in courts,


but grown gray in shaggy deserts; such were the scenes and portraits


that he had sketched. The glow of perilous moments; flashes of wild


feeling; struggles of fierce power- love, hate, grief, frenzy; in a


word, all the worn-out heart of the old earth had been revealed to him


under a new form. His portfolio was filled with graphic


illustrations of the volume of his memory, which genius would


transmute into its own substance, and imbue with immortality. He


felt that the deep wisdom in his art, which he had sought so far,


was found.


   But amid stern or lovely nature, in the perils of the forest or its


overwhelming peacefulness, still there had been two phantoms, the


companions of his way. Like all other men around whom an engrossing


purpose wreathes itself, he was insulated from the mass of human kind.


He had no aim- no pleasure- no sympathies- but what were ultimately


connected with his art. Though gentle in manner and upright in


intent and action, he did not possess kindly feelings; his heart was


cold; no living creature could be brought near enough to keep him


warm. For these two beings, however, he had felt, in its greatest


intensity, the sort of interest which always allied him to the


subjects of his pencil. He had pried into their souls with his keenest


insight, and pictured the result upon their features with his utmost


skill, so as barely to fall short of that standard which no genius


ever reached, his own severe conception. He had caught from the


duskiness of the future- at least, so he fancied- a fearful secret,


and had obscurely revealed it on the portraits. So much of himself- of


his imagination and all other powers- had been lavished on the study


of Walter and Elinor, that he almost regarded them as creations of his


own, like the thousands with which he had peopled the realms of


Picture. Therefore did they flit through the twilight of the woods,


hover on the mist of waterfalls, look forth from the mirror of the


lake, nor melt away in the noontide sun. They haunted his pictorial


fancy, not as mockeries of life, nor pale goblins of the dead, but


in the guise of portraits, each with the unalterable expression


which his magic had evoked from the caverns of the soul. He could


not recross the Atlantic till he had again beheld the originals of


those airy pictures.


   "O glorious Art!" thus mused the enthusiastic painter as he trod


the street, thou art the image of the Creator's own. The innumerable


forms, that wander in nothingness, start into being at thy beck. The


dead live again. Thou recallest them to their old scenes, and givest


their gray shadows the lustre of a better life, at once earthly and


immortal. Thou snatchest back the fleeting moments of History. With


thee there is no Past, for, at thy touch, all that is great becomes


forever present; and illustrious men live through long ages, in the


visible performance of the very deeds which made them what they are. O


potent Art! as thou bringest the faintly revealed Past to stand in


that narrow strip of sunlight, which we call Now, canst thou summon


the shrouded Future to meet her there? Have I not achieved it? Am I


not thy Prophet?"


   Thus, with a proud, yet melancholy fervor, did he almost cry aloud,


as he passed through the toilsome street, among people that knew not


of his reveries, nor could understand nor care for them. It is not


good for man to cherish a solitary ambition. Unless there be those


around him by whose example he may regulate himself, his thoughts,


desires, and hopes will become extravagant, and he the semblance,


perhaps the reality, of a madman. Reading other bosoms with an


acuteness almost preternatural, the painter failed to see the disorder


of his own.


   "And this should be the house," said he, looking up and down the


front, before he knocked. "Heaven help my brains! That picture!


Methinks it will never vanish. Whether I look at the windows or the


door, there it is framed within them, painted strongly, and glowing in


the richest tints- the faces of the portraits- the figures and


action of the sketch!"


   He knocked.


   "The Portraits! Are they within?" inquired he of the domestic; then


recollecting himself- "your master and mistress! Are they at home?"


   "They are, sir," said the servant, adding, as he noticed that


picturesque aspect of which the painter could never divest himself,


"and the Portraits too!"


   The guest was admitted into a parlor, communicating by a central


door with an interior room of the same size. As the first apartment


was empty, he passed to the entrance of the second, within which his


eyes were greeted by those living personages, as well as their


pictured representatives, who had long been the objects of so singular


an interest. He involuntarily paused on the threshold.


   They had not perceived his approach. Walter and Elinor were


standing before the portraits, whence the former had just flung back


the rich and voluminous folds of the silken curtain, holding its


golden tassel with one hand, while the other grasped that of his


bride. The pictures, concealed for months, gleamed forth again in


undiminished splendor, appearing to throw a sombre light across the


room, rather than to be disclosed by a borrowed radiance. That of


Elinor had been almost prophetic. A pensiveness, and next a gentle


sorrow, had successively dwelt upon her countenance, deepening, with


the lapse of time, into a quiet anguish. A mixture of affright would


now have made it the very expression of the portrait. Walter's face


was moody and dull, or animated only by fitful flashes, which left a


heavier darkness for their momentary illumination. He looked from


Elinor to her portrait, and thence to his own, in the contemplation of


which he finally stood absorbed.


   The painter seemed to hear the step of Destiny approaching behind


him, on its progress towards its victims. A strange thought darted


into his mind. Was not his own the form in which that destiny had


embodied itself, and he a chief agent of the coming evil which he


had foreshadowed?


   Still, Walter remained silent before the picture, communing with it


as with his own heart, and abandoning himself to the spell of evil


influence that the painter had cast upon the features. Gradually his


eyes kindled; while as Elinor watched the increasing wildness of his


face, her own assumed a look of terror; and when at last he turned


upon her, the resemblance of both to their portraits was complete.


   "Our fate is upon us!" howled Walter. "Die!"


   Drawing a knife, he sustained her, as she was sinking to the


ground, and aimed it at her bosom. In the action, and in the look


and attitude of each, the painter beheld the figures of his sketch.


The picture, with all its tremendous coloring, was finished.


   "Hold, madman!" cried he, sternly.


   He had advanced from the door, and interposed himself between the


wretched beings, with the same sense of power to regulate their


destiny as to alter a scene upon the canvas. He stood like a magician,


controlling the phantoms which he had evoked.


   "What!" muttered Walter Ludlow, as he relapsed from fierce


excitement into silent gloom. "Does Fate impede its own decree?"


   "Wretched lady!" said the painter, "did I not warn you?"


   "You did," replied Elinor, calmly, as her terror gave place to


the quiet grief which it had disturbed. "But- I loved him!"


   Is there not a deep moral in the tale? Could the result of one,


or all our deeds, be shadowed forth and set before us, some would call


it Fate, and hurry onward, others be swept along by their passionate


desires, and none be turned aside by the PROPHETIC PICTURES.








                        THE END


.




                                      1835


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                              YOUNG GOODMAN BROWN


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   YOUNG GOODMAN BROWN came forth at sunset, into the street of


Salem village, but put his head back, after crossing the threshold, to


exchange a parting kiss with his young wife. And Faith, as the wife


was aptly named, thrust her own pretty head into the street, letting


the wind play with the pink ribbons of her cap, while she called to


Goodman Brown.


   "Dearest heart," whispered she, softly and rather sadly, when her


lips were close to his ear, "pr'ythee, put off your journey until


sunrise, and sleep in your own bed tonight. A lone woman is troubled


with such dreams and such thoughts, that she's afeard of herself,


sometimes. Pray, tarry with me this night, dear husband, of all nights


in the year!"


   "My love and my Faith," replied young Goodman Brown, "of all nights


in the year, this one night must I tarry away from thee. My journey,


as thou callest it, forth and back again, must needs be done 'twixt


now and sunrise. What, my sweet, pretty wife, dost thou doubt me


already, and we but three months married!"


   "Then God bless you!" said Faith, with the pink ribbons, "and may


you find all well, when you come back."


   "Amen!" cried Goodman Brown. "Say thy prayers, dear Faith, and go


to bed at dusk, and no harm will come to thee."


   So they parted; and the young man pursued his way, until, being


about to turn the corner by the meeting-house, he looked back and


saw the head of Faith still peeping after him, with a melancholy


air, in spite of her pink ribbons.


   "Poor little Faith!" thought he, for his heart smote him. "What a


wretch am I, to leave her on such an errand! She talks of dreams, too.


Methought, as she spoke, there was trouble in her face, as if a


dream had warned her what work is to be done tonight. But, no, no!


'twould kill her to think it. Well; she's a blessed angel on earth;


and after this one night, I'll cling to her skirts and follow her to


Heaven."


   With this excellent resolve for the future, Goodman Brown felt


himself justified in making more haste on his present evil purpose. He


had taken a dreary road, darkened by all the gloomiest trees of the


forest, which barely stood aside to let the narrow path creep through,


and closed immediately behind. It was all as lonely as could be; and


there is this peculiarity in such a solitude, that the traveller knows


not who may be concealed by the innumerable trunks and the thick


boughs overhead; so that, with lonely footsteps, he may yet be passing


through an unseen multitude.


   "There may be a devilish Indian behind every tree," said Goodman


Brown to himself; and he glanced fearfully behind him, as he added,


"What if the devil himself should be at my very elbow!"


   His head being turned back, he passed a crook of the road, and


looking forward again, beheld the figure of a man, in grave and decent


attire, seated at the foot of an old tree. He arose, at Goodman


Brown's approach, and walked onward, side by side with him.


   "You are late, Goodman Brown," said he. "The clock of the  Old


South was striking, as I came through Boston; and that is full fifteen


minutes agone."


   "Faith kept me back awhile," replied the young man, with a tremor


in his voice, caused by the sudden appearance of his companion, though


not wholly unexpected.


   It was now deep dusk in the forest, and deepest in that part of


it where these two were journeying. As nearly as could be discerned,


the second traveller was about fifty years old, apparently in the same


rank of life as Goodman Brown, and bearing a considerable


resemblance to him, though perhaps more in expression than features.


Still, they might have been taken for father and son. And yet,


though the elder person was as simply clad as the younger, and as


simple in manner too, he had an indescribable air of one who knew


the world, and would not have felt abashed at the governor's


dinner-table, or in King William's court, were it possible that his


affairs should call him thither. But the only thing about him, that


could be fixed upon as remarkable, was his staff, which bore the


likeness of a great black snake, so curiously wrought, that it might


almost be seen to twist and wriggle itself like a living serpent.


This, of course, must have been an ocular deception, assisted by the


uncertain light.


   "Come, Goodman Brown!" cried his fellow-traveller, "this is a


dull pace for the beginning of a journey. Take my staff, if you are so


soon weary.


   "Friend," said the other, exchanging his slow pace for a full stop,


"having kept covenant by meeting thee here, it is my purpose now to


return whence I came. I have scruples, touching the matter thou wot'st


of."


   "Sayest thou so?" replied he of the serpent, smiling apart. "Let us


walk on, nevertheless, reasoning as we go, and if I convince thee not,


thou shalt turn back. We are but a little way in the forest, yet."


   "Too far, too far!" exclaimed the goodman, unconsciously resuming


his walk. "My father never went into the woods on such an errand,


nor his father before him. We have been a race of honest men and


good Christians, since the days of the martyrs. And shall I be the


first of the name of Brown, that ever took this path and kept"-


   "Such company, thou wouldst say," observed the elder person,


interrupting his pause. "Well said, Goodman Brown! I have been as well


acquainted with your family as with ever a one among the Puritans; and


that's no trifle to say. I helped your grandfather, the constable,


when he lashed the Quaker woman so smartly through the streets of


Salem. And it was I that brought your father a pitch-pine knot,


kindled at my own hearth, to set fire to an Indian village, in King


Philip's War. They were my good friends, both; and many a pleasant


walk have we had along this path, and returned merrily after midnight.


I would fain be friends with you, for their sake."


   "If it be as thou sayest," replied Goodman Brown, "I marvel they


never spoke of these matters. Or, verily, I marvel not, seeing that


the least rumor of the sort would have driven them from New England.


We are a people of prayer, and good works to boot, and abide no such


wickedness."


   "Wickedness or not," said the traveller with the twisted staff,


have a very general acquaintance here in New England. The deacons of


many a church have drunk the communion wine with me; the selectmen, of


divers towns, make me their chairman; and a majority of the Great


and General Court are firm supporters of my interest. The governor and


I, too- but these are state-secrets."


   "Can this be so!" cried Goodman Brown, with a stare of amazement at


his undisturbed companion. "Howbeit, I have nothing to do with the


governor and council; they have their own ways, and are no rule for


a simple husbandman like me. But, were I to go on with thee, how


should I meet the eye of that good old man, our minister, at Salem


village? Oh, his voice would make me tremble, both Sabbath-day and


lecture-day!"


   Thus far, the elder traveller had listened with due gravity, but


now burst into a fit of irrepressible mirth, shaking himself so


violently that his snake-like staff actually seemed to wriggle in


sympathy.


   "Ha! ha! ha!" shouted he, again and again; then composing


himself, "Well, go on, Goodman Brown, go on; but, prithee, don't


kill me with laughing!"


   "Well, then, to end the matter at once," said Goodman Brown,


considerably nettled, "there is my wife, Faith. It would break her


dear little heart; and I'd rather break my own!"


   "Nay, if that be the case," answered the other, "e'en go thy


ways, Goodman Brown. I would not, for twenty old women like the one


hobbling before us, that Faith should come to any harm."


   As he spoke, he pointed his staff at a female figure on the path,


in whom Goodman Brown recognized a very pious and exemplary dame,


who had taught him his catechism in youth, and was still his moral and


spiritual adviser, jointly with the minister and Deacon Gookin.


   "A marvel, truly, that Goody Cloyse should be so far in the


wilderness, at night-fall!" said he. "But, with your leave, friend,


I shall take a cut through the woods, until we have left this


Christian woman behind. Being a stranger to you, she might ask whom


I was consorting with, and whither I was going."


   "Be it so," said his fellow-traveller. "Betake you to the woods,


and let me keep the path."


   Accordingly, the young man turned aside, but took care to watch his


companion, who advanced softly along the road, until he had come


within a staff's length of the old dame. She, meanwhile, was making


the best of her way, with singular speed for so aged a woman, and


mumbling some indistinct words, a prayer, doubtless, as she went.


The traveller put forth his staff, and touched her withered neck


with what seemed the serpent's tail.


   "The devil!" screamed the pious old lady.


   "Then Goody Cloyse knows her old friend?" observed the traveller,


confronting her, and leaning on his writhing stick.


   "Ah, forsooth, and is it your worship, indeed?" cried the good


dame. "Yea, truly is it, and in the very image of my old gossip,


Goodman Brown, the grandfather of the silly fellow that now is. But,


would your worship believe it? my broomstick hath strangely


disappeared, stolen, as I suspect, by that unhanged witch, Goody Cory,


and that, too, when I was all anointed with the juice of smallage


and cinque-foil and wolf's-bane"-


   "Mingled with fine wheat and the fat of a new-born babe," said


the shape of old Goodman Brown.


   "Ah, your worship knows the recipe," cried the old lady, cackling


aloud. "So, as I was saying, being all ready for the meeting, and no


horse to ride on, I made up my mind to foot it; for they tell me,


there is a nice young man to be taken into communion tonight. But


now your good worship will lend me your arm, and we shall be there


in a twinkling."


   "That can hardly be," answered her friend. "I may not spare you


my arm, Goody Cloyse, but here is my staff, if you will."


   So saying, he threw it down at her feet, where, perhaps, it assumed


life, being one of the rods which its owner had formerly lent to


Egyptian Magi. Of this fact, however, Goodman Brown could not take


cognizance. He had cast up his eyes in astonishment, and looking


down again, beheld neither Goody Cloyse nor the serpentine staff,


but his fellow-traveller alone, who waited for him as calmly as if


nothing had happened.


   "That old woman taught me my catechism!" said the young man; and


there was a world of meaning in this simple comment.


   They continued to walk onward, while the elder traveller exhorted


his companion to make good speed and persevere in the path,


discoursing so aptly, that his arguments seemed rather to spring up in


the bosom of his auditor, than to be suggested by himself. As they


went, he plucked a branch of maple, to serve for a walking-stick,


and began to strip it of the twigs and little boughs, which were wet


with evening dew. The moment his fingers touched them, they became


strangely withered and dried up, as with a week's sunshine. Thus the


pair proceeded, at a good free pace, until suddenly, in a gloomy


hollow of the road, Goodman Brown sat himself down on the stump of a


tree, and refused to go any farther.


   "Friend," said he, stubbornly, "my mind is made up. Not another


step will I budge on this errand. What if a wretched old woman do


choose to go to the devil, when I thought she was going to Heaven!


Is that any reason why I should quit my dear Faith, and go after her?"


   "You will think better of this by-and-by," said his acquaintance,


composedly. "Sit here and rest yourself awhile; and when you feel like


moving again, there is my staff to help you along."


   Without more words, he threw his companion the maple stick, and was


as speedily out of sight as if he had vanished into the deepening


gloom. The young man sat a few moments by the road-side, applauding


himself greatly, and thinking with how clear a conscience he should


meet the minister, in his morning-walk, nor shrink from the eye of


good old Deacon Gookin. And what calm sleep would be his, that very


night, which was to have been spent so wickedly, but purely and


sweetly now, in the arms of Faith! Amidst these pleasant and


praiseworthy meditations, Goodman Brown heard the tramp of horses


along the road, and deemed it advisable to conceal himself within


the verge of the forest, conscious of the guilty purpose that had


brought him thither, though now so happily turned from it.


   On came the hoof-tramps and the voices of the riders, two grave old


voices, conversing soberly as they drew near. These mingled sounds


appeared to pass along the road, within a few yards of the young man's


hiding-place; but owing, doubtless, to the depth of the gloom, at that


particular spot, neither the travellers nor their steeds were visible.


Though their figures brushed the small boughs by the way-side, it


could not be seen that they intercepted, even for a moment, the


faint gleam from the strip of bright sky, athwart which they must have


passed. Goodman Brown alternately crouched and stood on tip-toe,


pulling aside the branches, and thrusting forth his head as far as


he durst, without discerning so much as a shadow. It vexed him the


more, because he could have sworn, were such a thing possible, that he


recognized the voices of the minister and Deacon Gookin, jogging along


quietly, as they were wont to do, when bound to some ordination or


ecclesiastical council. While yet within hearing, one of the riders


stopped to pluck a switch.


   "Of the two, reverend Sir," said the voice like the deacon's, I had


rather miss an ordination-dinner than tonight's meeting. They tell


me that some of our community are to be here from Falmouth and beyond,


and others from Connecticut and Rhode Island; besides several of the


Indian powows, who, after their fashion, know almost as much


deviltry as the best of us. Moreover, there is a goodly young woman to


be taken into communion."


   "Mighty well, Deacon Gookin!" replied the solemn old tones of the


minister. "Spur up, or we shall be late. Nothing can be done, you


know, until I get on the ground."


   The hoofs clattered again, and the voices, talking so strangely


in the empty air, passed on through the forest, where no church had


ever been gathered, nor solitary Christian prayed. Whither, then,


could these holy men be journeying, so deep into the heathen


wilderness? Young Goodman Brown caught hold of a tree, for support,


being ready to sink down on the ground, faint and overburthened with


the heavy sickness of his heart. He looked up to the sky, doubting


whether there really was a Heaven above him. Yet, there was the blue


arch, and the stars brightening in it.


   "With Heaven above, and Faith below, I will yet stand firm


against the devil!" cried Goodman Brown.


   While he still gazed upward, into the deep arch of the firmament,


and had lifted his hands to pray, a cloud, though no wind was


stirring, hurried across the zenith, and hid the brightening stars.


The blue sky was still visible, except directly overhead, where this


black mass of cloud was sweeping swiftly northward. Aloft in the


air, as if from the depths of the cloud, came a confused and


doubtful sound of voices. Once, the listener fancied that he could


distinguish the accent of townspeople of his own, men and women,


both pious and ungodly, many of whom he had met at the


communion-table, and had seen others rioting at the tavern. The next


moment, so indistinct were the sounds, he doubted whether he had heard


aught but the murmur of the old forest, whispering without a wind.


Then came a stronger swell of those familiar tones, heard daily in the


sunshine, at Salem village, but never, until now, from a cloud of


night. There was one voice, of a young woman, uttering lamentations,


yet with an uncertain sorrow, and entreating for some favor, which,


perhaps, it would grieve her to obtain. And all the unseen


multitude, both saints and sinners, seemed to encourage her onward.


   "Faith!" shouted Goodman Brown, in a voice of agony and


desperation; and the echoes of the forest mocked him, crying-


"Faith! Faith!" as if bewildered wretches were seeking her, all


through the wilderness.


   The cry of grief, rage, and terror, was yet piercing the night,


when the unhappy husband held his breath for a response. There was a


scream, drowned immediately in a louder murmur of voices, fading


into far-off laughter, as the dark cloud swept away, leaving the clear


and silent sky above Goodman Brown. But something fluttered lightly


down through the air, and caught on the branch of a tree. The young


man seized it, and beheld a pink ribbon.


   "My Faith is gone!" cried he, after one stupefied moment. "There is


no good on earth; and sin is but a name. Come, devil! for to thee is


this world given."


   And maddened with despair, so that he laughed loud and long, did


Goodman Brown grasp his staff and set forth again, at such a rate,


that he seemed to fly along the forest-path, rather than to walk or


run. The road grew wilder and drearier, and more faintly traced, and


vanished at length, leaving him in the heart of the dark wilderness,


still rushing onward, with the instinct that guides mortal man to


evil. The whole forest was peopled with frightful sounds; the creaking


of the trees, the howling of wild beasts, and the yell of Indians;


while, sometimes the wind tolled like a distant church-bell, and


sometimes gave a broad roar around the traveller, as if all Nature


were laughing him to scorn. But he was himself the chief horror of the


scene, and shrank not from its other horrors.


   "Ha! ha! ha!" roared Goodman Brown, when the wind laughed at him.


"Let us hear which will laugh loudest! Think not to frighten me with


your deviltry! Come witch, come wizard, come Indian powow, come


devil himself! and here comes Goodman Brown. You may as well fear


him as he fear you!"


   In truth, all through the haunted forest, there could be nothing


more frightful than the figure of Goodman Brown. On he flew, among the


black pines, brandishing his staff with frenzied gestures, now


giving vent to an inspiration of horrid blasphemy, and now shouting


forth such laughter, as set all the echoes of the forest laughing like


demons around him. The fiend in his own shape is less hideous, than


when he rages in the breast of man. Thus sped the demoniac on his


course, until, quivering among the trees, he saw a red light before


him, as when the felled trunks and branches of a clearing have been


set on fire, and throw up their lurid blaze against the sky, at the


hour of midnight. He paused, in a lull of the tempest that had


driven him onward, and heard the swell of what seemed a hymn,


rolling solemnly from a distance, with the weight of many voices. He


knew the tune; it was a familiar one in the choir of the village


meetinghouse. The verse died heavily away, and was lengthened by a


chorus, not of human voices, but of all the sounds of the benighted


wilderness, pealing in awful harmony together. Goodman Brown cried


out; and his cry was lost to his own ear, by its unison with the cry


of the desert.


   In the interval of silence, he stole forward, until the light


glared full upon his eyes. At one extremity of an open space, hemmed


in by the dark wall of the forest, arose a rock, bearing some rude,


natural resemblance either to an altar or a pulpit, and surrounded


by four blazing pines, their tops aflame, their stems untouched,


like candles at an evening meeting. The mass of foliage, that had


overgrown the summit of the rock, was all on fire, blazing high into


the night, and fitfully illuminating the whole field. Each pendant


twig and leafy festoon was in a blaze. As the red light arose and


fell, a numerous congregation alternately shone forth, then


disappeared in shadow, and again grew, as it were, out of the


darkness, peopling the heart of the solitary woods at once.


   "A grave and dark-clad company!" quoth Goodman Brown.


   In truth, they were such. Among them, quivering to and fro, between


gloom and splendor, appeared faces that would be seen, next day, at


the council-board of the province, and others which, Sabbath after


Sabbath, looked devoutly heavenward, and benignantly over the


crowded pews, from the holiest pulpits in the land. Some affirm,


that the lady of the governor was there. At least, there were high


dames well known to her, and wives of honored husbands, and widows,


a great multitude, and ancient maidens, all of excellent repute, and


fair young girls, who trembled lest their mothers should espy them.


Either the sudden gleams of light, flashing over the obscure field,


bedazzled Goodman Brown, or he recognized a score of the


church-members of Salem village, famous for their especial sanctity.


Good old Deacon Gookin had arrived, and waited at the skirts of that


venerable saint, his reverend pastor. But, irreverently consorting


with these grave, reputable, and pious people, these elders of the


church, these chaste dames and dewy virgins, there were men of


dissolute lives and women of spotted fame, wretches given over to


all mean and filthy vice, and suspected even of horrid crimes. It


was strange to see, that the good shrank not from the wicked, nor were


the sinners abashed by the saints. Scattered, also, among their


palefaced enemies, were the Indian priests, or powows, who had often


scared their native forest with more hideous incantations than any


known to English witchcraft.


   "But, where is Faith?" thought Goodman Brown; and, as hope came


into his heart, he trembled.


   Another verse of the hymn arose, a slow and mournful strain, such


as the pious love, but joined to words which expressed all that our


nature can conceive of sin, and darkly hinted at far more.


Unfathomable to mere mortals is the lore of fiends. Verse after


verse was sung, and still the chorus of the desert swelled between,


like the deepest tone of a mighty organ. And, with the final peal of


that dreadful anthem, there came a sound, as if the roaring wind,


the rushing streams, the howling beasts, and every other voice of


the unconverted wilderness, were mingling and according with the voice


of guilty man, in homage to the prince of all. The four blazing


pines threw up a loftier flame, and obscurely discovered shapes and


visages of horror on the smoke-wreaths, above the impious assembly. At


the same moment, the fire on the rock shot redly forth, and formed a


glowing arch above its base, where now appeared a figure. With


reverence be it spoken, the apparition bore no slight similitude, both


in garb and manner, to some grave divine of the New England churches.


   "Bring forth the converts!" cried a voice, that echoed through


the field and rolled into the forest.


   At the word, Goodman Brown stepped forth from the shadow of the


trees, and approached the congregation, with whom he felt a loathful


brotherhood, by the sympathy of all that was wicked in his heart. He


could have well nigh sworn, that the shape of his own dead father


beckoned him to advance, looking downward from a smoke-wreath, while a


woman, with dim features of despair, threw out her hand to warn him


back. Was it his mother? But he had no power to retreat one step,


nor to resist, even in thought, when the minister and good old


Deacon Gookin seized his arms, and led him to the blazing rock.


Thither came also the slender form of a veiled female, led between


Goody Cloyse, that pious teacher of the catechism, and Martha Carrier,


who had received the devil's promise to be queen of hell. A rampant


hag was she! And there stood the proselytes, beneath the canopy of


fire.


   "Welcome, my children," said the dark figure, "to the communion


of your race! Ye have found, thus young, your nature and your destiny.


My children, look behind you!"


   They turned; and flashing forth, as it were, in a sheet of flame,


the fiend-worshippers were seen; the smile of welcome gleamed darkly


on every visage.


   "There," resumed the sable form, "are all whom ye have reverenced


from youth. Ye deemed them holier than yourselves, and shrank from


your own sin, contrasting it with their lives of righteousness, and


prayerful aspirations heavenward. Yet, here are they all, in my


worshipping assembly! This night it shall be granted you to know their


secret deeds; how hoary-bearded elders of the church have whispered


wanton words to the young maids of their households; how many a woman,


eager for widow's weeds, has given her husband a drink at bed-time,


and let him sleep his last sleep in her bosom; how beardless youth


have made haste to inherit their father's wealth; and how fair


damsels- blush not, sweet ones- have dug little graves in the


garden, and bidden me, the sole guest, to an infant's funeral. By


the sympathy of your human hearts for sin, ye shall scent out all


the places-whether in church, bed-chamber, street, field, or forest-


where crime has been committed, and shall exult to behold the whole


earth one stain of guilt, one mighty blood-spot. Far more than this!


It shall be yours to penetrate, in every bosom, the deep mystery of


sin, the fountain of all wicked arts, and which inexhaustibly supplies


more evil impulses than human power- than my power at its utmost-


can make manifest in deeds. And now, my children, look upon each


other."


   They did so; and, by the blaze of the hell-kindled torches, the


wretched man beheld his Faith, and the wife her husband, trembling


before that unhallowed altar.


   "Lo! there ye stand, my children," said the figure, in a deep and


solemn tone, almost sad, with its despairing awfulness, as if his once


angelic nature could yet mourn for our miserable race. "Depending upon


one another's hearts, ye had still hoped that virtue were not all a


dream! Now are ye undeceived! Evil is the nature of mankind. Evil must


be your only happiness. Welcome, again, my children, to the


communion of your race!"


   "Welcome!" repeated the fiend-worshippers, in one cry of despair


and triumph.


   And there they stood, the only pair, as it seemed, who were yet


hesitating on the verge of wickedness, in this dark world. A basin was


hollowed, naturally, in the rock. Did it contain water, reddened by


the lurid light? or was it blood? or, perchance, a liquid flame?


Herein did the Shape of Evil dip his hand, and prepare to lay the mark


of baptism upon their foreheads, that they might be partakers of the


mystery of sin, more conscious of the secret guilt of others, both


in deed and thought, than they could now be of their own. The


husband cast one look at his pale wife, and Faith at him. What


polluted wretches would the next glance show them to each other,


shuddering alike at what they disclosed and what they saw!


   "Faith! Faith!" cried the husband. "Look up to Heaven, and resist


the Wicked One!"


   Whether Faith obeyed, he knew not. Hardly had he spoken, when he


found himself amid calm night and solitude, listening to a roar of the


wind, which died heavily away through the forest. He staggered against


the rock, and felt it chill and damp, while a hanging twig, that had


been all on fire, besprinkled his cheek with the coldest dew.


   The next morning, young Goodman Brown came slowly into the street


of Salem village, staring around him like a bewildered man. The good


old minister was taking a walk along the graveyard, to get an appetite


for breakfast and meditate his sermon, and bestowed a blessing, as


he passed, on Goodman Brown. He shrank from the venerable saint, as if


to avoid an anathema. Old Deacon Gookin was at domestic worship, and


the holy words of his prayer were heard through the open window. "What


God doth the wizard pray to?" quoth Goodman Brown. Goody Cloyse,


that excellent old Christian, stood in the early sunshine, at her


own lattice, catechising a little girl, who had brought her a pint


of morning's milk. Goodman Brown snatched away the child, as from


the grasp of the fiend himself. Turning the corner by the


meeting-house, he spied the head of Faith, with the pink ribbons,


gazing anxiously forth, and bursting into such joy at sight of him,


that she skipt along the street, and almost kissed her husband


before the whole village. But Goodman Brown looked sternly and sadly


into her face, and passed on without a greeting.


   Had Goodman Brown fallen asleep in the forest, and only dreamed a


wild dream of a witch-meeting?


   Be it so, if you will. But, alas! it was a dream of evil omen for


young Goodman Brown. A stern, a sad, a darkly meditative, a


distrustful, if not a desperate man, did he become, from the night


of that fearful dream. On the Sabbath-day, when the congregation


were singing a holy psalm, he could not listen, because an anthem of


sin rushed loudly upon his ear, and drowned all the blessed strain.


When the minister spoke from the pulpit, with power and fervid


eloquence, and with his hand on the open Bible, of the sacred truths


of our religion, and of saint-like lives and triumphant deaths, and of


future bliss or misery unutterable, then did Goodman Brown turn


pale, dreading lest the roof should thunder down upon the gray


blasphemer and his hearers. Often, awaking suddenly at midnight, he


shrank from the bosom of Faith, and at morning or eventide, when the


family knelt down at prayer, he scowled, and muttered to himself,


and gazed sternly at his wife, and turned away. And when he had


lived long, and was borne to his grave, a hoary corpse, followed by


Faith, an aged woman, and children and grandchildren, a goodly


procession, besides neighbors, not a few, they carved no hopeful verse


upon his tombstone; for his dying hour was gloom.


                        THE END


.




                                      1836


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                               THE WEDDING KNELL


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   THERE IS A CERTAIN CHURCH in the city of New York which I have


always regarded with peculiar interest, on account of a marriage there


solemnized, under very singular circumstances, in my grandmother's


girlhood. That venerable lady chanced to be a spectator of the


scene, and ever after made it her favorite narrative. Whether the


edifice now standing on the same site be the identical one to which


she referred, I am not antiquarian enough to know; nor would it be


worth while to correct myself, perhaps, of an agreeable error, by


reading the date of its erection on the tablet over the door. It is


a stately church, surrounded by an inclosure of the loveliest green,


within which appear urns, pillars, obelisks, and other forms of


monumental marble, the tributes of private affection, or more splendid


memorials of historic dust. With such a place, though the tumult of


the city rolls beneath its tower, one would be willing to connect some


legendary interest.


   The marriage might be considered as the result of an early


engagement, though there had been two intermediate weddings on the


lady's part, and forty years of celibacy on that of the gentleman.


At sixty-five, Mr. Ellenwood was a shy, but not quite a secluded


man; selfish, like all men who brood over their own hearts, yet


manifesting on rare occasions a vein of generous sentiment; a


scholar throughout life, though always an indolent one, because his


studies had no definite object, either of public advantage or personal


ambition; a gentleman, high bred and fastidiously delicate, yet


sometimes requiring a considerable relaxation, in his behalf, of the


common rules of society.


   In truth, there were so many anomalies in his character, and though


shrinking with diseased sensibility from public notice, it had been


his fatality so often to become the topic of the day, by some wild


eccentricity of conduct, that people searched his lineage for an


hereditary taint of insanity. But there was no need of this. His


caprices had their origin in a mind that lacked the support of an


engrossing purpose, and in feelings that preyed upon themselves for


want of other food. If he were mad, it was the consequence, and not


the cause, of an aimless and abortive life.


   The widow was as complete a contrast to her third bridegroom, in


everything but age, as can well be conceived. Compelled to


relinquish her first engagement, she had been united to a man of twice


her own years, to whom she became an exemplary wife, and by whose


death she was left in possession of a splendid fortune. A southern


gentleman, considerably younger than herself, succeeded to her hand,


and carried her to Charleston, where, after many uncomfortable


years, she found herself again a widow. It would have been singular,


if any uncommon delicacy of feeling had survived through such a life


as Mrs. Dabney's; it could not but be crushed and killed by her


early disappointment, the cold duty of her first marriage, the


dislocation of the heart's principles, consequent on a second union


and the unkindness of her southern husband, which had inevitably


driven her to connect the idea of his death with that of her


comfort. To be brief, she was that wisest, but unloveliest, variety of


woman, a philosopher, bearing troubles of the heart with equanimity,


dispensing with all that should have been her happiness, and making


the best of what remained. Sage in most matters, the widow was perhaps


the more amiable for the one frailty that made her ridiculous. Being


childless, she could not remain beautiful by proxy, in the person of a


daughter; she therefore refused to grow old and ugly, on any


consideration; she struggled with Time, and held fast her roses in


spite of him, till the venerable thief appeared to have relinquished


the spoil, as not worth the trouble of acquiring it.


   The approaching marriage of this woman of the world with such an


unworldly man as Mr. Ellenwood was announced soon after Mrs.


Dabney's return to her native city. Superficial observers, and


deeper ones, seemed to concur in supposing that the lady must have


borne no inactive part in arranging the affair; there were


considerations of expediency which she would be far more likely to


appreciate than Mr. Ellenwood; and there was just the specious phantom


of sentiment and romance in this late union of two early lovers


which sometimes makes a fool of a woman who has lost her true feelings


among the accidents of life. All the wonder was, how the gentleman,


with his lack of worldly wisdom and agonizing consciousness of


ridicule, could have been induced to take a measure at once so prudent


and so laughable. But while people talked the wedding-day arrived. The


ceremony was to be solemnized according to the Episcopalian forms, and


in open church, with a degree of publicity that attracted many


spectators, who occupied the front seats of the galleries, and the


pews near the altar and along the broad aisle. It had been arranged,


or possibly it was the custom of the day, that the parties should


proceed separately to church. By some accident the bridegroom was a


little less punctual than the widow and her bridal attendants; with


whose arrival, after this tedious, but necessary preface, the action


of our tale may be said to commence.


   The clumsy wheels of several old-fashioned coaches were heard,


and the gentlemen and ladies composing the bridal party came through


the church door with the sudden and gladsome effect of a burst of


sunshine. The whole group, except the principal figure, was made up of


youth and gayety. As they streamed up the broad aisle, while the


pews and pillars seemed to brighten on either side, their steps were


as buoyant as if they mistook the church for a ball-room, and were


ready to dance hand in hand to the altar. So brilliant was the


spectacle that few took notice of a singular phenomenon that had


marked its entrance. At the moment when the bride's foot touched the


threshold the bell swung heavily in the tower above her, and sent


forth its deepest knell. The vibrations died away and returned with


prolonged solemnity, as she entered the body of the church.


   "Good heavens! what an omen," whispered a young lady to her lover.


   "On my honor," replied the gentleman, "I believe the bell has the


good taste to toll of its own accord. What has she to do with


weddings? If you, dearest Julia, were approaching the altar the bell


would ring out its merriest peal. It has only a funeral knell for


her."


   The bride and most of her company had been too much occupied with


the bustle of entrance to hear the first boding stroke of the bell, or


at least to reflect on the singularity of such a welcome to the altar.


They therefore continued to advance with undiminished gayety. The


gorgeous dresses of the time, the crimson velvet coats, the gold-laced


hats, the hoop petticoats, the silk, satin, brocade, and embroidery,


the buckles, canes, and swords, all displayed to the best advantage on


persons suited to such finery, made the group appear more like a


bright-colored picture than anything real. But by what perversity of


taste had the artist represented his principal figure as so wrinkled


and decayed, while yet he had decked her out in the brightest splendor


of attire, as if the loveliest maiden had suddenly withered into


age, and become a moral to the beautiful around her! On they went,


however, and had glittered along about a third of the aisle, when


another stroke of the bell seemed to fill the church with a visible


gloom, dimming and obscuring the bright pageant, till it shone forth


again as from a mist.


   This time the party wavered, stopped, and huddled closer


together, while a slight scream was heard from some of the ladies, and


a confused whispering among the gentlemen. Thus tossing to and fro,


they might have been fancifully compared to a splendid bunch of


flowers, suddenly shaken by a puff of wind, which threatened to


scatter the leaves of an old, brown, withered rose, on the same


stalk with two dewy buds- such being the emblem of the widow between


her fair young bridemaids. But her heroism was admirable. She had


started with an irrepressible shudder, as if the stroke of the bell


had fallen directly on her heart; then, recovering herself, while


her attendants were yet in dismay, she took the lead, and paced calmly


up the aisle. The bell continued to swing, strike, and vibrate, with


the same doleful regularity as when a corpse is on its way to the


tomb.


   "My young friends here have their nerves a little shaken," said the


widow, with a smile, to the clergyman at the altar. "But so many


weddings have been ushered in with the merriest peal of the bells, and


yet turned out unhappily, that I shall hope for better fortune under


such different auspices."


   "Madam," answered the rector, in great perplexity, "this strange


occurrence brings to my mind a marriage sermon of the famous Bishop


Taylor, wherein he mingles so many thoughts of mortality and future


wo, that, to speak somewhat after his own rich style, he seems to hang


the bridal chamber in black, and cut the wedding garment out of a


coffin pall. And it has been the custom of divers nations to infuse


something of sadness into their marriage ceremonies, so to keep


death in mind while contracting that engagement which is life's


chiefest business. Thus we may draw a sad but profitable moral from


this funeral knell."


   But, though the clergyman might have given his moral even a


keener point, he did not fail to dispatch an attendant to inquire into


the mystery, and stop those sounds, so dismally appropriate to such


a marriage. A brief space elapsed, during which the silence was broken


only by whispers, and a few suppressed titterings, among the wedding


party and the spectators, who, after the first shock, were disposed to


draw an ill-natured merriment from the affair. The young have less


charity for aged follies than the old for those of youth. The


widow's glance was observed to wander, for an instant, towards a


window of the church, as if searching for the time-worn marble that


she had dedicated to her first husband; then her eyelids dropped


over their faded orbs, and her thoughts were drawn irresistibly to


another grave. Two buried men, with a voice at her ear, and a cry afar


off, were calling her to lie down beside them. Perhaps, with momentary


truth of feeling, she thought how much happier had been her fate,


if, after years of bliss, the bell were now tolling for her funeral,


and she were followed to the grave by the old affection of her


earliest lover, long her husband. But why had she returned to him,


when their cold hearts shrank from each other's embrace?


   Still the death-bell tolled so mournfully, that the sunshine seemed


to fade in the air. A whisper, communicated from those who stood


nearest the windows, now spread through the church; a hearse, with a


train of several coaches, was creeping along the street, conveying


some dead man to the churchyard, while the bride awaited a living


one at the altar. Immediately after, the footsteps of the bridegroom


and his friends were heard at the door. The widow looked down the


aisle, and clinched the arm of one of her bridemaids in her bony


hand with such unconscious violence, that the fair girl trembled.


   "You frighten me, my dear madam!" cried she. "For Heaven's sake,


what is the matter?"


   "Nothing, my dear, nothing," said the widow; then, whispering close


to her ear, "There is a foolish fancy that I cannot get rid of. I am


expecting my bridegroom to come into the church, with my first two


husbands for groomsmen!"


   "Look, look!" screamed the bridemaid. "What is here? The funeral!"


   As she spoke, a dark procession paced into the church. First came


an old man and woman, like chief mourners at a funeral, attired from


head to foot in the deepest black, all but their pale features and


hoary hair; he leaning on a staff, and supporting her decrepit form


with his nerveless arm. Behind appeared another, and another pair,


as aged, as black, and mournful as the first. As they drew near, the


widow recognized in every face some trait of former friends, long


forgotten, but now returning, as if from their old graves, to warn her


to prepare a shroud; or, with purpose almost as unwelcome, to


exhibit their wrinkles and infirmity, and claim her as their companion


by the tokens of her own decay. Many a merry night had she danced with


them, in youth. And now, in joyless age, she felt that some withered


partner should request her hand, and all unite, in a dance of death,


to the music of the funeral bell.


   While these aged mourners were passing up the aisle, it was


observed that, from pew to pew, the spectators shuddered with


irrepressible awe, as some object, hitherto concealed by the


intervening figures, came full in sight. Many turned away their faces;


others kept a fixed and rigid stare; and a young girl giggled


hysterically, and fainted with the laughter on her lips. When the


spectral procession approached the altar, each couple separated, and


slowly diverged, till, in the centre, appeared a form, that had been


worthily ushered in with all this gloomy pomp, the death knell, and


the funeral. It was the bridegroom in his shroud!


   No garb but that of the grave could have befitted such a


deathlike aspect; the eyes, indeed, had the wild gleam of a sepulchral


lamp; all else was fixed in the stern calmness which old men wear in


the coffin. The corpse stood motionless, but addressed the widow in


accents that seemed to melt into the clang of the bell, which fell


heavily on the air while he spoke.


   "Come, my bride!" said those pale lips, "the hearse is ready. The


sexton stands waiting for us at the door of the tomb. Let us be


married; and then to our coffins!"


   How shall the widow's horror be represented? It gave her the


ghastliness of a dead man's bride. Her youthful friends stood apart,


shuddering at the mourners, the shrouded bridegroom, and herself;


the whole scene expressed, by the strongest imagery, the vain struggle


of the gilded vanities of this world, when opposed to age,


infirmity, sorrow, and death. The awestruck silence was first broken


by the clergyman.


   "Mr. Ellenwood," said he, soothingly, yet with somewhat of


authority, "you are not well. Your mind has been agitated by the


unusual circumstances in which you are placed. The ceremony must be


deferred. As an old friend, let me entreat you to return home."


   "Home! yes, but not without my bride," answered he, in the same


hollow accents. "You deem this mockery; perhaps madness. Had I


bedizened my aged and broken frame with scarlet and embroidery- had


I forced my withered lips to smile at my dead heart- that might have


been mockery, or madness. But now, let young and old declare, which of


us has come hither without a wedding garment, the bridegroom or the


bride!"


   He stepped forward at a ghostly pace, and stood beside the widow,


contrasting the awful simplicity of his shroud with the glare and


glitter in which she had arrayed herself for this unhappy scene. None,


that beheld them, could deny the terrible strength of the moral


which his disordered intellect had contrived to draw.


   "Cruel! cruel!" groaned the heart-stricken bride.


   "Cruel!" repeated he; then, losing his deathlike composure in a


wild bitterness: "Heaven judge which of us has been cruel to the


other! In youth you deprived me of my happiness, my hopes, my aims;


you took away all the substance of my life, and made it a dream


without reality enough even to grieve at- with only a pervading gloom,


through which I walked wearily, and cared not whither. But after forty


years, when I have built my tomb, and would not give up the thought of


resting there- no, not for such a life as we once pictured- you call


me to the altar. At your summons I am here. But other husbands have


enjoyed your youth, your beauty, your warmth of heart, and all that


could be termed your life. What is there for me but your decay and


death? And therefore I have bidden these funeral friends, and bespoken


the sexton's deepest knell, and am come, in my shroud, to wed you,


as with a burial service, that we may join our hands at the door of


the sepulchre, and enter it together."


   It was not frenzy; it was not merely the drunkenness of strong


emotion, in a heart unused to it, that now wrought upon the bride. The


stern lesson of the day had done its work; her worldliness was gone.


She seized the bridegroom's hand.


   "Yes!" cried she. "Let us wed, even at the door of the sepulchre!


My life is gone in vanity and emptiness. But at its close there is one


true feeling. It has made me what I was in youth; it makes me worthy


of you. Time is no more for both of us. Let us wed for Eternity!"


   With a long and deep regard, the bridegroom looked into her eyes,


while a tear was gathering in his own. How strange that gush of


human feeling from the frozen bosom of a corpse! He wiped away the


tears even with his shroud.


   "Beloved of my youth," said he, "I have been wild. The despair of


my whole lifetime had returned at once, and maddened me. Forgive;


and be forgiven. Yes; it is evening with us now; and we have


realized none of our morning dreams of happiness. But let us join


our hands before the altar, as lovers whom adverse circumstances


have separated through life, yet who meet again as they are leaving


it, and find their earthly affection changed into something holy as


religion. And what is Time, to the married of Eternity?"


   Amid the tears of many, and a swell of exalted sentiment, in


those who felt aright, was solemnized the union of two immortal souls.


The train of withered mourners, the hoary bridegroom in his shroud,


the pale features of the aged bride, and the death-bell tolling


through the whole, till its deep voice overpowered the marriage words,


all marked the funeral of earthly hopes. But as the ceremony


proceeded, the organ, as if stirred by the sympathies of this


impressive scene, poured forth an anthem, first mingling with the


dismal knell, then rising to a loftier strain, till the soul looked


down upon its wo. And when the awful rite was finished, and with


cold hand in cold hand, the Married of Eternity withdrew, the


organ's peal of solemn triumph drowned the Wedding Knell.








                        THE END


.




                                      1844


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                             RAPPACCINI'S DAUGHTER


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   A YOUNG MAN, named Giovanni Guasconti, came, very long ago, from


the more southern region of Italy, to pursue his studies at the


University of Padua. Giovanni, who had but a scanty supply of gold


ducats in his pocket, took lodgings in a high and gloomy chamber of an


old edifice, which looked not unworthy to have been the palace of a


Paduan noble, and which, in fact, exhibited over its entrance the


armorial bearings of a family long since extinct. The young


stranger, who was not unstudied in the great poem of his country,


recollected that one of the ancestors of this family, and perhaps an


occupant of this very mansion, had been pictured by Dante as a


partaker of the immortal agonies of his Inferno. These reminiscences


and associations, together with the tendency to heart-break natural to


a young man for the first time out of his native sphere, caused


Giovanni to sigh heavily, as he looked around the desolate and


ill-furnished apartment.


   "Holy Virgin, signor," cried old dame Lisabetta, who, won by the


youth's remarkable beauty of person, was kindly endeavoring to give


the chamber a habitable air, "what a sigh was that to come out of a


young man's heart! Do you find this old mansion gloomy? For the love


of heaven, then, put your head out of the window, and you will see


as bright sunshine as you have left in Naples."


   Guasconti mechanically did as the old woman advised, but could


not quite agree with her that the Lombard sunshine was as cheerful


as that of southern Italy. Such as it was, however, it fell upon a


garden beneath the window, and expended its fostering influences on


a variety of plants, which seemed to have been cultivated with


exceeding care.


   "Does this garden belong to the house?" asked Giovanni.


   "Heaven forbid, signor! unless it were fruitful of better


potherbs than any that grow there now," answered old Lisabetta. "No:


that garden is cultivated by the own hands of Signor Giacomo


Rappaccini, the famous Doctor, who, I warrant him, has been heard of


as far as Naples. It is said he distils these plants into medicines


that are as potent as a charm. Oftentimes you may see the signor


Doctor at work, and perchance the signora his daughter, too, gathering


the strange flowers that grow in the garden."


   The old woman had now done what she could for the aspect of the


chamber, and, commending the young man to the protection of the


saints, took her departure.


   Giovanni still found no better occupation than to look down into


the garden beneath his window. From its appearance, he judged it to be


one of those botanic gardens, which were of earlier date in Padua than


elsewhere in Italy, or in the world. Or, not improbably, it might once


have been the pleasure-place of an opulent family; for there was the


ruin of a marble fountain in the centre, sculptured with rare art, but


so wofully shattered that it was impossible to trace the original


design from the chaos of remaining fragments. The water, however,


continued to gush and sparkle into the sunbeams as cheerfully as ever.


A little gurgling sound ascended to the young man's window, and made


him feel as if a fountain were an immortal spirit, that sun its song


unceasingly, and without heeding the vicissitudes around it; while one


century embodied it in marble, and another scattered the perishable


garniture on the soil. All about the pool into which the water


subsided, grew various plants, that seemed to require a plentiful


supply of moisture for the nourishment of gigantic leaves, and, in


some instances, flowers gorgeously magnificent. There was one shrub in


particular, set in a marble vase in the midst of the pool, that bore a


profusion of purple blossoms, each of which had the lustre and


richness of a gem; and the whole together made a show so resplendent


that it seemed enough to illuminate the garden, even had there been no


sunshine. Every portion of the soil was peopled with plants and herbs,


which, if less beautiful, still bore tokens of assiduous care; as if


all had their individual virtues, known to the scientific mind that


fostered them. Some were placed in urns, rich with old carving, and


others in common garden-pots; some crept serpent-like along the


ground, or climbed on high, using whatever means of ascent was offered


them. One plant had wreathed itself round a statue of Vertumnus, which


was thus quite veiled and shrouded in a drapery of hanging foliage, so


happily arranged that it might have served a sculptor for a study.


   While Giovanni stood at the window, he heard a rustling behind a


screen of leaves, and became aware that a person was at work in the


garden. His figure soon emerged into view, and showed itself to be


that of no common laborer, but a tall, emaciated, sallow, and sickly


looking man, dressed in a scholar's garb of black. He was beyond the


middle term of life, with gray hair, a thin gray beard, and a face


singularly marked with intellect and cultivation, but which could


never, even in his more youthful days, have expressed much warmth of


heart.


   Nothing could exceed the intentness with which this scientific


gardener examined every shrub which grew in his path; it seemed as


if he was looking into their inmost nature, making observations in


regard to their creative essence, and discovering why one leaf grew in


this shape, and another in that, and wherefore such and such flowers


differed among themselves in hue and perfume. Nevertheless, in spite


of the deep intelligence on his part, there was no approach to


intimacy between himself and these vegetable existences. On the


contrary, he avoided their actual touch, or the direct inhaling of


their odors, with a caution that impressed Giovanni most disagreeably;


for the man's demeanor was that of one walking among malignant


influences, such as savage beasts, or deadly snakes, or evil


spirits, which, should he allow them one moment of license, would


wreak upon him some terrible fatality. It was strangely frightful to


the young man's imagination, to see this air of insecurity in a person


cultivating a garden, that most simple and innocent of human toils,


and which had been alike the joy and labor of the unfallen parents


of the race. Was this garden, then, the Eden of the present world? and


this man, with such a perception of harm in what his own hands


caused to grow, was he the Adam?


   The distrustful gardener, while plucking away the dead leaves or


pruning the too luxuriant growth of the shrubs, defended his hands


with a pair of thick gloves. Nor were these his only armor. When, in


his walk through the garden, he came to the magnificent plant that


hung its purple gems beside the marble fountain, he placed a kind of


mask over his mouth and nostrils, as if all this beauty did but


conceal a deadlier malice. But finding his task still too dangerous,


he drew back, removed the mask, and called loudly, but in the infirm


voice of a person affected with inward disease:


   "Beatrice! Beatrice!"


   "Here am I, my father! What would you?" cried a rich and youthful


voice from the window of the opposite house; a voice as rich as a


tropical sunset, and which made Giovanni, though he knew not why,


think of deep hues of purple or crimson, and of perfumes heavily


delectable- "Are you in the garden?"


   "Yes, Beatrice," answered the gardener, "and I need your help."


   Soon there emerged from under a sculptured portal the figure of a


young girl, arrayed with as much richness of taste as the most


splendid of the flowers, beautiful as the day, and with a bloom so


deep and vivid that one shade more would have been too much. She


looked redundant with life, health, and energy; all of which


attributes were bound down and compressed, as it were, and girdled


tensely, in their luxuriance, by her virgin zone. Yet Giovanni's fancy


must have grown morbid, while he looked down into the garden; for


the impression which the fair stranger made upon him was as if here


were another flower, the human sister of those vegetable ones, as


beautiful as they- more beautiful than the richest of them- but


still to be touched only with a glove, nor to be approached without


a mask. As Beatrice came down the garden-path, it was observable


that she handled and inhaled the odor of several of the plants,


which her father had most sedulously avoided.


   "Here, Beatrice," said the latter- "see how many needful offices


require to be done to our chief treasure. Yet, shattered as I am, my


life might pay the penalty of approaching it so closely as


circumstances demand. Henceforth, I fear, this plant must be consigned


to your sole charge."


   "And gladly will I undertake it," cried again the rich tones of the


young lady, as she bent towards the magnificent plant, and opened


her arms as if to embrace it. "Yes, my sister, my splendor, it shall


be Beatrice's task to nurse and serve thee; and thou shalt reward


her with thy kisses and perfume breath, which to her is as the


breath of life!"


   Then, with all the tenderness in her manner that was so


strikingly expressed in her words, she busied herself with such


attentions as the plant seemed to require; and Giovanni, at his


lofty window, rubbed his eyes, and almost doubted whether it were a


girl tending her favorite flower, or one sister performing the


duties of affection to another. The scene soon terminated. Whether


Doctor Rappaccini had finished his labors in the garden, or that his


watchful eye had caught the stranger's face, he now took his


daughter's arm and retired. Night was already closing in; oppressive


exhalations seemed to proceed from the plants, and steal upward past


the open window; and Giovanni, closing the lattice, went to his couch,


and dreamed of a rich flower and beautiful girl. Flower and maiden


were different and yet the same, and fraught with some strange peril


in either shape.


   But there is an influence in the light of morning that tends to


rectify whatever errors of fancy, or even of judgment, we may have


incurred during the sun's decline, or among the shadows of the


night, or in the less wholesome glow of moonshine. Giovanni's first


movement on starting from sleep, was to throw open the window, and


gaze down into the garden which his dreams had made so fertile of


mysteries. He was surprised, and a little ashamed, to find how real


and matter-of-fact an affair it proved to be, in the first rays of the


sun, which gilded the dew-drops that hung upon leaf and blossom,


and, while giving a brighter beauty to each rare flower, brought


everything within the limits of ordinary experience. The young man


rejoiced, that, in the heart of the barren city, he had the


privilege of overlooking this spot of lovely and luxuriant vegetation.


It would serve, he said to himself, as a symbolic language, to keep


him in communion with nature. Neither the sickly and thought-worn


Doctor Giacomo Rappaccini, it is true, nor his brilliant daughter,


were now visible; so that Giovanni could not determine how much of the


singularity which he attributed to both, was due to their own


qualities, and how much to his wonder-working fancy. But he was


inclined to take a most rational view of the whole matter.


   In the course of the day, he paid his respects to Signor Pietro


Baglioni, Professor of Medicine in the University, a physician of


eminent repute, to whom Giovanni had brought a letter of introduction.


The Professor was an elderly personage, apparently of genial nature,


and habits that might almost be called jovial; he kept the young man


to dinner, and made himself very agreeable by the freedom and


liveliness of his conversation, especially when warmed by a flask or


two of Tuscan wine. Giovanni, conceiving that men of science,


inhabitants of the same city, must needs be on familiar terms with one


another, took an opportunity to mention the name of Doctor Rappaccini.


But the Professor did not respond with so much cordiality as he had


anticipated.


   "Ill would it become a teacher of the divine art of medicine," said


Professor Pietro Baglioni, in answer to a question of Giovanni, "to


withhold due and well-considered praise of a physician so eminently


skilled as Rappaccini. But, on the other hand, I should answer it


but scantily to my conscience, were I to permit a worthy youth like


yourself, Signor Giovanni, the son of an ancient friend, to imbibe


erroneous ideas respecting a man who might hereafter chance to hold


your life and death in his hands. The truth is, our worshipful


Doctor Rappaccini has as much science as any member of the faculty-


with perhaps one single exception- in Padua, or all Italy. But there


are certain grave objections to his professional character."


   "And what are they?" asked the young man.


   "Has my friend Giovanni any disease of body or heart, that he is so


inquisitive about physicians?" said the Professor, with a smile.


"But as for Rappaccini, it is said of him- and I, who know the man


well, can answer for its truth- that he cares infinitely more for


science than for mankind. His patients are interesting to him only


as subjects for some new experiment. He would sacrifice human life,


his own among the rest, or whatever else was dearest to him, for the


sake of adding so much as a grain of mustard-seed to the great heap of


his accumulated knowledge."


   "Methinks he is an awful man, indeed," remarked Guasconti, mentally


recalling the cold and purely intellectual aspect of Rappaccini.


"And yet, worshipful Professor, is it not a noble spirit? Are there


many men capable of so spiritual a love of science?"


   "God forbid," answered the Professor, somewhat testily- "at


least, unless they take sounder views of the healing art than those


adopted by Rappaccini. It is his theory, that all medicinal virtues


are comprised within those substances which we term vegetable poisons.


These he cultivates with his own hands, and is said even to have


produced new varieties of poison, more horribly deleterious than


Nature, without the assistance of this learned person, would ever have


plagued the world with. That the Signor Doctor does less mischief than


might be expected, with such dangerous substances, is undeniable.


Now and then, it must be owned, he has effected-or seemed to effect- a


marvellous cure. But, to tell you my private mind, Signor Giovanni, he


should receive little credit for such instances of success- they being


probably the work of chance- but should be held strictly accountable


for his failures, which may justly be considered his own work."


   The youth might have taken Baglioni's opinions with many grains


of allowance, had he known that there was a professional warfare of


long continuance between him and Doctor Rappaccini, in which the


latter was generally thought to have gained the advantage. If the


reader be inclined to judge for himself, we refer him to certain


black-letter tracts on both sides, preserved in the medical department


of the University of Padua.


   "I know not, most learned Professor," returned Giovanni, after


musing on what had been said of Rappaccini's exclusive zeal for


science- "I know not how dearly this physician may love his art; but


surely there is one object more dear to him. He has a daughter."


   "Aha!" cried the Professor with a laugh. "So now our friend


Giovanni's secret is out. You have heard of this daughter, whom all


the young men in Padua are wild about, though not half a dozen have


ever had the good hap to see her face. I know little of the Signora


Beatrice, save that Rappaccini is said to have instructed her deeply


in his science, and that, young and beautiful as fame reports her, she


is already qualified to fill a professor's chair. Perchance her father


destines her for mine! Other absurd rumors there be, not worth talking


about, or listening to. So now, Signor Giovanni, drink off your


glass of Lacryma."


   Guasconti returned to his lodgings somewhat heated with the wine he


had quaffed, and which caused his brain to swim with strange fantasies


in reference to Doctor Rappaccini and the beautiful Beatrice. On his


way, happening to pass by a florist's, he bought a fresh bouquet of


flowers.


   Ascending to his chamber, he seated himself near the window, but


within the shadow thrown by the depth of the wall, so that he could


look down into the garden with little risk of being discovered. All


beneath his eye was a solitude. The strange plants were basking in the


sunshine, and now and then nodding gently to one another, as if in


acknowledgment of sympathy and kindred. In the midst, by the shattered


fountain, grew the magnificent shrub, with its purple gems


clustering all over it; they glowed in the air, and gleamed back again


out of the depths of the pool, which thus seemed to overflow with


colored radiance from the rich reflection that was steeped in it. At


first, as we have said, the garden was a solitude. Soon, however- as


Giovanni had half hoped, half feared, would be the case- a figure


appeared beneath the antique sculptured portal, and came down


between the rows of plants, inhaling their various perfumes, as if she


were one of those beings of old classic fable, that lived upon sweet


odors. On again beholding Beatrice, the young man was even startled to


perceive how much her beauty exceeded his recollection of it; so


brilliant, so vivid in its character, that she glowed amid the


sunlight, and, as Giovanni whispered to himself, positively


illuminated the more shadowy intervals of the garden path. Her face


being now more revealed than on the former occasion, he was struck


by its expression of simplicity and sweetness; qualities that had


not entered into his idea of her character, and which made him ask


anew, what manner of mortal she might be. Nor did he fail again to


observe, or imagine, an analogy between the beautiful girl and the


gorgeous shrub that hung its gem-like flowers over the fountain; a


resemblance which Beatrice seemed to have indulged a fantastic humor


in heightening, both by the arrangement of her dress and the selection


of its hues.


   Approaching the shrub, she threw open her arms, as with a


passionate ardor, and drew its branches into an intimate embrace; so


intimate, that her features were hidden in its leafy bosom, and her


glistening ringlets all intermingled with the flowers.


   "Give me thy breath, my sister," exclaimed Beatrice; "for I am


faint with common air! And give me this flower of thine, which I


separate with gentlest fingers from the stem, and place it close


beside my heart."


   With these words, the beautiful daughter of Rappaccini plucked


one of the richest blossoms of the shrub, and was about to fasten it


in her bosom. But now, unless Giovanni's draughts of wine had


bewildered his senses, a singular incident occurred. A small orange


colored reptile, of the lizard or chameleon species, chanced to be


creeping along the path, just at the feet of Beatrice. It appeared


to Giovanni- but, at the distance from which he gazed, he could


scarcely have seen anything so minute- it appeared to him, however,


that a drop or two of moisture from the broken stem of the flower


descended upon the lizard's head. For an instant, the reptile


contorted itself violently, and then lay motionless in the sunshine.


Beatrice observed this remarkable phenomenon, and crossed herself,


sadly, but without surprise; nor did she therefore hesitate to arrange


the fatal flower in her bosom. There it blushed, and almost


glimmered with the dazzling effect of a precious stone, adding to


her dress and aspect the one appropriate charm, which nothing else


in the world could have supplied. But Giovanni, out of the shadow of


his window, bent forward and shrank back, and murmured and trembled.


   "Am I awake? Have I my senses?" said he to himself. "What is this


being? beautiful, shall I call her? or inexpressibly terrible?"


   Beatrice now strayed carelessly through the garden, approaching


closer beneath Giovanni's window, so that he was compelled to thrust


his head quite out of its concealment, in order to gratify the intense


and painful curiosity which she excited. At this moment, there came


a beautiful insect over the garden wall; it had perhaps wandered


through the city and found no flowers nor verdure among those


antique haunts of men, until the heavy perfumes of Doctor Rappaccini's


shrubs had lured it from afar. Without alighting on the flowers,


this winged brightness seemed to be attracted by Beatrice, and


lingered in the air and fluttered about her head. Now here it could


not be but that Giovanni Guasconti's eyes deceived him. Be that as


it might, he fancied that while Beatrice was gazing at the insect with


childish delight, it grew faint and fell at her feet! its bright wings


shivered! it was dead! from no cause that he could discern, unless


it were the atmosphere of her breath. Again Beatrice crossed herself


and sighed heavily, as she bent over the dead insect.


   An impulsive movement of Giovanni drew her eyes to the window.


There she beheld the beautiful head of the young man- rather a Grecian


than an Italian head, with fair, regular features, and a glistening of


gold among his ringlets- gazing down upon her like a being that


hovered in mid-air. Scarcely knowing what he did, Giovanni threw


down the bouquet which he had hitherto held in his hand.


   "Signora," said he, "there are pure and healthful flowers. Wear


them for the sake of Giovanni Guasconti!"


   "Thanks, Signor," replied Beatrice, with her rich voice that came


forth as it were like a gush of music; and with a mirthful


expression half childish and half woman-like. "I accept your gift, and


would fain recompense it with this precious purple flower; but if I


toss it into the air, it will not reach you. So Signor Guasconti


must even content himself with my thanks."


   She lifted the bouquet from the ground, and then as if inwardly


ashamed at having stepped aside from her maidenly reserve to respond


to a stranger's greeting, passed swiftly homeward through the


garden. But, few as the moments were, it seemed to Giovanni when she


was on the point of vanishing beneath the sculptured portal, that


his beautiful bouquet was already beginning to wither in her grasp. It


was an idle thought; there could be no possibility of distinguishing a


faded flower from a fresh one, at so great a distance.


   For many days after this incident, the young man avoided the window


that looked into Doctor Rappaccini's garden, as if something ugly


and monstrous would have blasted his eye-sight, had he been betrayed


into a glance. He felt conscious of having put himself, to a certain


extent, within the influence of an unintelligible power, by the


communication which he had opened with Beatrice. The wisest course


would have been, if his heart were in any real danger, to quit his


lodgings and Padua itself, at once; the next wiser, to have accustomed


himself, as far as possible, to the familiar and day-light view of


Beatrice; thus bringing her rigidly and systematically within the


limits of ordinary experience. Least of all, while avoiding her sight,


should Giovanni have remained so near this extraordinary being, that


the proximity and possibility even of intercourse, should give a


kind of substance and reality to the wild vagaries which his


imagination ran riot continually in producing. Guasconti had not a


deep heart- or at all events, its depths were not sounded now- but


he had a quick fancy, and an ardent southern temperament, which rose


every instant to a higher fever-pitch. Whether or no Beatrice


possessed those terrible attributes- that fatal breath- the affinity


with those so beautiful and deadly flowers- which were indicated by


what Giovanni had witnessed, she had at least instilled a fierce and


subtle poison into his system. It was not love, although her rich


beauty was a madness to him; nor horror, even while he fancied her


spirit to be imbued with the same baneful essence that seemed to


pervade her physical frame; but a wild offspring of both love and


horror that had each parent in it, and burned like one and shivered


like the other. Giovanni knew not what to dread; still less did he


know what to hope; yet hope and dread kept a continual warfare in


his breast, alternately vanquishing one another and starting up afresh


to renew the contest. Blessed are all simple emotions, be they dark or


bright! It is the lurid intermixture of the two that produces the


illuminating blaze of the infernal regions.


   Sometimes he endeavored to assuage the fever of his spirit by a


rapid walk through the streets of Padua, or beyond its gates; his


footsteps kept time with the throbbings of his brain, so that the walk


was apt to accelerate itself to a race. One day, he found himself


arrested; his arm was seized by a portly personage who had turned back


on recognizing the young man, and expended much breath in overtaking


him.


   "Signor Giovanni! stay, my young friend!" cried he. "Have you


forgotten me? That might well be the case, if I were as much altered


as yourself."


   It was Baglioni, whom Giovanni had avoided, ever since their


first meeting, from a doubt that the Professor's sagacity would look


too deeply into his secrets. Endeavoring to recover himself, he stared


forth wildly from his inner world into the outer one, and spoke like a


man in a dream.


   "Yes; I am Giovanni Guasconti. You are Professor Pietro Baglioni.


Now let me pass!"


   "Not yet- not yet, Signor Giovanni Guasconti," said the


Professor, smiling, but at the same time scrutinizing the youth with


an earnest glance. "What, did I grow up side by side with your father,


and shall his son pass me like a stranger, in these old streets of


Padua? Stand still, Signor Giovanni; for we must have a word or two


before we part."


   "Speedily, then, most worshipful Professor, speedily!" said


Giovanni, with feverish impatience. "Does not your worship see that


I am in haste?"


   Now, while he was speaking, there came a man in black along the


street, stooping and moving feebly, like a person in inferior


health. His face was all overspread with a most sickly and sallow hue,


but yet so pervaded with an expression of piercing and active


intellect, that an observer might easily have overlooked the merely


physical attributes, and have seen only this wonderful energy. As he


passed, this person exchanged a cold and distant salutation with


Baglioni, but fixed his eyes upon Giovanni with an intentness that


seemed to bring out whatever was within him worthy of notice.


Nevertheless, there was a peculiar quietness in the look, as if taking


merely a speculative, not a human interest, in the young man.


   "It is Doctor Rappaccini!" whispered the Professor, when the


stranger had passed. "Has he ever seen your face before?"


   "Not that I know," answered Giovanni, starting at the name.


   "He has seen you! he must have seen you!" said Baglioni, hastily.


"For some purpose or other, this man of science is making a study of


you. I know that look of his! It is the same that coldly illuminates


his face, as he bends over a bird, a mouse, or a butterfly, which,


in pursuance of some experiment, he has killed by the perfume of a


flower- a look as deep as nature itself, but without nature's warmth


of love. Signor Giovanni, I will stake my life upon it, you are the


subject of one of Rappaccini's experiments!"


   "Will you make a fool of me?" cried Giovanni, passionately.


"That, Signor Professor, were an untoward experiment."


   "Patience, patience!" replied the imperturbable Professor. "I


tell thee, my poor Giovanni, that Rappaccini has a scientific interest


in thee. Thou hast fallen into fearful hands! And the Signora


Beatrice? What part does she act in this mystery?"


   But Guasconti, finding Baglioni's pertinacity intolerable, here


broke away, and was gone before the Professor could again seize his


arm. He looked after the young man intently, and shook his head.


   "This must not be," said Baglioni to himself. "The youth is the son


of my old friend, and shall not come to any harm from which the arcana


of medical science can preserve him. Besides, it is too insufferable


an impertinence in Rappaccini thus to snatch the lad out of my own


hands, as I may say, and make use of him for his infernal experiments.


This daughter of his! It shall be looked to. Perchance, most learned


Rappaccini, I may foil you where you little dream of it!"


   Meanwhile, Giovanni had pursued a circuitous route, and at length


found himself at the door of his lodgings. As he crossed the


threshold, he was met by old Lisabetta, who smirked and smiled, and


was evidently desirous to attract his attention; vainly, however, as


the ebullition of his feelings had momentarily subsided into a cold


and dull vacuity. He turned his eyes full upon the withered face


that was puckering itself into a smile, but seemed to behold it not.


The old dame, therefore, laid her grasp upon his cloak.


   "Signor! Signor!" whispered she, still with a smile over the


whole breadth of her visage, so that it looked not unlike a


grotesque carving in wood, darkened by centuries- "Listen, Signor!


There is a private entrance into the garden!"


   "What do you say?" exclaimed Giovanni, turning quickly about, as if


an inanimate thing should start into feverish life. "A private


entrance into Doctor Rappaccini's garden!"


   "Hush! hush! not so loud!" whispered Lisabetta, putting her hand


over his mouth. "Yes; into the worshipful Doctor's garden, where you


may see all his fine shrubbery. Many a young man in Padua would give


gold to be admitted among those flowers."


   Giovanni put a piece of gold into her hand.


   "Show me the way," said he.


   A surmise, probably excited by his conversation with Baglioni,


crossed his mind, that this interposition of old Lisabetta might


perchance be connected with the intrigue, whatever were its nature, in


which the Professor seemed to suppose that Doctor Rappaccini was


involving him. But such a suspicion, though it disturbed Giovanni, was


inadequate to restrain him. The instant he was aware of the


possibility of approaching Beatrice, it seemed an absolute necessity


of his existence to do so. It mattered not whether she were angel or


demon; he was irrevocably within her sphere, and must obey the law


that whirled him onward, in ever lessening circles, towards a result


which he did not attempt to foreshadow. And yet, strange to say, there


came across him a sudden doubt, whether this intense interest on his


part were not delusory- whether it were really of so deep and positive


a nature as to justify him in now thrusting himself into an


incalculable position- whether it were not merely the fantasy of a


young man's brain, only slightly, or not at all, connected with his


heart!


   He paused- hesitated- turned half about- but again went on. His


withered guide led him along several obscure passages, and finally


undid a door, through which, as it was opened, there came the sight


and sound of rustling leaves, with the broken sunshine glimmering


among them. Giovanni stepped forth, and forcing himself through the


entanglement of a shrub that wreathed its tendrils over the hidden


entrance, he stood beneath his own window, in the open area of


Doctor Rappaccini's garden.


   How often is it the case, that, when impossibilities have come to


pass, and dreams have condensed their misty substance into tangible


realities, we find ourselves calm, and even coldly self-possessed,


amid circumstances which it would have been a delirium of joy or agony


to anticipate! Fate delights to thwart us thus. Passion will choose


his own time to rush upon the scene, and lingers sluggishly behind,


when an appropriate adjustment of events would seem to summon his


appearance. So was it now with Giovanni. Day after day, his pulses had


throbbed with feverish blood, at the improbable idea of an interview


with Beatrice, and of standing with her, face to face, in this very


garden, basking in the oriental sunshine of her beauty, and


snatching from her full gaze the mystery which he deemed the riddle of


his own existence. But now there was a singular and untimely


equanimity within his breast. He threw a glance around the garden to


discover if Beatrice or her father were present, and perceiving that


he was alone, began a critical observation of the plants.


   The aspect of one and all of them dissatisfied him; their


gorgeousness seemed fierce, passionate, and even unnatural. There


was hardly an individual shrub which a wanderer, straying by himself


through a forest, would not have been startled to find growing wild,


as if an unearthly face had glared at him out of the thicket. Several,


also, would have shocked a delicate instinct by an appearance of


artificialness, indicating that there had been such commixture, and,


as it were, adultery of various vegetable species, that the production


was no longer of God's making, but the monstrous offspring of man's


depraved fancy, glowing with only an evil mockery of beauty. They were


probably the result of experiment, which, in one or two cases, had


succeeded in mingling plants individually lovely into a compound


possessing the questionable and ominous character that distinguished


the whole growth of the garden. In fine, Giovanni recognized but two


or three plants in the collection, and those of a kind that he well


knew to be poisonous. While busy with these contemplations, he heard


the rustling of a silken garment, and turning, beheld Beatrice


emerging from beneath the sculptured portal.


   Giovanni had not considered with himself what should be his


deportment; whether he should apologize for his intrusion into the


garden, or assume that he was there with the privity, at least, if not


by the desire, of Doctor Rappaccini or his daughter. But Beatrice's


manner placed him at his ease, though leaving him still in doubt by


what agency he had gained admittance. She came lightly along the path,


and met him near the broken fountain. There was surprise in her


face, but brightened by a simple and kind expression of pleasure.


   "You are a connoisseur in flowers, Signor," said Beatrice with a


smile, alluding to the bouquet which he had flung her from the window.


"It is no marvel, therefore, if the sight of my father's rare


collection has tempted you to take a nearer view. If he were here,


he could tell you many strange and interesting facts as to the


nature and habits of these shrubs, for he has spent a life-time in


such studies, and this garden is his world."


   "And yourself, lady"- observed Giovanni- "if fame says true- you,


likewise, are deeply skilled in the virtues indicated by these rich


blossoms, and these spicy perfumes. Would you deign to be my


instructress, I should prove an apter scholar than under Signor


Rappaccini himself."


   "Are there such idle rumors?" asked Beatrice, with the music of a


pleasant laugh. "Do people say that I am skilled in my father's


science of plants? What a jest is there! No; though I have grown up


among these flowers, I know no more of them than their hues and


perfume; and sometimes, methinks I would fain rid myself of even


that small knowledge. There are many flowers here, and those not the


least brilliant, that shock and offend me, when they meet my eye. But,


pray, Signor, do not believe these stories about my science. Believe


nothing of me save what you see with your own eyes."


   "And must I believe all that I have seen with my own eyes?" asked


Giovanni pointedly, while the recollection of former scenes made him


shrink. "No, Signora, you demand too little of me. Bid me believe


nothing, save what comes from your own lips."


   It would appear that Beatrice understood him. There came a deep


flush to her cheek; but she looked full into Giovanni's eyes, and


responded to his gaze of uneasy suspicion with a queen-like


haughtiness.


   I do so bid you, Signor!" she replied. "Forget whatever you may


have fancied in regard to me. If true to the outward senses, still


it may be false in its essence. But the words of Beatrice Rappaccini's


lips are true from the heart outward. Those you may believe!"


   A fervor glowed in her whole aspect, and beamed upon Giovanni's


consciousness like the light of truth itself. But while she spoke,


there was a fragrance in the atmosphere around her rich and


delightful, though evanescent, yet which the young man, from an


indefinable reluctance, scarcely dared to draw into his lungs. It


might be the odor of the flowers. Could it be Beatrice's breath, which


thus embalmed her words with a strange richness, as if by steeping


them in her heart? A faintness passed like a shadow over Giovanni, and


flitted away; he seemed to gaze through the beautiful girl's eyes into


her transparent soul, and felt no more doubt or fear.


   The tinge of passion that had colored Beatrice's manner vanished;


she became gay, and appeared to derive a pure delight from her


communion with the youth, not unlike what the maiden of a lonely


island might have felt, conversing with a voyager from the civilized


world. Evidently her experience of life had been confined within the


limits of that garden. She talked now about matters as simple as the


day-light or summer-clouds, and now asked questions in reference to


the city, or Giovanni's distant home, his friends, his mother, and his


sisters; questions indicating such seclusion, and such lack of


familiarity with modes and forms, that Giovanni responded as if to


an infant. Her spirit gushed out before him like a fresh rill, that


was just catching its first glimpse of the sunlight, and wondering, at


the reflections of earth and sky which were flung into its bosom.


There came thoughts, too, from a deep source, and fantasies of a


gem-like brilliancy, as if diamonds and rubies sparkled upward among


the bubbles of the fountain. Ever and anon, there gleamed across the


young man's mind a sense of wonder, that he should be walking side


by side with the being who had so wrought upon his imagination- whom


he had idealized in such hues of terror- in whom he had positively


witnessed such manifestations of dreadful attributes- that he should


be conversing with Beatrice like a brother, and should find her so


human and so maiden-like. But such reflections were only momentary;


the effect of her character was too real, not to make itself


familiar at once.


   In this free intercourse, they had strayed through the garden,


and now, after many turns among its avenues, were come to the


shattered fountain, beside which grew the magnificent shrub with its


treasury of glowing blossoms. A fragrance was diffused from it,


which Giovanni recognized as identical with that which he had


attributed to Beatrice's breath, but incomparably more powerful. As


her eyes fell upon it, Giovanni beheld her press her hand to her


bosom, as if her heart were throbbing suddenly and painfully.


   "For the first time in my life," murmured she, addressing the


shrub, "I had forgotten thee!"


   "I remember, Signora," said Giovanni, "that you once promised to


reward me with one of these living gems for the bouquet, which I had


the happy boldness to fling to your feet. Permit me now to pluck it as


a memorial of this interview."


   He made a step towards the shrub, with extended hand. But


Beatrice darted forward, uttering a shriek that went through his heart


like a dagger. She caught his hand, and drew it back with the whole


force of her slender figure. Giovanni felt her touch thrilling through


his fibres.


   "Touch it not!" exclaimed she, in a voice of agony. "Not for thy


life! It is fatal!"


   Then, hiding her face, she fled from him, and vanished beneath


the sculptured portal. As Giovanni followed her with his eyes, he


beheld the emaciated figure and pale intelligence of Doctor


Rappaccini, who had been watching the scene, he knew not how long,


within the shadow of the entrance.


   No sooner was Guasconti alone in his chamber, than the image of


Beatrice came back to his passionate musings, invested with all the


witchery that had been gathering around it ever since his first


glimpse of her, and now likewise imbued with a tender warmth of


girlish womanhood. She was human: her nature was endowed with all


gentle and feminine qualities; she was worthiest to be worshipped; she


was capable, surely, on her part, of the height and heroism of love.


Those tokens, which he had hitherto considered as proofs of a


frightful peculiarity in her physical and moral system, were now


either forgotten, or, by the subtle sophistry of passion, transmuted


into a golden crown of enchantment, rendering Beatrice the more


admirable, by so much as she was the more unique. Whatever had


looked ugly, was now beautiful; or, if incapable of such a change,


it stole away and hid itself among those shapeless half-ideas, which


throng the dim region beyond the daylight of our perfect


consciousness. Thus did Giovanni spend the night, nor fell asleep,


until the dawn had begun to awake the slumbering flowers in Doctor


Rappaccini's garden, whither his dreams doubtless led him. Up rose the


sun in his due season, and flinging his beams upon the young man's


eyelids, awoke him to a sense of pain. When thoroughly aroused, he


became sensible of a burning and tingling agony in his hand- in his


right hand- the very hand which Beatrice had grasped in her own,


when he was on the point of plucking one of the gem-like flowers. On


the back of that hand there was now a purple print, like that of


four small fingers, and the likeness of a slender thumb upon his


wrist.


   Oh, how stubbornly does love- or even that cunning semblance of


love which flourishes in the imagination, but strikes no depth of root


into the heart- how stubbornly does it hold its faith, until the


moment come, when it is doomed to vanish into thin mist! Giovanni


wrapt a handkerchief about his hand, and wondered what evil thing


had stung him, and soon forgot his pain in a reverie of Beatrice.


   After the first interview, a second was in the inevitable course of


what we call fate. A third; a fourth; and a meeting with Beatrice in


the garden was no longer an incident in Giovanni's daily life, but the


whole space in which he might be said to live; for the anticipation


and memory of that ecstatic hour made up the remainder. Nor was it


otherwise with the daughter of Rappaccini. She watched for the youth's


appearance, and flew to his side with confidence as unreserved as if


they had been playmates from early infancy- as if they were such


playmates still. If, by any unwonted chance, he failed to come at


the appointed moment, she stood beneath the window, and sent up the


rich sweetness of her tones to float around him in his chamber, and


echo and reverberate throughout his heart- "Giovanni! Giovanni! Why


tarriest thou? Come down!" And down he hastened into that Eden of


poisonous flowers.


   But, with all this intimate familiarity, there was still a


reserve in Beatrice's demeanor, so rigidly and invariably sustained,


that the idea of infringing it scarcely occurred to his imagination.


By all appreciable signs, they loved; they had looked love, with


eyes that conveyed the holy secret from the depths of one soul into


the depths of the other, as if it were too sacred to be whispered by


the way; they had even spoken love, in those gushes of passion when


their spirits darted forth in articulated breath, like tongues of


long-hidden flame; and yet there had been no seal of lips, no clasp of


hands, nor any slightest caress, such as love claims and hallows. He


had never touched one of the gleaming ringlets of her hair; her


garment- so marked was the physical barrier between them- had never


been waved against him by a breeze. On the few occasions when Giovanni


had seemed tempted to overstep the limit, Beatrice grew so sad, so


stern, and withal wore such a look of desolate separation,


shuddering at itself, that not a spoken word was requisite to repel


him. At such times, he was startled at the horrible suspicions that


rose, monster-like, out of the caverns of his heart, and stared him in


the face; his love grew thin and faint as the morning-mist; his doubts


alone had substance. But when Beatrice's face brightened again,


after the momentary shadow, she was transformed at once from the


mysterious, questionable being, whom he had watched with so much awe


and horror; she was now the beautiful and unsophisticated girl, whom


he felt that his spirit knew with a certainty beyond all other


knowledge.


   A considerable time had now passed since Giovanni's last meeting


with Baglioni. One morning, however, he was disagreeably surprised


by a visit from the Professor, whom he had scarcely thought of for


whole weeks, and would willingly have forgotten still longer. Given


up, as he had long been, to a pervading excitement, he could


tolerate no companions, except upon condition of their perfect


sympathy with his present state of feeling. Such sympathy was not to


be expected from Professor Baglioni.


   The visitor chatted carelessly, for a few moments, about the gossip


of the city and the University, and then took up another topic.


   "I have been reading an old classic author lately," said he, "and


met with a story that strangely interested me. Possibly you may


remember it. It is of an Indian prince, who sent a beautiful woman


as a present to Alexander the Great. She was as lovely as the dawn,


and gorgeous as the sunset; but what especially distinguished her


was a certain rich perfume in her breath- richer than a garden of


Persian roses. Alexander, as was natural to a youthful conqueror, fell


in love at first sight with this magnificent stranger. But a certain


sage physician, happening to be present, discovered a terrible


secret in regard to her."


   "And what was that?" asked Giovanni, turning his eyes downward to


avoid those of the Professor.


   "That this lovely woman," continued Baglioni, with emphasis, "had


been nourished with poisons from her birth upward, until her whole


nature was so imbued with them, that she herself had become the


deadliest poison in existence. Poison was her element of life. With


that rich perfume of her breath, she blasted the very air. Her love


would have been poison! her embrace death! Is not this a marvellous


tale?"


   "A childish fable," answered Giovanni, nervously starting from


his chair. "I marvel how your worship finds time to read such


nonsense, among your graver studies."


   "By the bye," said the Professor, looking uneasily about him, "what


singular fragrance is this in your apartment? Is it the perfume of


your gloves? It is faint, but delicious, and yet, after all, by no


means agreeable. Were I to breathe it long, methinks it would make


me ill. It is like the breath of a flower- but I see no flowers in the


chamber."


   "Nor are there any," replied Giovanni, who had turned pale as the


Professor spoke; "nor, I think, is there any fragrance, except in your


worship's imagination. Odors, being a sort of element combined of


the sensual and the spiritual, are apt to deceive us in this manner.


The recollection of a perfume- the bare idea of it- may easily be


mistaken for a present reality."


   "Aye; but my sober imagination does not often play such tricks,"


said Baglioni; "and were I to fancy any kind of odor, it would be that


of some vile apothecary drug, wherewith my fingers are likely enough


to be imbued. Our worshipful friend Rappaccini, as I have heard,


tinctures his medicaments with odors richer than those of Araby.


Doubtless, likewise, the fair and learned Signora Beatrice would


minister to her patients with draughts as sweet as a maiden's


breath. But wo to him that sips them!"


   Giovanni's face evinced many contending emotions. The tone in which


the Professor alluded to the pure and lovely daughter of Rappaccini


was a torture to his soul; and yet, the intimation of a view of her


character, opposite to his own, gave instantaneous distinctness to a


thousand dim suspicions, which now grinned at him like so many demons.


But he strove hard to quell them, and to respond to Baglioni with a


true lover's perfect faith.


   "Signor Professor," said he, "you were my father's friend-


perchance, too, it is your purpose to act a friendly part towards


his son. I would fain feel nothing towards you save respect and


deference. But I pray you to observe, Signor, that there is one


subject on which we must not speak. You know not the Signora Beatrice.


You cannot, therefore, estimate the wrong- the blasphemy, I may even


say- that is offered to her character by a light or injurious word."


   "Giovanni! my poor Giovanni!" answered the Professor, with a calm


expression of pity, "I know this wretched girl far better than


yourself. You shall hear the truth in respect to the poisoner


Rappaccini, and his poisonous daughter. Yes; poisonous as she is


beautiful! Listen; for even should you do violence to my gray hairs,


it shall not silence me. That old fable of the Indian woman has become


a truth, by the deep and deadly science of Rappaccini, and in the


person of the lovely Beatrice!"


   Giovanni groaned and hid his face.


   "Her father," continued Baglioni, "was not restrained by natural


affection from offering up his child, in this horrible manner, as


the victim of his insane zeal for science. For- let us do him justice-


he is as true a man of science as ever distilled his own heart in an


alembic. What, then, will be your fate? Beyond a doubt, you are


selected as the material of some new experiment. Perhaps the result is


to be death- perhaps a fate more awful still! Rappaccini, with what he


calls the interest of science before his eyes, will hesitate at


nothing."


   "It is a dream!" muttered Giovanni to himself, "surely it is a


dream!"


   "But, resumed the Professor, "be of good cheer, son of my friend!


It is not yet too late for the rescue. Possibly, we may even succeed


in bringing back this miserable child within the limits of ordinary


nature, from which her father's madness has estranged her. Behold this


little silver vase! It was wrought by the hands of the renowned


Benvenuto Cellini, and is well worthy to be a love-gift to the fairest


dame in Italy. But its contents are invaluable. One little sip of this


antidote would have rendered the most virulent poisons of the


Borgias innocuous. Doubt not that it will be as efficacious against


those of Rappaccini. Bestow the vase, and the precious liquid within


it, on your Beatrice, and hopefully await the result."


   Baglioni laid a small, exquisitely wrought silver phial on the


table, and withdrew, leaving what he had said to produce its effect


upon the young man's mind.


   "We will thwart Rappaccini yet!" thought he, chuckling to


himself, as he descended the stairs. "But, let us confess the truth of


him, he is a wonderful man! a wonderful man indeed! A vile empiric,


however, in his practice, and therefore not to be tolerated by those


who respect the good old rules of the medical profession!"


   Throughout Giovanni's whole acquaintance with Beatrice, he had


occasionally, as we have said, been haunted by dark surmises as to her


character. Yet, so thoroughly had she made herself felt by him as a


simple, natural, most affectionate and guileless creature, that the


image now held up by Professor Baglioni, looked as strange and


incredible, as if it were not in accordance with his own original


conception. True, there were ugly recollections connected with his


first glimpses of the beautiful girl; he could not quite forget the


bouquet that withered in her grasp, and the insect that perished


amid the sunny air, by no ostensible agency save the fragrance of


her breath. These incidents, however, dissolving in the pure light


of her character, had no longer the efficacy of facts, but were


acknowledged as mistaken fantasies, by whatever testimony of the


senses they might appear to be substantiated. There is something truer


and more real, than what we can see with the eyes, and touch with


the finger. On such better evidence, had Giovanni founded his


confidence in Beatrice, though rather by the necessary force of her


high attributes, than by any deep and generous faith on his part. But,


now, his spirit was incapable of sustaining itself at the height to


which the early enthusiasm of passion had exalted it; he fell down,


grovelling among earthly doubts, and defiled therewith the pure


whiteness of Beatrice's image. Not that he gave her up; he did but


distrust. He resolved to institute some decisive test that should


satisfy him, once for all, whether there were those dreadful


peculiarities in her physical nature, which could not be supposed to


exist without some corresponding monstrosity of soul. His eyes, gazing


down afar, might have deceived him as to the lizard, the insect, and


the flowers. But if he could witness, at the distance of a few


paces, the sudden blight of one fresh and healthful flower in


Beatrice's hand, there would be room for no further question. With


this idea, he hastened to the florist's, and purchased a bouquet


that was still gemmed with the morning dew-drops.


   It was now the customary hour of his daily interview with Beatrice.


Before descending into the garden, Giovanni failed not to look at


his figure in the mirror; a vanity to be expected in a beautiful young


man, yet, as displaying itself at that troubled and feverish moment,


the token of a certain shallowness of feeling and insincerity of


character. He did gaze, however, and said to himself, that his


features had never before possessed so rich a grace, nor his eyes such


vivacity, nor his cheeks so warm a hue of superabundant life.


   "At least," thought he, "her poison has not yet insinuated itself


into my system. I am no flower to perish in her grasp!"


   With that thought, he turned his eyes on the bouquet, which he


had never once laid aside from his hand. A thrill of indefinable


horror shot through his frame, on perceiving that those dewy flowers


were already beginning to droop; they wore the aspect of things that


had been fresh and lovely, yesterday. Giovanni grew white as marble,


and stood motionless before the mirror, staring at his own


reflection there, as at the likeness of something frightful. He


remembered Baglioni's remark about the fragrance that seemed to


pervade the chamber. It must have been the poison in his breath!


Then he shuddered- shuddered at himself! Recovering from his stupor,


he began to watch, with curious eye, a spider that was busily at work,


hanging its web from the antique cornice of the apartment, crossing


and re-crossing the artful system of interwoven lines, as vigorous and


active a spider as ever dangled from an old ceiling. Giovanni bent


towards the insect, and emitted a deep, long breath. The spider


suddenly ceased its toil; the web vibrated with a tremor originating


in the body of the small artizan. Again Giovanni sent forth a


breath, deeper, longer, and imbued with a venomous feeling out of


his heart; he knew not whether he were wicked or only desperate. The


spider made a convulsive gripe with his limbs, and hung dead across


the window.


   "Accursed! Accursed!" muttered Giovanni, addressing himself.


"Hast thou grown so poisonous, that this deadly insect perishes by thy


breath?"


   At that moment, a rich, sweet voice came floating up from the


garden: "Giovanni! Giovanni! It is past the hour! Why tarriest thou!


Come down!"


   "Yes," muttered Giovanni again. "She is the only being whom my


breath may not slay! Would that it might!"


   He rushed down, and in an instant, was standing before the bright


and loving eyes of Beatrice. A moment ago, his wrath and despair had


been so fierce that he could have desired nothing so much as to wither


her by a glance. But, with her actual presence, there came


influences which had too real an existence to be at once shaken off;


recollections of the delicate and benign power of her feminine nature,


which had so often enveloped him in a religious calm; recollections of


many a holy and passionate outgush of her heart, when the pure


fountain had been unsealed from its depths, and made visible in its


transparency to his mental eye; recollections which, had Giovanni


known how to estimate them, would have assured him that all this


ugly mystery was but an earthly illusion, and that, whatever mist of


evil might seem to have gathered over her, the real Beatrice was a


heavenly angel. Incapable as he was of such high faith, still her


presence had not utterly lost its magic. Giovanni's rage was quelled


into an aspect of sullen insensibility. Beatrice, with a quick


spiritual sense, immediately felt that there was a gulf of blackness


between them, which neither he nor she could pass. They walked on


together, sad and silent, and came thus to the marble fountain, and to


its pool of water on the ground, in the midst of which grew the


shrub that bore gem-like blossoms. Giovanni was affrighted at the


eager enjoyment- the appetite, as it were- with which he found himself


inhaling the fragrance of the flowers.


   "Beatrice," asked he abruptly, "whence came this shrub!"


   "My father created it," answered she, with simplicity.


   "Created it! created it!" repeated Giovanni. "What mean you,


Beatrice?"


   "He is a man fearfully acquainted with the secrets of nature,"


replied Beatrice; "and, at the hour when I first drew breath, this


plant sprang from the soil, the offspring of his science, of his


intellect, while I was but his earthly child. Approach it not!"


continued she, observing with terror that Giovanni was drawing


nearer to the shrub. "It has qualities that you little dream of. But


I, dearest Giovanni- I grew up and blossomed with the plant, and was


nourished with its breath. It was my sister, and I loved it with a


human affection: for- alas! hast thou not suspected it? there was an


awful doom." Here Giovanni frowned so darkly upon her that Beatrice


paused and trembled. But her faith in his tenderness reassured her,


and made her blush that she had doubted for an instant.


   "There was an awful doom," she continued- "the effect of my


father's fatal love of science- which estranged me from all society of


my kind. Until Heaven sent thee, dearest Giovanni, Oh! how lonely


was thy poor Beatrice!"


   "Was it a hard doom?" asked Giovanni, fixing his eyes upon her.


   "Only of late have I known how hard it was," answered she tenderly.


"Oh, yes; but my heart was torpid, and therefore quiet."


   Giovanni's rage broke forth from his sullen gloom like a


lightning-flash out of a dark cloud.


   "Accursed one!" cried he, with venomous scorn and anger. "And


finding thy solitude wearisome, thou hast severed me, likewise, from


all the warmth of life, and enticed me into thy region of


unspeakable horror!"


   "Giovanni!" exclaimed Beatrice, turning her large bright eyes


upon his face. The force of his words had not found its way into her


mind; she was merely thunder-struck.


   "Yes, poisonous thing!" repeated Giovanni, beside himself with


passion. "Thou hast done it! Thou hast blasted me! Thou hast filled my


veins with poison! Thou hast made me as hateful, as ugly, as loathsome


and deadly a creature as thyself- a world's wonder of hideous


monstrosity! Now- if our breath be happily as fatal to ourselves as to


all others- let us join our lips in one kiss of unutterable hatred,


and so die!"


   "What has befallen me?" murmured Beatrice, with a low moan out of


her heart. "Holy Virgin pity me, a poor heartbroken child!"


   "Thou! Dost thou pray?" cried Giovanni, still with the same


fiendish scorn. "Thy very prayers, as they come from thy lips, taint


the atmosphere with death. Yes, yes; let us pray! Let us to church,


and dip our fingers in the holy water at the portal! They that come


after us will perish as by a pestilence. Let us sign crosses in the


air! It will be scattering curses abroad in the likeness of holy


symbols!"


   "Giovanni," said Beatrice calmly, for her grief was beyond passion,


"Why dost thou join thyself with me thus in those terrible words? I,


it is true, am the horrible thing thou namest me. But thou! what


hast thou to do, save with one other shudder at my hideous misery,


to go forth out of the garden and mingle with thy race, and forget


that there ever crawled on earth such a monster as poor Beatrice?"


   "Dost thou pretend ignorance?" asked Giovanni, scowling upon her.


"Behold! This power have I gained from the pure daughter of


Rappaccini!"


   There was a swarm of summer-insects flitting through the air, in


search of the food promised by the flower-odors of the fatal garden.


They circled round Giovanni's head, and were evidently attracted


towards him by the same influence which had drawn them, for an


instant, within the sphere of several of the shrubs. He sent forth a


breath among them, and smiled bitterly at Beatrice, as at least a


score of the insects fell dead upon the ground.


   "I see it! I see it!" shrieked Beatrice. "It is my father's fatal


science? No, no, Giovanni; it was not I! Never, never! I dreamed


only to love thee, and be with thee a little time, and so to let


thee pass away, leaving but thine image in mine heart. For,


Giovanni- believe it- though my body be nourished with poison, my


spirit is God's creature, and craves love as its daily food. But my


father! he has united us in this fearful sympathy. Yes; spurn me!


tread upon me! kill me! Oh, what is death, after such words as


thine? But it was not I! Not for a world of bliss would I have done


it!"


   Giovanni's passion had exhausted itself in its outburst from his


lips. There now came across him a sense, mournful, and not without


tenderness, of the intimate and peculiar relationship between Beatrice


and himself. They stood, as it were, in an utter solitude, which would


be made none the less solitary by the densest throng of human life.


Ought not, then, the desert of humanity around them to press this


insulated pair closer together? If they should be cruel to one


another, who was there to be kind to them? Besides, thought


Giovanni, might there not still be a hope of his returning within


the limits of ordinary nature, and leading Beatrice- the redeemed


Beatrice- by the hand? Oh, weak, and selfish, and unworthy spirit,


that could dream of an earthly union and earthly happiness as


possible, after such deep love had been so bitterly wronged as was


Beatrice's love by Giovanni's blighting words! No, no; there could


be no such hope. She must pass heavily, with that broken heart, across


the borders- she must bathe her hurts in some fount of Paradise, and


forget her grief in the light of immortality- and there be well!


   But Giovanni did not know it.


   "Dear Beatrice, said he, approaching her, while she shrank away, as


always at his approach, but now with a different impulse- "dearest


Beatrice, our fate is not yet so desperate. Behold! There is a


medicine, potent, as a wise physician has assured me, and almost


divine in its efficacy. It is composed of ingredients the most


opposite to those by which thy awful father has brought this


calamity upon thee and me. It is distilled of blessed herbs. Shall


we not quaff it together, and thus be purified from evil?"


   "Give it me!" said Beatrice, extending her hand to receive the


little silver phial which Giovanni took from his bosom. She added,


with a peculiar emphasis: "I will drink- but do thou await the


result."


   She put Baglioni's antidote to her lips; and, at the same moment,


the figure of Rappaccini emerged from the portal, and came slowly


towards the marble fountain. As he drew near, the pale man of


science seemed to gaze with a triumphant expression at the beautiful


youth and maiden, as might an artist who should spend his life in


achieving a picture or a group of statuary, and finally be satisfied


with his success. He paused- his bent form grew erect with conscious


power, he spread out his hand over them, in the attitude of a father


imploring a blessing upon his children. But those were the same


hands that had thrown poison into the stream of their lives!


Giovanni trembled. Beatrice shuddered very nervously, and pressed


her hand upon her heart.


   "My daughter," said Rappaccini, "thou art no longer lonely in the


world! Pluck one of those precious gems from thy sister shrub, and bid


thy bridegroom wear it in his bosom. It will not harm him now! My


science, and the sympathy between thee and him, have so wrought within


his system, that he now stands apart from common men, as thou dost,


daughter of my pride and triumph, from ordinary women. Pass on,


then, through the world, most dear to one another, and dreadful to all


besides!"


   "My father," said Beatrice, feebly- and still, as she spoke, she


kept her hand upon her heart- "wherefore didst thou inflict this


miserable doom upon thy child?"


   "Miserable!" exclaimed Rappaccini. "What mean you, foolish girl?


Dost thou deem it misery to be endowed with marvellous gifts,


against which no power nor strength could avail an enemy? Misery, to


be able to quell the mightiest with a breath? Misery, to be as


terrible as thou art beautiful? Wouldst thou, then, have preferred the


condition of a weak woman, exposed to all evil, and capable of none?"


   "I would fain have been loved, not feared, murmured Beatrice,


sinking down upon the ground. "But now it matters not; I am going,


father, where the evil, which thou hast striven to mingle with my


being, will pass away like a dream- like the fragrance of these


poisonous flowers, which will no longer taint my breath among the


flowers of Eden. Farewell, Giovanni! Thy words of hatred are like lead


within my heart- but they, too, will fall away as I ascend. Oh, was


there not, from the first, more poison in thy nature than in mine?"


   To Beatrice- so radically had her earthly part been wrought upon by


Rappaccini's skill- as poison had been life, so the powerful


antidote was death. And thus the poor victim of man's ingenuity and of


thwarted nature, and of the fatality that attends all such efforts


of perverted wisdom, perished there, at the feet of her father and


Giovanni. Just at that moment, Professor Pietro Baglioni looked


forth from the window, and called loudly, in a tone of triumph mixed


with horror, to the thunder-stricken man of science: "Rappaccini!


Rappaccini! And is this the upshot of your experiment?"


                        THE END


.




                                      1850


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                              THE GREAT STONE FACE


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   ONE AFTERNOON, When the sun was going down, a mother and her little


boy sat at the door of their cottage, talking about the Great Stone


Face. They had but to lift their eyes, and there it was plainly to


be seen, though miles away, with the sunshine brightening all its


features.


   And what was the Great Stone Face?


   Embosomed amongst a family of lofty mountains, there was a valley


so spacious that it contained many thousand inhabitants. Some of these


good people dwelt in log huts, with the black forest all around


them, on the steep and difficult hill-sides. Others had their homes in


comfortable farm-houses, and cultivated the rich soil on the gentle


slopes or level surfaces of the valley. Others, again, were


congregated into populous villages, where some wild, highland rivulet,


tumbling down from its birthplace in the upper mountain region, had


been caught and tamed by human cunning, and compelled to turn the


machinery of cotton factories. The inhabitants of this valley, in


short, were numerous, and of many modes of life. But all of them,


grown people and children, had a kind of familiarity with the Great


Stone Face, although some possessed the gift of distinguishing this


grand natural phenomenon more perfectly than many of their neighbors.


   The Great Stone Face, then, was a work of Nature in her mood of


majestic playfulness, formed on the perpendicular side of a mountain


by some immense rocks, which had been thrown together in such a


position as, when viewed at a proper distance, precisely to resemble


the features of the human countenance. It seemed as if an enormous


giant, or a Titan, had sculptured his own likeness on the precipice.


There was the broad arch of the forehead, a hundred feet in height;


the nose, with its long bridge; and the vast lips, which, if they


could have spoken, would have rolled their thunder accents from one


end of the valley to the other. True it is, that if the spectator


approached too near, he lost the outline of the gigantic visage, and


could discern only a heap of ponderous and gigantic rocks, piled in


chaotic ruin one upon another. Retracing his steps, however, the


wondrous features would again be seen; and the further he withdrew


from them, the more like a human face, with all its original


divinity intact, did they appear; until, as it grew dim in the


distance, with the clouds and glorified vapor of the mountains


clustering about it, the Great Stone Face seemed positively to be


alive.


   It was a happy lot for children to grow up to manhood or


womanhood with the Great Stone Face before their eyes, for all the


features were noble, and the expression was at once grand and sweet,


as if it were the glow of a vast, warm heart, that embraced all


mankind in its affections, and had room for more. It was an


education only to look at it. According to the belief of many


people, the valley owed much of its fertility to this benign aspect


that was continually beaming over it, illuminating the clouds, and


infusing its tenderness into the sunshine.


   As we began with saying, a mother and her little boy sat at their


cottage door, gazing at the Great Stone Face, and talking about it.


The child's name was Ernest.


   "Mother, said he, while the Titanic visage smiled on him, "I wish


that it could speak, for it looks so very kindly that its voice must


needs be pleasant. If I were to see a man with such a face, I should


love him dearly."


   "If an old prophecy should come to pass," answered his mother,


"we may see a man, some time or other, with exactly such a face as


that."


   "What prophecy do you mean, dear mother?" eagerly inquired


Ernest. "Pray tell me all about it!"


   So his mother told him a story that her own mother had told to her,


when she herself was younger than little Ernest; a story, not of


things that were past, but of what was yet to come; a story,


nevertheless, so very old, that even the Indians, who formerly


inhabited this valley, had heard it from their forefathers, to whom,


as they affirmed, it had been murmured by the mountain streams, and


whispered by the wind among the tree-tops. The purport was, that, at


some future day, a child should be born hereabouts, who was destined


to become the greatest and noblest personage of his time, and whose


countenance, in manhood, should bear an exact resemblance to the Great


Stone Face. Not a few old-fashioned people, and young ones likewise,


in the ardor of their hopes, still cherished an enduring faith in this


old prophecy. But others, who had seen more of the world, had


watched and waited till they were weary, and had beheld no man with


such a face, nor any man that proved to be much greater or nobler than


his neighbors, concluded it to be nothing but an idle tale. At all


events, the great man of the prophecy had not yet appeared.


   "O, mother, dear mother!" cried Ernest, clapping his hands above


his head, I do hope that I shall live to see him!"


   His mother was an affectionate and thoughtful woman, and felt


that it was wisest not to discourage the generous hopes of her


little boy. So she only said to him, "Perhaps you may."


   And Ernest never forgot the story that his mother told him. It


was always in his mind, whenever he looked upon the Great Stone


Face. He spent his childhood in the log-cottage where he was born, and


was dutiful to his mother, and helpful to her in many things,


assisting her much with his little hands, and more with his loving


heart. In this manner, from a happy yet often pensive child, he grew


up to be a mild, quiet, unobtrusive boy, and sun-browned with labor in


the fields, but with more intelligence brightening his aspect than


is seen in many lads who have been taught at famous schools. Yet


Ernest had had no teacher, save only that the Great Stone Face


became one to him. When the toil of the day was over, he would gaze at


it for hours, until he began to imagine that those vast features


recognized him, and gave him a smile of kindness and encouragement,


responsive to his own look of veneration. We must not take upon us


to affirm that this was a mistake, although the Face may have looked


no more kindly at Ernest than at all the world besides. But the secret


was, that the boy's tender and confiding simplicity discerned what


other people could not see; and thus the love, which was meant for


all, became his peculiar portion.


   About this time, there went a rumor throughout the valley, that the


great man, foretold from ages long ago, who was to bear a


resemblance to the Great Stone Face, had appeared at last. It seems


that, many years before, a young man had migrated from the valley


and settled at a distant seaport, where, after getting together a


little money, he had set up as a shopkeeper. His name- but I could


never learn whether it was his real one, or a nickname that had


grown out of his habits and success in life- was Gathergold. Being


shrewd and active, and endowed by Providence with that inscrutable


faculty which develops itself in what the world calls luck, he


became an exceedingly rich merchant, and owner of a whole fleet of


bulky-bottomed ships. All the countries of the globe appeared to


join hands for the mere purpose of adding heap after heap to the


mountainous accumulation of this one man's wealth. The cold regions of


the north, almost within the gloom and shadow of the Arctic Circle,


sent him their tribute in the shape of furs; hot Africa sifted for him


the golden sands of her rivers, and gathered up the ivory tusks of her


great elephants out of the forests; the East came bringing him the


rich shawls, and spices, and teas, and the effulgence of diamonds, and


the gleaming purity of large pearls. The ocean, not to be behindhand


with the earth, yielded up her mighty whales, that Mr. Gathergold


might sell their oil, and make a profit on it. Be the original


commodity what it might, it was gold within his grasp. It might be


said of him, as of Midas in the fable, that whatever he touched with


his finger immediately glistened, and grew yellow, and was changed


at once into sterling metal, or, which suited him still better, into


piles of coin. And, when Mr. Gathergold had become so very rich that


it would have taken him a hundred years only to count his wealth, he


bethought himself of his native valley, and resolved to go back


thither, and end his days where he was born. With this purpose in


view, he sent a skilful architect to build him such a palace as should


be fit for a man of his vast wealth to live in.


   As I have said above, it had already been rumored in the valley


that Mr. Gathergold had turned out to be the prophetic personage so


long and vainly looked for, and that his visage was the perfect and


undeniable similitude of the Great Stone Face. People were the more


ready to believe that this must needs be the fact, when they beheld


the splendid edifice that rose, as if by enchantment, on the site of


his father's old weather-beaten farm-house. The exterior was of


marble, so dazzlingly white that it seemed as though the whole


structure might melt away in the sunshine, like those humbler ones


which Mr. Gathergold, in his young play-days, before his fingers


were gifted with the touch of transmutation, had been accustomed to


build of snow. It had a richly ornamented portico, supported by tall


pillars, beneath which was a lofty door, studded with silver knobs,


and made of a kind of variegated wood that had been brought from


beyond the sea. The windows, from the floor to the ceiling of each


stately apartment, were composed, respectively, of but one enormous


pane of glass, so transparently pure that it was said to be a finer


medium than even the vacant atmosphere. Hardly anybody had been


permitted to see the interior of this palace; but it was reported, and


with good semblance of truth, to be far more gorgeous than the


outside, insomuch that whatever was iron or brass in other houses, was


silver or gold in this; and Mr. Gathergold's bed-chamber,


especially, made such a glittering appearance that no ordinary man


would have been able to close his eyes there. But, on the other


hand, Mr. Gathergold was now so inured to wealth, that perhaps he


could not have closed his eyes unless where the gleam of it was


certain to find its way beneath his eyelids.


   In due time, the mansion was finished; next came the


upholsterers, with magnificent furniture; then, a whole troop of black


and white servants, the harbingers of Mr. Gathergold, who, in his


own majestic person was expected to arrive at sunset. Our friend


Ernest, meanwhile, had been deeply stirred by the idea that the


great man, the noble man, the man of prophecy, after so many ages of


delay, was at length to be made manifest to his native valley. He


knew, boy as he was, that there were a thousand ways in which Mr.


Gathergold, with his vast wealth, might transform himself into an


angel of beneficence, and assume a control over human affairs as


wide and benignant as the smile of the Great Stone Face. Full of faith


and hope, Ernest doubted not that what the people said was true, and


that now he was to behold the living likeness of those wondrous


features on the mountain-side. While the boy was still gazing up the


valley, and fancying, as he always did, that the Great Stone Face


returned his gaze and looked kindly at him, the rumbling of wheels was


heard, approaching swiftly along the winding road.


   "Here he comes!" cried a group of people who were assembled to


witness the arrival. "Here comes the great Mr. Gathergold!"


   A carriage, drawn by four horses, dashed round the turn of the


road. Within it, thrust partly out of the window, appeared the


physiognomy of a little old man, with a skin as yellow as if his own


Midas-hand had transmuted it. He had a low forehead, small, sharp


eyes, puckered about with innumerable wrinkles, and very thin lips,


which he made still thinner by pressing them forcibly together.


   "The very image of the Great Stone Face!" shouted the people. "Sure


enough, the old prophecy is true; and here we have the great man come,


at last!"


   And, what greatly perplexed Ernest, they seemed actually to believe


that here was the likeness which they spoke of. By the roadside


there chanced to be an old beggar-woman and two little


beggar-children, stragglers from some far-off region, who, as the


carriage rolled onward, held out their hands and lifted up their


doleful voices, most piteously beseeching charity. A yellow claw-


the very same that had clawed together so much wealth- poked itself


out of the coach-window, and dropt some copper coins upon the


ground; so that, though the great man's name seems to have been


Gathergold, he might just as suitably have been nicknamed


Scattercopper. Still, nevertheless, with an earnest shout, and


evidently with as much good faith as ever, the people bellowed, "He is


the very image of the Great Stone Face!"


   But Ernest turned sadly from the wrinkled shrewdness of that sordid


visage, and gazed up the valley, where, amid a gathering mist,


gilded by the last sunbeams, he could still distinguish those glorious


features which had impressed themselves into his soul. Their aspect


cheered him. What did the benign lips seem to say?


   "He will come! Fear not, Ernest; the man will come!"


   The years went on, and Ernest ceased to be a boy. He had grown to


be a young man now. He attracted little notice from the other


inhabitants of the valley; for they saw nothing remarkable in his


way of life, save that, when the labor of the day was over, he still


loved to go apart and gaze and meditate upon the Great Stone Face.


According to their idea of the matter, it was a folly, indeed, but


pardonable, inasmuch as Ernest was industrious, kind, and


neighborly, and neglected no duty for the sake of indulging this


idle habit. They knew not that the Great Stone Face had become a


teacher to him, and that the sentiment which was expressed in it would


enlarge the young man's heart, and fill it with wider and deeper


sympathies than other hearts. They knew not that thence would come a


better wisdom than could be learned from books, and a better life than


could be moulded on the defaced example of other human lives.


Neither did Ernest know that the thoughts and affections which came to


him so naturally, in the fields and at the fireside, and wherever he


communed with himself, were of a higher tone than those which all


men shared with him. A simple soul- simple as when his mother first


taught him the old prophecy- he beheld the marvellous features beaming


adown the valley, and still wondered that their human counterpart


was so long in making his appearance.


   By this time poor Mr. Gathergold was dead and buried; and the


oddest part of the matter was, that his wealth, which was the body and


spirit of his existence, had disappeared before his death, leaving


nothing of him but a living skeleton, covered over with a wrinkled,


yellow skin. Since the melting away of his gold, it had been very


generally conceded that there was no such striking resemblance,


after all, betwixt the ignoble features of the ruined merchant and


that majestic face upon the mountain-side. So the people ceased to


honor him during his lifetime, and quietly consigned him to


forgetfulness after his decease. Once in a while, it is true, his


memory was brought up in connection with the magnificent palace


which he had built, and which had long ago been turned into a hotel


for the accommodation of strangers, multitudes of whom came, every


summer, to visit that famous natural curiosity, the Great Stone


Face. Thus, Mr. Gathergold being discredited and thrown into the


shade, the man of prophecy was yet to come.


   It so happened that a native-born son of the valley, many years


before, had enlisted as a soldier, and, after a great deal of hard


fighting, had now become an illustrious commander. Whatever he may


be called in history, he was known in camps and on the battle-field


under the nickname of Old Blood-and-Thunder. This war-worn veteran,


being now infirm with age and wounds, and weary of the turmoil of a


military life, and of the roll of the drum and the clangor of the


trumpet, that had so long been ringing in his ears, had lately


signified a purpose of returning to his native valley, hoping to


find repose where he remembered to have left it. The inhabitants,


his old neighbors and their grown-up children, were resolved to


welcome the renowned warrior with a salute of cannon and a public


dinner; and all the more enthusiastically, it being affirmed that now,


at last, the likeness of the Great Stone Face had actually appeared.


An aid-de-camp of Old Blood-and-Thunder, travelling through the


valley, was said to have been struck with the resemblance. Moreover,


the schoolmates and early acquaintances of the general were ready to


testify, on oath, that, to the best of their recollection, the


aforesaid general had been exceedingly like the majestic image, even


when a boy, only that the idea had never occurred to them at that


period. Great, therefore, was the excitement throughout the valley;


and many people, who had never once thought of glancing at the Great


Stone Face for years before, now spent their time in gazing at it, for


the sake of knowing exactly how General Blood-and-Thunder looked.


   On the day of the great festival, Ernest, with all the other people


of the valley, left their work, and proceeded to the spot where the


sylvan banquet was prepared. As he approached, the loud voice of the


Reverend Doctor Battleblast was heard, beseeching a blessing on the


good things set before them, and on the distinguished friend of


peace in whose honor they were assembled. The tables were arranged


in a cleared space of the woods, shut in by the surrounding trees,


except where a vista opened eastward, and afforded a distant view of


the Great Stone Face. Over the general's chair, which was a relic from


the home of Washington, there was an arch of verdant boughs, with


the laurel profusely intermixed, and surmounted by his country's


banner, beneath which he had won his victories. Our friend Ernest


raised himself on his tip-toes, in hopes to get a glimpse of the


celebrated guest; but there was a mighty crowd about the tables


anxious to hear the toasts and speeches, and to catch any word that


might fall from the general in reply; and a volunteer company, doing


duty as a guard, pricked ruthlessly with their bayonets at any


particularly quiet person among the throng. So Ernest, being of an


unobtrusive character, was thrust quite into the background, where


he could see no more of Old Blood-and-Thunder's physiognomy than if it


had been still blazing on the battle-field. To console himself, he


turned towards the Great Stone Face, which, like a faithful and


long-remembered friend, looked back and smiled upon him through the


vista of the forest. Meantime, however, he could over-hear the remarks


of various individuals, who were comparing the features of the hero


with the face on the distant mountain-side.


   " 'Tis the same face, to a hair!" cried one man, cutting a caper


for joy.


   "Wonderfully like, that's a fact!" responded another.


   "Like! why, I call it Old Blood-and-Thunder himself, in a monstrous


looking-glass!" cried a third. "And why not! He's the greatest man


of this or any other age, beyond a doubt."


   And then all three of the speakers gave a great shout, which


communicated electricity to the crowd, and called forth a roar from


a thousand voices, that went reverberating for miles among the


mountains, until you might have supposed that the Great Stone Face had


poured its thunder-breath into the cry. All these comments, and this


vast enthusiasm, served the more to interest our friend; nor did he


think of questioning that now, at length, the mountain-visage had


found its human counterpart. It is true, Ernest had imagined that this


long-looked-for personage would appear in the character of a man of


peace, uttering wisdom, and doing good, and making people happy.


But, taking an habitual breadth of view, with all his simplicity, he


contended that Providence should choose its own method of blessing


mankind, and could conceive that this great end might be effected even


by a warrior and a bloody sword, should inscrutable wisdom see fit


to order matters so.


   "The general! the general!" was now the cry. "Hush! silence! Old


Blood-and-Thunder's going to make a speech."


   Even so; for, the cloth being removed, the general's health had


been drunk amid shouts of applause, and he now stood upon his feet


to thank the company. Ernest saw him. There he was, over the shoulders


of the crowd, from the two glittering epaulets and embroidered


collar upward, beneath the arch of green boughs with inter-twined


laurell and the banner drooping as if to shade his brow! And there,


too, visible in the same glance, through the vista of the forest,


appeared the Great Stone Face! And was there, indeed, such a


resemblance as the crowd had testified? Alas, Ernest could not


recognize it! He beheld a war-worn and weather-beaten countenance,


full of energy, and expressive of an iron will; but the gentle wisdom,


the deep, broad, tender sympathies, were altogether wanting in Old


Blood-and-Thunder's visage; and even if the Great Stone Face had


assumed his look of stern command, the milder traits would still


have tempered it.


   "This is not the man of prophecy," sighed Ernest to himself, as


he made his way out of the throng. "And must the world wait longer


yet?"


   The mists had congregated about the distant mountain-side, and


there were seen the grand and awful features of the Great Stone


Face, awful but benignant, as if a mighty angel were sitting among the


hills, and enrobing himself in a cloud-vesture of gold and purple.


As he looked, Ernest could hardly believe but that a smile beamed over


the whole visage, with a radiance still brightening, although


without motion of the lips. It was probably the effect of the


western sunshine, melting through the thinly diffused vapors that


had swept between him and the object that he gazed at. But- as it


always did- the aspect of his marvellous friend made Ernest as hopeful


as if he had never hoped in vain.


   "Fear not, Ernest," said his heart, even as if the Great Face


were whispering him, "fear not, Ernest; he will come."


   More years sped swiftly and tranquilly away. Ernest still dwelt


in his native valley, and was now a man of middle age. By


imperceptible degrees, he had become known among the people. Now, as


heretofore, he labored for his bread, and was the same


simple-hearted man that he had always been. But he had thought and


felt so much, he had given so many of the best hours of his life to


unworldly hopes for some great good to mankind, that it seemed as


though he had been talking with the angels, and had imbibed a


portion of their wisdom unawares. It was visible in the calm and


well-considered beneficence of his daily life, the quiet stream of


which had made a wide green margin all along its course. Not a day


passed by, that the world was not the better because this man,


humble as he was, had lived. He never stepped aside from his own path,


yet would always reach a blessing to his neighbor. Almost


involuntarily, too, he had become a preacher. The pure and high


simplicity of his thought, which, as one of its manifestations, took


shape in the good deeds that dropped silently from his hand, flowed


also forth in speech. He uttered truths that wrought upon and


moulded the lives of those who heard him. His auditors, it may be,


never suspected that Ernest, their own neighbor and familiar friend,


was more than an ordinary man; least of all did Ernest himself suspect


it; but, inevitably as the murmur of a rivulet, came thoughts out of


his mouth that no other human lips had spoken.


   When the people's minds had had a little time to cool, they were


ready enough to acknowledge their mistake in imagining a similarity


between General Blood-and-Thunder's truculent physiognomy and the


benign visage on the mountain-side. But now, again, there were reports


and many paragraphs in the newspapers, affirming that the likeness


of the Great Stone Face had appeared upon the broad shoulders of a


certain eminent statesman. He, like Mr. Gathergold and Old


Blood-and-Thunder, was a native of the valley, but had left it in


his early days, and taken up the trades of law and politics. Instead


of the rich man's wealth and the warrior's sword, he had but a tongue,


and it was mightier than both together. So wonderfully eloquent was


he, that whatever he might choose to say, his auditors had no choice


but to believe him; wrong looked like right, and right like wrong; for


when it pleased him, he could make a kind of illuminated fog with


his mere breath, and obscure the natural daylight with it. His tongue,


indeed, was a magic instrument: sometimes it rumbled like the thunder;


sometimes it warbled like the sweetest music. It was the blast of war-


the song of peace; and it seemed to have a heart in it, when there was


no such matter. In good truth, he was a wondrous man; and when his


tongue had acquired him all other imaginable success- when it had been


heard in halls of state, and in the courts of princes and


potentates- after it had made him known all over the world, even as


a voice crying from shore to shore- it finally persuaded his


countrymen to select him for the presidency. Before this time- indeed,


as soon as he began to grow celebrated- his admirers had found out the


resemblance between him and the Great Stone Face; and so much were


they struck by it, that throughout the country this distinguished


gentleman was known by the name of Old Stony Phiz. The phrase was


considered as giving a highly favorable aspect to his political


prospects; for, as is likewise the case with the Popedom, nobody


ever becomes president without taking a name other than his own.


   While his friends were doing their best to make him president,


Old Stony Phiz, as he was called, set out on a visit to the valley


where he was born. Of course, he had no other object than to shake


hands with his fellow-citizens, and neither thought nor cared about


any effect which his progress through the country might have upon


the election. Magnificent preparations were made to receive the


illustrious statesman; a cavalcade of horsemen set forth to meet him


at the boundary line of the state, and all the people left their


business and gathered along the wayside to see him pass. Among these


was Ernest. Though more than once disappointed, as we have seen, he


had such a hopeful and confiding nature, that he was always ready to


believe in whatever seemed beautiful and good. He kept his heart


continually open, and thus was sure to catch the blessing from on


high, when it should come. So now again, as buoyantly as ever, he went


forth to behold the likeness of the Great Stone Face.


   The cavalcade came prancing along the road, with a great clattering


of hoofs and a mighty cloud of dust, which rose up so dense and high


that the visage of the mountain-side was completely hidden from


Ernest's eyes. All the great men of the neighborhood were there on


horseback: militia officers, in uniform; the member of Congress; the


sheriff of the county; the editors of newspapers; and many a farmer,


too, had mounted his patient steed, with his Sunday coat upon his


back. It really was a very brilliant spectacle, especially as there


were numerous banners flaunting over the cavalcade, on some of which


were gorgeous portraits of the illustrious statesman and the Great


Stone Face, smiling familiarly at one another, like two brothers. If


the pictures were to be trusted, the mutual resemblance, it must be


confessed, was marvellous. We must not forget to mention that there


was a band of music, which made the echoes of the mountains ring and


reverberate with the loud triumph of its strains; so that airy and


soul-thrilling melodies broke out among all the heights and hollows as


if every nook of his native valley had found a voice to welcome the


distinguished guest. But the grandest effect was when the far-off


mountain-precipice flung back the music; for then the Great Stone Face


itself seemed to be swelling the triumphant chorus, in


acknowledgment that, at length, the man of prophecy was come.


   All this while the people were throwing up their hats and shouting,


with enthusiasm so contagious that the heart of Ernest kindled up, and


he likewise threw up his hat, and shouted, as loudly as the loudest,


"Huzza for the great man! Huzza for Old Stony Phiz!" But as yet he had


not seen him.


   "Here he is, now!" cried those who stood near Ernest. "There!


There! Look at Old Stony Phiz and then at the Old Man of the Mountain,


and see if they are not as like as two twin-brothers!"


   In the midst of all this gallant array, came an open barouche,


drawn by four white horses; and in the barouche, with his massive head


uncovered, sat the illustrious statesman, Old Stony Phiz himself.


   "Confess it," said one of Ernest's neighbors to him, "the Great


Stone Face has met its match at last!"


   Now, it must be owned that, at his first glimpse of the countenance


which was bowing and smiling from the barouche, Ernest did fancy


that there was a resemblance between it and the old familiar face upon


the mountain-side. The brow, with its massive depth and loftiness, and


all the other features, indeed, were boldly and strongly hewn, as if


in emulation of a more than heroic, of a Titanic model. But the


sublimity and stateliness, the grand expression of a divine


sympathy, that illuminated the mountain-visage, and etherealized its


ponderous granite substance into spirit, might here be sought in vain.


Something had been originally left out, or had departed. And therefore


the marvellously gifted statesman had always a weary gloom in the deep


caverns of his eyes, as of a child that has outgrown its playthings,


or a man of mighty faculties and little aims, whose life, with all its


high performances, was vague and empty, because no high purpose had


endowed it with reality.


   Still, Ernest's neighbor was thrusting his elbow into his side, and


pressing him for an answer.


   "Confess! confess! Is not he the very picture of your Old Man of


the Mountain?"


   "No!" said Ernest, bluntly, "I see little or no likeness."


   "Then so much the worse for the Great Stone Face!" answered his


neighbor; and again he set up a shout for Old Stony Phiz.


   But Ernest turned away. melancholy, and almost despondent; for this


was the saddest of his disappointments, to behold a man who might have


fulfilled the prophecy, and had not willed to do so. Meantime, the


cavalcade, the banners, the music, and the barouches, swept past


him, with the vociferous crowd in the rear, leaving the dust to settle


down, and the Great Stone Face to be revealed again, with the grandeur


that it had worn for untold centuries.


   "Lo, here I am, Ernest!" the benign lips seemed to say. "I have


waited longer than thou, and am not yet weary. Fear not; the man


will come."


   The years hurried onward, treading in their haste on one


another's heels. And now they began to bring white hairs, and


scatter them over the head of Ernest; they made reverend wrinkles


across his forehead, and furrows in his cheeks. He was an aged man.


But not in vain had he grown old: more than the white hairs on his


head were the sage thoughts in his mind; his wrinkles and furrows were


inscriptions that Time had graved, and in which he had written legends


of wisdom that had been tested by the tenor of a life. And Ernest


had ceased to be obscure. Unsought for, undesired, had come the fame


which so many seek, and made him known in the great world, beyond


the limits of the valley in which he had dwelt so quietly. College


professors, and even the active men of cities, came from far to see


and converse with Ernest; for the report had gone abroad that this


simple husbandman had ideas unlike those of other men, not gained from


books, but of a higher tone- a tranquil and familiar majesty, as if he


had been talking with the angels as his daily friends. Whether it were


sage, statesman, or philanthropist, Ernest received these visitors


with the gentle sincerity that had characterized him from boyhood, and


spoke freely with them of whatever came uppermost, or lay deepest in


his heart or their own. While they talked together, his face would


kindle, unawares, and shine upon them, as with a mild evening light.


Pensive with the fulness of such discourse, his guests took leave


and went their way; and, passing up the valley, paused to look at


the Great Stone Face, imagining that they had seen its likeness in a


human countenance, but could not remember where.


   While Ernest had been growing up and growing old, a bountiful


Providence had granted a new poet to this earth. He, likewise, was a


native of the valley but had spent the greater part of his life at a


distance from that romantic region, pouring out his sweet music amid


the bustle and din of cities. Often, however, did the mountains


which had been familiar to him in his childhood lift their snowy peaks


into the clear atmosphere of his poetry. Neither was the Great Stone


Face forgotten, for the poet had celebrated it in an ode, which was


grand enough to have been uttered by its own majestic lips. This man


of genius, we may say, had come down from heaven with wonderful


endowments. If he sang of a mountain, the eyes of all mankind beheld a


mightier grandeur reposing on its breast, or soaring to its summit,


than had before been seen there. If his theme were a lovely lake, a


celestial smile had now been thrown over it, to gleam forever on its


surface. If it were the vast old sea, even the deep immensity of its


dread bosom seemed to swell the higher, as if moved by the emotions of


the song. Thus the world assumed another and a better aspect from


the hour that the poet blessed it with his happy eyes. The Creator had


bestowed him, as the last, best touch to his own handiwork. Creation


was not finished till the poet came to interpret, and so complete it.


   The effect was no less high and beautiful, when his human


brethren were the subject of his verse. The man or woman, sordid


with the common dust of life, who crossed his daily path, and the


little child who played in it, were glorified if he beheld them in his


mood of poetic faith. He showed the golden links of the great chain


that intertwined them with an angelic kindred; he brought out the


hidden traits of a celestial birth that made them worthy of such


kin. Some, indeed, there were, who thought to show the soundness of


their judgment by affirming that all the beauty and dignity of the


natural world existed only in the poet's fancy. Let such men speak for


themselves, who undoubtedly appear to have been spawned forth by


Nature with a contemptuous bitterness; she having plastered them up


out of her refuse stuff, after all the swine were made. As respects


all things else, the poet's ideal was the truest truth.


   The songs of this poet found their way to Ernest. He read them,


after his customary toil, seated on the bench before his cottage door,


where, for such a length of time, he had filled his repose with


thought by gazing at the Great Stone Face. And now, as he read stanzas


that caused the soul to thrill within him, he lifted his eyes to the


vast countenance beaming on him so benignantly.


   "O, majestic friend," he murmured, addressing the Great Stone Face,


"is not this man worthy to resemble thee?"


   The Face seemed to smile, but answered not a word.


   Now it happened that the poet, though he dwelt so far away, had not


only heard of Ernest, but had meditated much upon his character, until


he deemed nothing so desirable as to meet this man, whose untaught


wisdom walked hand in hand with the noble simplicity of his life.


One summer morning, therefore, he took passage by the railroad, and,


in the decline of the afternoon, alighted from the cars at no great


distance from Ernest's cottage. The great hotel, which had formerly


been the palace of Mr. Gathergold, was close at hand, but the poet


with his carpet-bag on his arm, inquired at once where Ernest dwelt,


and was resolved to be accepted as his guest.


   Approaching the door, he there found the good old man, holding a


volume in his hand, which alternately he read, and then, with a finger


between the leaves, looked lovingly at the Great Stone Face.


   "Good evening," said the poet. "Can you give a traveller a


night's lodging?"'


   "Willingly," answered Ernest; and then he added, smiling, "Methinks


I never saw the Great Stone Face look so hospitably at a stranger."


   The poet sat down on the bench beside him, and he and Ernest talked


together. Often had the poet held intercourse with the wittiest and


the wisest, but never before with a man like Ernest, whose thoughts


and feelings gushed up with such a natural freedom, and who made great


truths so familiar by his simple utterance of them. Angels, as had


been so often said, seemed to have wrought with him at his labor in


the fields; angels seemed to have sat with him by the fireside; and,


dwelling with angels as friend with friends, he had imbibed the


sublimity of their ideas, and imbued it with the sweet and lowly charm


of household words. So thought the poet. And Ernest, on the other


hand, was moved and agitated by the living images which the poet flung


out of his mind, and which peopled all the air about the


cottage-door with shapes of beauty, both gay and pensive. The


sympathies of these two men instructed them with a profounder sense


than either could have attained alone. Their minds accorded into one


strain, and made delightful music which neither of them could have


claimed as all his own, nor distinguished his own share from the


other's. They led one another, as it were, into a high pavilion of


their thoughts, so remote, and hitherto so dim, that they had never


entered it before, and so beautiful that they desired to be there


always.


   As Ernest listened to the poet, he imagined that the Great Stone


Face was bending forward to listen too. He gazed earnestly into the


poet's glowing eyes.


   "Who are you, my strangely gifted guest?" he said.


   The poet laid his finger on the volume that Ernest had been


reading.


   "You have read these poems," said he. "You know me, then- for I


wrote them."


   Again, and still more earnestly than before, Ernest examined the


poet's features; then turned towards the Great Stone Face; then


back, with an uncertain aspect, to his guest. But his countenance


fell; he shook his head, and sighed.


   "Wherefore are you sad?" inquired the poet.


   "Because, replied Ernest, "all through life I have awaited the


fulfilment of a prophecy; and, when I read these poems, I hoped that


it might be fulfilled in you."


   "You hoped," answered the poet, faintly smiling, "to find in me the


likeness of the Great Stone Face. And you are disappointed, as


formerly with Mr. Gathergold, and Old Blood-and-Thunder, and Old Stony


Phiz. Yes, Ernest, it is my doom. You must add my name to the


illustrious three, and record another failure of your hopes. For- in


shame and sadness do I speak it, Ernest- I am not worthy to be


typified by yonder benign and majestic image."


   "And why?" asked Ernest. He pointed to the volume- "Are not those


thoughts divine?"


   "They have a strain of the Divinity," replied the poet. "You can


hear in them the far-off echo of a heavenly song. But my life, dear


Ernest, has not corresponded with my thought. I have had grand dreams,


but they have been only dreams, because I have lived- and that, too,


by own choice- among poor and mean realities. Sometimes even- shall


I dare to say it?- I lack faith in the grandeur, the beauty, and the


goodness, which my own works are said to have made more evident in


nature and in human life. Why, then, pure seeker of the good and true,


shouldst thou hope to find me, in yonder image of the divine!"


   The poet spoke sadly, and his eyes were dim with tears. So,


likewise, were those of Ernest.


   At the hour of sunset, as had long been his frequent custom, Ernest


was to discourse to an assemblage of the neighboring inhabitants, in


the open air. He and the poet, arm in arm, still talking together as


they went along, proceeded to the spot. It was a small nook among


the hills, with a gray precipice behind, the stern front of which


was relieved by the pleasant foliage of many creeping plants, that


made a tapestry for the naked rock, by hanging their festoons from all


its rugged angles. At a small elevation above the ground, set in a


rich frame-work of verdure, there appeared a niche, spacious enough to


admit a human figure, with freedom for such gestures as


spontaneously accompany earnest thought and genuine emotion. Into this


natural pulpit Ernest ascended, and threw a look of familiar


kindness around upon his audience. They stood, or sat, or reclined


upon the grass, as seemed good to each, with the departing sunshine


falling obliquely over them, and mingling its subdued cheerfulness


with the solemnity of a grove of ancient trees, beneath and amid the


boughs of which the golden rays were constrained to pass. In another


direction was seen the Great Stone Face, with the same cheer, combined


with the same solemnity, in its benignant aspect.


   Ernest began to speak, giving to the people of what was in his


heart and mind. His words had power, because they accorded with his


thoughts; and his thoughts had reality and depth, because they


harmonized with the life which he had always lived. It was not mere


breath that this preacher uttered; they were the words of life,


because a life of good deeds and holy love was melted into them.


Pearls, pure and rich, had been dissolved into this precious


draught. The poet, as he listened, felt that the being and character


of Ernest were a nobler strain of poetry than he had ever written. His


eyes glistening with tears, he gazed reverentially at the venerable


man, and said within himself that never was there an aspect so


worthy of a prophet and a sage as that mild, sweet, thoughtful


countenance, with the glory of white hair diffused about it. At a


distance, but distinctly to be seen, high up in the golden light of


the setting sun, appeared the Great Stone Face, with hoary mists


around it, like the white hairs around the brow of Ernest. Its look of


grand beneficence seemed to embrace the world.


   At that moment, in sympathy with a thought which he was about to


utter, the face of Ernest assumed a grandeur of expression, so


imbued with benevolence, that the poet, by an irresistible impulse,


threw his arms aloft, and shouted, "Behold! Behold! Ernest is


himself the likeness of the Great Stone Face!"


   Then all the people looked, and saw that what the deep-sighted poet


said was true. The prophecy was fulfilled. But Ernest, having finished


what he had to say, took the poet's arm, and walked slowly homeward,


still hoping that some wiser and better man than himself would by


and by appear, bearing a resemblance to the GREAT STONE FACE.








                        THE END


.




                                      1838


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                             LADY ELEANORE'S MANTLE


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   NOT LONG AFTER Colonel Shute had assumed the government of


Massachusetts Bay, now nearly a hundred and twenty years ago, a


young lady of rank and fortune arrived from England, to claim his


protection as her guardian. He was her distant relative, but the


nearest who had survived the gradual extinction of her family; so that


no more eligible shelter could be found for the rich and high-born


Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe than within the Province House of a


transatlantic colony. The consort of Governor Shute, moreover, had


been as a mother to her childhood, and was now anxious to receive her,


in the hope that a beautiful young woman would be exposed to


infinitely less peril from the primitive society of New England than


amid the artifices and corruptions of a court. If either the


Governor or his lady had especially consulted their own comfort,


they would probably have sought to devolve the responsibility on other


hands; since, with some noble and splendid traits of character, Lady


Eleanore was remarkable for a harsh, unyielding pride, a haughty


consciousness of her hereditary and personal advantages, which made


her almost incapable of control. Judging from many traditionary


anecdotes, this peculiar temper was hardly less than a monomania;


or, if the acts which it inspired were those of a sane person, it


seemed due from Providence that pride so sinful should be followed


by as severe a retribution. That tinge of the marvellous, which is


thrown over so many of these half-forgotten legends, has probably


imparted an additional wildness to the strange story of Lady


Eleanore Rochcliffe.


   The ship in which she came passenger had arrived at Newport, whence


Lady Eleanore was conveyed to Boston in the Governor's coach, attended


by a small escort of gentlemen on horseback. The ponderous equipage,


with its four black horses, attracted much notice as it rumbled


through Cornhill, surrounded by the prancing steeds of half a dozen


cavaliers, with swords dangling to their stirrups and pistols at their


holsters. Through the large glass windows of the coach, as it rolled


along, the people could discern the figure of Lady Eleanore, strangely


combining an almost queenly stateliness with the grace and beauty of a


maiden in her teens. A singular tale had gone abroad among the


ladies of the province, that their fair rival was indebted for much of


the irresistible charm of her appearance to a certain article of


dress- an embroidered mantle- which had been wrought by the most


skilful artist in London, and possessed even magical properties of


adornment. On the present occasion, however, she owed nothing to the


witchery of dress, being clad in a riding habit of velvet, which would


have appeared stiff and ungraceful on any other form.


   The coachman reined in his four black steeds, and the whole


cavalcade came to a pause in front of the contorted iron balustrade


that fenced the Province House from the public street. It was an


awkward coincidence that the bell of the Old South was just then


tolling for a funeral; so that, instead of a gladsome peal with


which it was customary to announce the arrival of distinguished


strangers, Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe was ushered by a doleful clang, as


if calamity had come embodied in her beautiful person.


   "A very great disrespect!" exclaimed Captain Langford, an English


officer, who had recently brought dispatches to Governor Shute. "The


funeral should have been deferred, lest Lady Eleanore's spirits be


affected by such a dismal welcome."


   "With your pardon, sir," replied Doctor Clarke, a physician, and


a famous champion of the popular party, "whatever the heralds may


pretend, a dead beggar must have precedence of a living queen. King


Death confers high privileges."


   These remarks were interchanged while the speakers waited a passage


through the crowd, which had gathered on each side of the gateway,


leaving an open avenue to the portal of the Province House. A black


slave in livery now leaped from behind the coach, and threw open the


door; while at the same moment Governor Shute descended the flight


of steps from his mansion, to assist Lady Eleanore in alighting. But


the Governor's stately approach was anticipated in a manner that


excited general astonishment. A pale young man, with his black hair


all in disorder, rushed from the throng, and prostrated himself beside


the coach, thus offering his person as a footstool for Lady Eleanore


Rochcliffe to tread upon. She held back an instant, yet with an


expression as if doubting whether the young man were worthy to bear


the weight of her footstep, rather than dissatisfied to receive such


awful reverence from a fellow-mortal.


   "Up, sir," said the Governor, sternly, at the same time lifting his


cane over the intruder. "What means the Bedlamite by this freak?"


   "Nay," answered Lady Eleanore playfully, but with more scorn than


pity in her tone, "your Excellency shall not strike him. When men seek


only to be trampled upon, it were a pity to deny them a favor so


easily granted- and so well deserved!"


   Then, though as lightly as a sunbeam on a cloud, she placed her


foot upon the cowering form, and extended her hand to meet that of the


Governor. There was a brief interval, during which Lady Eleanore


retained this attitude; and never, surely, was there an apter emblem


of aristocracy and hereditary pride trampling on human sympathies


and the kindred of nature, than these two figures presented at that


moment. Yet the spectators were so smitten with her beauty, and so


essential did pride seem to the existence of such a creature, that


they gave a simultaneous acclamation of applause.


   "Who is this insolent young fellow?" inquired Captain Langford, who


still remained beside Doctor Clarke. "If he be in his senses, his


impertinence demands the bastinado. If mad, Lady Eleanore should be


secured from further inconvenience, by his confinement."


   "His name is Jervase Helwyse," answered the Doctor; "a youth of


no birth or fortune, or other advantages, save the mind and soul


that nature gave him; and being secretary to our colonial agent in


London, it was his misfortune to meet this Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe.


He loved her- and her scorn has driven him mad."


   "He was mad so to aspire," observed the English officer.


   "It may be so," said Doctor Clarke, frowning as he spoke. "But I


tell you, sir, I could well-nigh doubt the justice of the Heaven above


us if no signal humiliation overtake this lady, who now treads so


haughtily into yonder mansion. She seeks to place herself above the


sympathies of our common nature, which envelops all human souls.


See, if that nature do not assert its claim over her in some mode that


shall bring her level with the lowest!"


   "Never!" cried Captain Langford indignantly- "neither in life,


nor when they lay her with her ancestors."


   Not many days afterwards the Governor gave a ball in honor of


Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe. The principal gentry of the colony


received invitations, which were distributed to their residences,


far and near, by messengers on horseback, bearing missives sealed with


all the formality of official dispatches. In obedience to the summons,


there was a general gathering of rank, wealth, and beauty; and the


wide door of the Province House had seldom given admittance to more


numerous and honorable guests than on the evening of Lady Eleanore's


ball. Without much extravagance of eulogy, the spectacle might even be


termed splendid; for, according to the fashion of the times, the


ladies shone in rich silks and satins, outspread over


wide-projecting hoops; and the gentlemen glittered in gold embroidery,


laid unsparingly upon the purple, or scarlet, or sky-blue velvet,


which was the material of their coats and waistcoats. The latter


article of dress was of great importance, since it enveloped the


wearer's body nearly to the knees, and was perhaps bedizened with


the amount of his whole year's income, in golden flowers and


foliage. The altered taste of the present day- a taste symbolic of a


deep change in the whole system of society- would look upon almost any


of those gorgeous figures as ridiculous; although that evening the


guests sought their reflections in the pierglasses, and rejoiced to


catch their own glitter amid the glittering crowd. What a pity that


one of the stately mirrors has not preserved a picture of the scene,


which, by the very traits that were so transitory, might have taught


us much that would be worth knowing and remembering!


   Would, at least, that either painter or mirror could convey to us


some faint idea of a garment, already noticed in this legend- the Lady


Eleanore's embroidered mantle- which the gossips whispered was


invested with magic properties, so as to lend a new and untried


grace to her figure each time that she put it on! Idle fancy as it is,


this mysterious mantle has thrown an awe around my image of her,


partly from its fabled virtues, and partly because it was the


handiwork of a dying woman, and, perchance, owed the fantastic grace


of its conception to the delirium of approaching death.


   After the ceremonial greetings had been paid, Lady Eleanore


Rochcliffe stood apart from the mob of guests, insulating herself


within a small and distinguished circle, to whom she accorded a more


cordial favor than to the general throng. The waxen torches threw


their radiance vividly over the scene, bringing out its brilliant


points in strong relief; but she gazed carelessly, and with now and


then an expression of weariness or scorn, tempered with such


feminine grace that her auditors scarcely perceived the moral


deformity of which it was the utterance. She beheld the spectacle


not with vulgar ridicule, as disdaining to be pleased with the


provincial mockery of a court festival, but with the deeper scorn of


one whose spirit held itself too high to participate in the


enjoyment of other human souls. Whether or no the recollections of


those who saw her that evening were influenced by the strange events


with which she was subsequently connected, so it was that her figure


ever after recurred to them as marked by something wild and unnatural-


although, at the time, the general whisper was of her exceeding


beauty, and of the indescribable charm which her mantle threw around


her. Some close observers, indeed, detected a feverish flush and


alternate paleness of countenance, with a corresponding flow and


revulsion of spirits, and once or twice a painful and helpless


betrayal of lassitude, as if she were on the point of sinking to the


ground. Then, with a nervous shudder, she seemed to arouse her


energies and threw some bright and playful yet half-wicked sarcasm


into the conversation. There was so strange a characteristic in her


manners and sentiments that it astonished every right-minded listener;


till looking in her face, a lurking and incomprehensible glance and


smile perplexed them with doubts both as to her seriousness and


sanity. Gradually, Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe's circle grew smaller,


till only four gentlemen remained in it. These were Captain


Langford, the English officer before mentioned; a Virginian planter,


who had come to Massachusetts on some political errand; a young


Episcopal clergyman, the grandson of a British earl; and, lastly,


the private secretary of Governor Shute, whose obsequiousness had


won a sort of tolerance from Lady Eleanore.


   At different periods of the evening the liveried servants of the


Province House passed among the guests, bearing huge trays of


refreshments and French and Spanish wines. Lady Eleanore Roch-


cliffe, who refused to wet her beautiful lips even with a bubble of


Champagne, had sunk back into a large damask chair, apparently


overwearied either with the excitement of the scene or its tedium, and


while, for an instant, she was unconscious of voices, laughter, and


music, a young man stole forward, and knelt down at her feet. He


bore a salver in his hand, on which was a chased silver goblet, filled


to the brim with wine, which he offered as reverentially as to a


crowned queen, or rather with the awful devotion of a priest doing


sacrifice to his idol. Conscious that someone touched her robe, Lady


Eleanore started, and unclosed her eyes upon the pale, wild features


and dishevelled hair of Jervase Helwyse.


   "Why do you haunt me thus?" said she, in a languid tone, but with a


kindlier feeling than she ordinarily permitted herself to express.


"They tell me that I have done you harm."


   "Heaven knows if that be so," replied the young man solemnly. "But,


Lady Eleanore, in requital of that harm, if such there be, and for


your own earthly and heavenly welfare, I pray you to take one sip of


this holy wine, and then to pass the goblet round among the guests.


And this shall be a symbol that you have not sought to withdraw


yourself from the chain of human sympathies- which whoso would shake


off must keep company with fallen angels."


   "Where has this mad fellow stolen that sacramental vessel?"


exclaimed the Episcopal clergyman.


   This question drew the notice of the guests to the silver cup,


which was recognized as appertaining to the communion plate of the Old


South Church; and, for aught that could be known, it was brimming over


with the consecrated wine.


   "Perhaps it is poisoned," half whispered the Governor's secretary.


   "Pour it down the villain's throat!" cried the Virginian fiercely.


   "Turn him out of the house!" cried Captain Langford, seizing


Jervase Helwyse so roughly by the shoulder that the sacramental cup


was overturned, and its contents sprinkled upon Lady Eleanore's


mantle. "Whether knave, fool, or Bedlamite, it is intolerable that the


fellow should go at large."


   "Pray, gentlemen, do my poor admirer no harm," said Lady


Eleanore, with a faint and weary smile. "Take him out of my sight,


if such be your pleasure; for I can find in my heart to do nothing but


laugh at him; whereas, in all decency and conscience, it would


become me to weep for the mischief I have wrought!"


   But while the by-standers were attempting to lead away the


unfortunate young man, he broke from them, and with a wild,


impassioned earnestness, offered a new and equally strange petition to


Lady Eleanore. It was no other than that she should throw off the


mantle, which, while he pressed the silver cup of wine upon her, she


had drawn more closely around her form, so as almost to shroud herself


within it.


   "Cast it from you!" exclaimed Jervase Helwyse, clasping his hands


in an agony of entreaty. "It may not yet be too late! Give the


accursed garment to the flames!"


   But Lady Eleanore, with a laugh of scorn, drew the rich folds of


the embroidered mantle over her head, in such a fashion as to give a


completely new aspect to her beautiful face, which- half hidden,


half revealed- seemed to belong to some being of mysterious


character and purposes.


   Farewell, Jervase Helwyse!" said she. "Keep my image in your


remembrance, as you behold it now."


   "Alas, lady!" he replied, in a tone no longer wild, but sad as a


funeral bell. "We must meet shortly, when your face may wear another


aspect- and that shall be the image that must abide within me."


   He made no more resistance to the violent efforts of the


gentlemen and servants, who almost dragged him out of the apartment,


and dismissed him roughly from the iron gate of the Province House.


Captain Langford, who had been very active in this affair, was


returning to the presence of Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe, when he


encountered the physician, Doctor Clarke, with whom he had held some


casual talk on the day of her arrival. The Doctor stood apart,


separated from Lady Eleanore by the width of the room, but eying her


with such keen sagacity that Captain Langford involuntarily gave him


credit for the discovery of some deep secret.


   "You appear to be smitten, after all, with the charms of this


queenly maiden," said he, hoping thus to draw forth the physician's


hidden knowledge.


   "God forbid!" answered Doctor Clarke, with a grave smile; "and if


you be wise you will put up the same prayer for yourself. Wo to


those who shall be smitten by this beautiful Lady Eleanore! But yonder


stands the Governor- and I have a word or two for his private ear.


Good night!"


   He accordingly advanced to Governor Shute, and addressed him in


so low a tone that none of the by-standers could catch a word of


what he said, although the sudden change of his Excellency's


hitherto cheerful visage betokened that the communication could be


of no agreeable import. A very few moments afterwards it was announced


to the guests that an unforeseen circumstance rendered it necessary to


put a premature close to the festival.


   The ball at the Province House supplied a topic of conversation for


the colonial metropolis for some days after its occurrence, and


might still longer have been the general theme, only that a subject of


all-engrossing interest thrust it, for a time, from the public


recollection. This was the appearance of a dreadful epidemic, which,


in that age and long before and afterwards, was wont to slay its


hundreds and thousands on both sides of the Atlantic. On the


occasion of which we speak, it was distinguished by a peculiar


virulence, insomuch that it has left its traces- its pit-marks, to use


an appropriate figure- on the history of the country, the affairs of


which were thrown into confusion by its ravages. At first, unlike


its ordinary course, the disease seemed to confine itself to the


higher circles of society, selecting its victims from among the proud,


the well-born, and the wealthy, entering unabashed into stately


chambers, and lying down with the slumberers in silken beds. Some of


the most distinguished guests of the Province House- even those whom


the haughty Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe had deemed not unworthy of her


favor- were stricken by this fatal scourge. It was noticed, with an


ungenerous bitterness of feeling, that the four gentlemen- the


Virginian, the British officer, the young clergyman, and the


Governor's secretary- who had been her most devoted attendants on


the evening of the ball, were the foremost on whom the plague stroke


fell. But the disease, pursuing its onward progress, soon ceased to be


exclusively a prerogative of aristocracy. Its red brand was no


longer conferred like a noble's star, or an order of knighthood. It


threaded its way through the narrow and crooked streets, and entered


the low, mean, darksome dwellings, and laid its hand of death upon the


artisans and laboring classes of the town. It compelled rich and


poor to feel themselves brethren then; and stalking to and fro


across the Three Hills, with a fierceness which made it almost a new


pestilence, there was that mighty conqueror- that scourge and horror


of our forefathers- the Small-Pox!


   We cannot estimate the affright which this plague inspired of yore,


by contemplating it as the fangless monster of the present day. We


must remember, rather, with what awe we watched the gigantic footsteps


of the Asiatic cholera, striding from shore to shore of the


Atlantic, and marching like destiny upon cities far remote which


flight had already half depopulated. There is no other fear so


horrible and unhumanizing as that which makes man dread to breathe


heaven's vital air lest it be poison, or to grasp the hand of a


brother or friend lest the gripe of the pestilence should clutch


him. Such was the dismay that now followed in the track of the


disease, or ran before it throughout the town. Graves were hastily


dug, and the pestilential relics as hastily covered, because the


dead were enemies of the living, and strove to draw them headlong,


as it were, into their own dismal pit. The public councils were


suspended, as if mortal wisdom might relinquish its devices, now


that an unearthly usurper had found his way into the ruler's


mansion. Had an enemy's fleet been hovering on the coast, or his


armies trampling on our soil, the people would probably have committed


their defence to that same direful conqueror who had wrought their own


calamity, and would permit no interference with his sway. This


conqueror had a symbol of his triumphs. It was a blood-red flag,


that fluttered in the tainted air, over the door of every dwelling


into which the Small-Pox had entered.


   Such a banner was long since waving over the portal of the Province


House; for thence, as was proved by tracking its footsteps back, had


all this dreadful mischief issued. It had been traced back to a lady's


luxurious chamber- to the proudest of the proud- to her that was so


delicate, and hardly owned herself of earthly mould- to the haughty


one, who took her stand above human sympathies- to Lady Eleanore!


There remained no room for doubt that the contagion had lurked in that


gorgeous mantle, which threw so strange a grace around her at the


festival. Its fantastic splendor had been conceived in the delirious


brain of a woman on her death-bed, and was the last toil of her


stiffening fingers, which had interwoven fate and misery with its


golden threads. This dark tale, whispered at first, was now bruited


far and wide. The people raved against the Lady Eleanore, and cried


out that her pride and scorn had evoked a fiend, and that, between


them both, this monstrous evil had been born. At times, their rage and


despair took the semblance of grinning mirth; and whenever the red


flag of the pestilence was hoisted over another and yet another


door, they clapped their hands and shouted through the streets, in


bitter mockery: "Behold a new triumph for the Lady Eleanore!"


   One day, in the midst of these dismal times, a wild figure


approached the portal of the Province House, and folding his arms,


stood contemplating the scarlet banner which a passing breeze shook


fitfully, as if to fling abroad the contagion that it typified. At


length, climbing one of the pillars by means of the iron balustrade,


he took down the flag and entered the mansion, waving it above his


head. At the foot of the staircase he met the Governor, booted and


spurred, with his cloak drawn around him, evidently on the point of


setting forth upon a journey.


   "Wretched lunatic, what do you seek here?" exclaimed Shute,


extending his cane to guard himself from contact. "There is nothing


here but Death. Back- or you will meet him!"


   "Death will not touch me, the banner-bearer of the pestilence!"


cried Jervase Helwyse, shaking the red flag aloft. "Death, and the


Pestilence, who wears the aspect of the Lady Eleanore, will walk


through the streets tonight, and I must march before them with this


banner!"


   "Why do I waste words on the fellow?" muttered the Governor,


drawing his cloak across his mouth. "What matters his miserable


life, when none of us are sure of twelve hours' breath? On, fool, to


your own destruction!"


   He made way for Jervase Helwyse, who immediately ascended the


staircase, but, on the first landing-place, was arrested by the firm


grasp of a hand upon his shoulder. Looking fiercely up, with a


madman's impulse to struggle with and rend asunder his opponent, he


found himself powerless beneath a calm, stern eye, which possessed the


mysterious property of quelling frenzy at its height. The person


whom he had now encountered was the physician, Doctor Clarke, the


duties of whose sad profession had led him to the Province House where


he was an infrequent guest in more prosperous times.


   "Young man, what is your purpose?" demanded he.


   "I seek the Lady Eleanore," answered Jervase Helwyse, submissively.


   "All have fled from her," said the physician. "Why do you seek


her now? I tell you, youth, her nurse fell death-stricken on the


threshold of that fatal chamber. Know ye not, that never came such a


curse to our shores as this lovely Lady Eleanore? that her breath


has filled the air with poison? that she has shaken pestilence and


death upon the land, from the folds of her accursed mantle?"


   "Let me look upon her!" rejoined the mad youth, more wildly. "Let


me behold her, in her awful beauty, clad in the regal garments of


the pestilence! She and Death sit on a throne together. Let me kneel


down before them!"


   "Poor youth!" said Doctor Clarke; and, moved by a deep sense of


human weakness, a smile of caustic humor curled his lip even then.


"Wilt thou still worship the destroyer and surround her image with


fantasies the more magnificent, the more evil she has wrought? Thus


man doth ever to his tyrants. Approach, then! Madness, as I have


noted, has that good efficacy, that it will guard you from


contagion- and perchance its own cure may be found in yonder chamber."


   Ascending another flight of stairs, he threw open a door and signed


to Jervase Helwyse that he should enter. The poor lunatic, it seems


probable, had cherished a delusion that his haughty mistress sat in


state, unharmed herself by the pestilential influence, which, as by


enchantment, she scattered round about her. He dreamed, no doubt, that


her beauty was not dimmed, but brightened into superhuman splendor.


With such anticipations, he stole reverentially to the door at which


the physician stood, but paused upon the threshold gazing fearfully


into the gloom of the darkened chamber.


   "Where is the Lady Eleanore?" whispered he.


   "Call her," replied the physician.


   "Lady Eleanore! Princess! Queen of Death!" cried Jervase Helwyse,


advancing three steps into the chamber. "She is not here! There, on


yonder table, I behold the sparkle of a diamond which once she wore


upon her bosom. There"- and he shuddered- "there hangs her mantle,


on which a dead woman embroidered a spell of dreadful potency. But


where is the Lady Eleanore?"


   Something stirred within the silken curtains of a canopied bed; and


a low moan was uttered, which, listening intently, Jervase Helwyse


began to distinguish as a woman's voice, complaining dolefully of


thirst. He fancied, even, that he recognized its tones.


   "My throat! my throat is scorched," murmured the voice. "A drop


of water!"


   "What thing art thou?" said the brain-stricken youth, drawing


near the bed and tearing asunder its curtains. "Whose voice hast


thou stolen for thy murmurs and miserable petitions, as if Lady


Eleanore could be conscious of mortal infirmity? Fie! Heap of diseased


mortality, why lurkest thou in my lady's chamber?"


   "O Jervase Helwyse," said the voice- and as it spoke the figure


contorted itself, struggling to hide its blasted face- "look not now


on the woman you once loved! The curse of Heaven hath stricken me,


because I would not call man my brother, nor woman sister. I wrapped


myself in PRIDE as in a MANTLE, and scorned the sympathies of


nature; and therefore has nature made this wretched body the medium of


a dreadful sympathy. You are avenged- they are all avenged- Nature


is avenged- for I am Eleanore Rochcliffe!"


   The malice of his mental disease, the bitterness lurking at the


bottom of his heart, mad as he was, for a blighted and ruined life,


and love that had been paid with cruel scorn, awoke within the


breast of Jervase Helwyse. He shook his finger at the wretched girl,


and the chamber echoed, the curtains of the bed were shaken, with


his outburst of insane merriment.


   "Another triumph for the Lady Eleanore!" he cried. "All have been


her victims! Who so worthy to be the final victim as herself?"


   Impelled by some new fantasy of his crazed intellect, he snatched


the fatal mantle and rushed from the chamber and the house. That night


a procession passed, by torchlight, through the streets, bearing in


the midst the figure of a woman, enveloped with a richly embroidered


mantle; while in advance stalked Jervase Helwyse, waving the red


flag of the pestilence. Arriving opposite the Province House, the


mob burned the effigy, and a strong wind came and swept away the


ashes. It was said that, from that very hour, the pestilence abated,


as if its sway had some mysterious connection, from the first plague


stroke to the last, with Lady Eleanore's Mantle. A remarkable


uncertainty broods over that unhappy lady's fate. There is a belief,


however, that in a certain chamber of this mansion a female form may


sometimes be duskily discerned, shrinking into the darkest corner


and muffling her face within an embroidered mantle. Supposing the


legend true, can this be other than the once proud Lady Eleanore?








                        THE END


.




                                      1850


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                       THE SNOW-IMAGE: A CHILDISH MIRACLE


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   ONE AFTERNOON of a cold winter's day, when the sun shone forth with


chilly brightness, after a long storm, two children asked leave of


their mother to run out and play in the new-fallen snow. The elder


child was a little girl, whom, because she was of a tender and


modest disposition, and was thought to be very beautiful, her parents,


and other people who were familiar with her, used to call Violet.


But her brother was known by the style and title of Peony, on


account of the ruddiness of his broad and round little phiz, which


made everybody think of sunshine and great scarlet flowers. The father


of these two children, a certain Mr. Lindsey, it is important to


say, was an excellent but exceedingly matter-of-fact sort of man, a


dealer in hardware, and was sturdily accustomed to take what is called


the common-sense view of all matters that came under his


consideration. With a heart about as tender as other people's, he


had a head as hard and impenetrable, and therefore, perhaps, as empty,


as one of the iron pots which it was a part of his business to sell.


The mother's character, on the other hand, had a strain of poetry in


it, a trait of unworldly beauty- a delicate and dewy flower, as it


were, that had survived out of her imaginative youth, and still kept


itself alive amid the dusty realities of matrimony and motherhood.


   So, Violet and Peony, as I began with saying, besought their mother


to let them run out and play in the new snow; for, though it had


looked so dreary and dismal, drifting downward out of the gray sky, it


had a very cheerful aspect, now that the sun was shining on it. The


children dwelt in a city, and had no wider play-place than a little


garden before the house, divided by a white fence from the street, and


with a pear-tree and two or three plum-trees overshadowing it, and


some rose-bushes just in front of the parlor windows. The trees and


shrubs, however, were now leafless, and their twigs were enveloped


in the light snow, which thus made a kind of wintry foliage, with here


and there a pendent icicle for the fruit.


   "Yes, Violet- yes, my little Peony," said their kind mother; "you


may go out and play in the new snow."


   Accordingly, the good lady bundled up her darlings in woollen


jackets and wadded sacks, and put comforters round their necks, and


a pair of striped gaiters on each little pair of legs, and worsted


mittens on their hands, and gave them a kiss apiece, by way of a spell


to keep away Jack Frost. Forth sallied the two children, with a


hop-skip-and-jump, that carried them at once into the very heart of


a huge snow-drift, whence Violet emerged like a snow-bunting, while


little Peony floundered out with his round face in full bloom. Then


what a merry time had they! To look at them, frolicking in the


wintry garden, you would have thought that the dark and pitiless storm


had been sent for no other purpose but to provide a new plaything


for Violet and Peony; and that they themselves had been created, as


the snow-birds were, to take delight only in the tempest, and in the


white mantle which it spread over the earth.


   At last, when they had frosted one another all over with handfuls


of snow, Violet, after laughing heartily at little Peony's figure, was


struck with a new idea.


   "You look exactly like a snow-image, Peony," said she, "if your


cheeks were not so red. And that puts me in mind! Let us make an image


out of snow- an image of a little girl- and it shall be our sister and


shall run about and play with us all winter long. Won't it be nice?"


   "O, yes!" cried Peony, as plainly as he could speak, for he was but


a little boy. "That will be nice! And mamma shall see it!"


   "Yes," answered Violet; "mamma shall see the new little girl. But


she must not make her come into the warm parlor; for, you know, our


little snow-sister will not love the warmth."


   And forthwith the children began this great business of making a


snow-image that should run about; while their mother, who was


sitting at the window and overheard some of their talk, could not help


smiling at the gravity with which they set about it. They really


seemed to imagine that there would be no difficulty whatever in


creating a live little girl out of the snow. And, to say the truth, if


miracles are ever to be wrought, it will be by putting our hands to


the work in precisely such a simple and undoubting frame of mind as


that in which Violet and Peony now undertook to perform one, without


so much as knowing that it was a miracle. So thought the mother; and


thought, likewise, that the new snow, just fallen from heaven, would


be excellent material to make new beings of, if it were not so very


cold. She gazed at the children a moment longer, delighting to watch


their little figures- the girl, tall for her age, graceful and


agile, and so delicately colored that she looked like a cheerful


thought, more than a physical reality- while Peony expanded in breadth


rather than height, and rolled along on his short and sturdy legs,


as substantial as an elephant, though not quite so big. Then the


mother resumed her work. What it was I forget; but she was either


trimming a silken bonnet for Violet, or darning a pair of stockings


for little Peony's short legs. Again, however, and again, and yet


other agains, she could not help turning her head to the window, to


see how the children got on with their snow-image.


   Indeed, it was an exceedingly pleasant sight, those bright little


souls at their tasks! Moreover, it was really wonderful to observe how


knowingly and skilfully they managed the matter. Violet assumed the


chief direction, and told Peony what to do, while, with her own


delicate fingers, she shaped out all the nicer parts of the


snow-figure. It seemed, in fact, not so much to be made by the


children, as to grow up under their hands, while they were playing and


prattling about it. Their mother was quite surprised at this; and


the longer she looked, the more and more surprised she grew.


   "What remarkable children mine are!" thought she, smiling with a


mother's pride; and smiling at herself, too, for being so proud of


them. "What other children could have made anything so like a little


girl's figure out of snow, at the first trial? Well- but now I must


finish Peony's new frock, for his grandfather is coming tomorrow,


and I want the little fellow to look handsome."


   So she took up the frock, and was soon as busily at work again with


her needle as the two children with their snow-image. But still, as


the needle travelled hither and thither through the seams of the


dress, the mother made her toil light and happy by listening to the


airy voices of Violet and Peony. They kept talking to one another


all the time, their tongues being quite as active as their feet and


hands. Except at intervals, she could not distinctly hear what was


said, but had merely a sweet impression that they were in a most


loving mood, and were enjoying themselves highly, and that the


business of making the snow-image went prosperously on. Now and


then, however, when Violet and Peony happened to raise their voices,


the words were as audible as if they had been spoken in the very


parlor, where the mother sat. O, how delightfully those words echoed


in her heart, even though they meant nothing so very wise or


wonderful, after all!


   But you must know a mother listens with her heart, much more than


with her ears; and thus she is often delighted with the trills of


celestial music, when other people can hear nothing of the kind.


   "Peony, Peony!" cried Violet to her brother, who had gone to


another part of the garden, "bring me some of that fresh snow,


Peony, from the very furthest corner, where we have not been


trampling. I want it to shape our little snow-sister's bosom with. You


know that part must be quite pure, just as it came out of the sky!"


   "Here it is, Violet!" answered Peony, in his bluff tone- but a very


sweet tone, too- as he came floundering through the half-trodden


drifts. "Here is the snow for her little bosom. O, Violet, how


beau-ti-ful she begins to look!"


   "Yes," said Violet, thoughtfully and quietly; "our snow-sister does


look very lovely. I did not quite know, Peony, that we could make such


a sweet little girl as this."


   The mother, as she listened, thought how fit and delightful an


incident it would be, if fairies, or, still better, if


angel-children were to come from paradise, and play invisibly with her


own darlings, and help them to make their snow-image, giving it the


features of celestial babyhood! Violet and Peony would not be aware of


their immortal playmates only they would see that the image grew


very beautiful while they worked at it, and would think that they


themselves had done it all.


   "My little girl and boy deserve such playmates, if mortal


children ever did!" said the mother to herself; and then she smiled


again at her own motherly pride.


   Nevertheless, the idea seized upon her imagination; and, ever and


anon, she took a glimpse out of the window, half dreaming that she


might see the golden-haired children of paradise sporting with her own


golden-haired Violet and bright-cheeked Peony.


   Now, for a few moments, there was a busy and earnest, but


in-distinct hum of the two children's voices, as Violet and Peony


wrought together with one happy consent. Violet still seemed to be the


guiding spirit, while Peony acted rather as a laborer, and brought her


the snow from far and near. And yet the little urchin evidently had


a proper understanding of the matter, too!


   "Peony, Peony!" cried Violet; for her brother was again at the


other side of the garden. "Bring me those light wreaths of snow that


have rested on the lower branches of the pear-tree. You can clamber on


the snow-drift, Peony, and reach them easily. I must have them to make


some ringlets for our snow-sister's head!"


   "Here they are, Violet!" answered the little boy. "Take care you do


not break them. Well done! Well done! How pretty!"


   "Does she not look sweetly?" said Violet, with a very satisfied


tone; "and now we must have some little shining bits of ice, to make


the brightness of her eyes. She is not finished yet. Mamma will see


how very beautiful she is; but papa will say, 'Tush! nonsense!- come


in out of the cold!'"


   "Let us call mamma to look out," said Peony; and then he shouted


lustily, "Mamma! mamma!! mamma!!! Look out, and see what a nice 'ittle


girl we are making!


   The mother put down her work, for an instant, and looked out of the


window. But it so happened that the sun- for this was one of the


shortest days of the whole year- had sunken so nearly to the edge of


the world, that his setting shine came obliquely into the lady's eyes.


So she was dazzled, you must understand, and could not very distinctly


observe what was in the garden. Still, however, through all that


bright, blinding dazzle of the sun and the new snow, she beheld a


small white figure in the garden, that seemed to have a wonderful deal


of human likeness about it. And she saw Violet and Peony- indeed,


she looked more at them than at the image- she saw the two children


still at work; Peony bringing fresh snow, and Violet applying it to


the figure as scientifically as a sculptor adds clay to his model.


Indistinctly as she discerned the snow-child, the mother thought to


herself that never before was there a snow-figure so cunningly made,


nor ever such a dear little girl and boy to make it.


   "They do everything better than other children," said she, very


complacently. "No wonder they make better snow-images!"


   She sat down again to her work, and made as much haste with it as


possible; because twilight would soon come, and Peony's frock was


not yet finished, and grandfather was expected, by railroad, pretty


early in the morning. Faster and faster, therefore, went her flying


fingers. The children, likewise, kept busily at work in the garden,


and still the mother listened, whenever she could catch a word. She


was amused to observe now their little imaginations had got mixed up


with what they were doing, and were carried away by it. They seemed


positively to think that the snow-child would run about and play


with them.


   "What a nice playmate she will be for us, all winter long!" said


Violet. "I hope papa will not be afraid of her giving us a cold!


Shan't you love her dearly, Peony?"


   "O, yes!" cried Peony. "And I will hug her, and she shall sit


down close by me, and drink some of my warm milk!"


   "O, no, Peony!" answered Violet, with grave wisdom. "That will


not do at all. Warm milk will not be wholesome for our little


snow-sister. Little snow-people, like her, eat nothing but icicles.


No, no, Peony; we must not give her anything warm to drink!"


   There was a minute or two of silence; for Peony, whose short legs


were never weary, had gone on a pilgrimage again to the other side


of the garden. All of a sudden, Violet cried out, loudly and joyfully,


"Look here, Peony! Come quickly! A light has been shining on her cheek


out of that rose-colored cloud! and the color does not go away! Is not


that beautiful?"


   "Yes; it is beau-ti-ful," answered Peony, pronouncing the three


syllables with deliberate accuracy. "O, Violet, only look at her hair!


It is all like gold!"


   "O, certainly," said Violet, with tranquillity, as if it were


very much a matter of course. "That color, you know, comes from the


golden clouds, that we see up there in the sky. She is almost finished


now. But her lips must be made very red- redder than her cheeks.


Perhaps, Peony, it will make them red, if we both kiss them!"


   Accordingly, the mother heard two smart little smacks, as if both


her children were kissing the snow-image on its frozen mouth. But,


as this did not seem to make the lips quite red enough, Violet next


proposed that the snow-child should be invited to kiss Peony's scarlet


cheek.


   "Come, 'ittle snow-sister, kiss me!" cried Peony.


   "There! she has kissed you," added Violet, "and now her lips are


very red. And she blushed a little, too!"


   "O, what a cold kiss!" cried Peony.


   Just then, there came a breeze of the pure west wind, sweeping


through the garden and rattling the parlor windows. It sounded so


wintry cold, that the mother was about to tap on the window-pane


with her thimbled finger, to summon the two children in, when they


both cried out to her with one voice. The tone was not a tone of


surprise, although they were evidently a good deal excited; it


appeared rather as if they were very much rejoiced at some event


that had now happened, but which they had been looking for, and had


reckoned upon all along.


   "Mamma! mamma! We have finished our little snow-sister, and she


is running about the garden with us!"


   "What imaginative little beings my children are!" thought the


mother, putting the last few stitches into Peony's frock. "And it is


strange, too, that they make me almost as much a child as they


themselves are! I can hardly help believing, now, that the


snow-image has really come to life!"


   "Dear mamma!" cried Violet, "pray look out and see what a sweet


playmate we have!"


   The mother, being thus entreated, could no longer delay to look


forth from the window. The sun was now gone out of the sky, leaving,


however, a rich inheritance of his brightness among those purple and


golden clouds which make the sunsets of winter so magnificent. But


there was not the slightest gleam or dazzle, either on the window or


on the snow; so that the good lady could look all over the garden, and


see everything and everybody in it. And what do you think she saw


there? Violet and Peony, of course, her own two darling children.


Ah, but whom or what did she besides? Why, if you will believe me,


there was a small figure of a girl, dressed all in white, with


rose-tinged cheeks and ringlets of golden hue, playing about the


garden with the two children! A stranger though she was, the child


seemed to be on as familiar terms with Violet and Peony, and they with


her, as if all the three had been playmates during the whole of


their little lives. The mother thought to herself that it must


certainly be the daughter of one of the neighbors, and that, seeing


Violet and Peony in the garden, the child had run across the street to


play with them. So this kind lady went to the door, intending to


invite the little runaway into her comfortable parlor; for, now that


the sunshine was withdrawn, the atmosphere, out of doors, was


already growing very cold.


   But, after opening the house-door, she stood an instant on the


threshold, hesitating whether she ought to ask the child to come in,


or whether she should even speak to her. Indeed, she almost doubted


whether it were a real child, after all, or only a light wreath of the


new-fallen snow, blown hither and thither about the garden by the


intensely cold west wind. There was certainly something very


singular in the aspect of the little stranger. Among all the


children of the neighborhood, the lady could remember no such face,


with its pure white, and delicate rose-color, and the golden


ringlets tossing about the forehead and cheeks. And as for her


dress, which was entirely of white, and fluttering in the breeze, it


was such as no reasonable woman would put upon a little girl, when


sending her out to play, in the depth of winter. It made this kind and


careful mother shiver only to look at those small feet, with nothing


in the world on them, except a very thin pair of white slippers.


Nevertheless, airily as she was clad, the child seemed to feel not the


slightest inconvenience from the cold, but danced so lightly over


the snow that the tips of her toes left hardly a print in its surface;


while Violet could but just keep pace with her, and Peony's short legs


compelled him to lag behind.


   Once, in the course of their play, the strange child placed herself


between Violet and Peony, and taking a hand of each, skipped merrily


forward, and they along with her. Almost immediately, however, Peony


pulled away his little fist, and began to rub it as if the fingers


were tingling with cold; while Violet also released herself, though


with less abruptness, gravely remarking that it was better not to take


hold of hands. The white-robed damsel said not a word, but danced


about, just as merrily as before. If Violet and Peony did not choose


to play with her, she could make just as good a playmate of the


brisk and cold west wind, which kept blowing her all about the garden,


and took such liberties with her, that they seemed to have been


friends for a long time. All this while, the mother stood on the


threshold, wondering how a little girl could look so much like a


flying snow-drift, or how a snow-drift could look so very like a


little girl.


   She called Violet, and whispered to her.


   "Violet, my darling, what is this child's name?" asked she. "Does


she live near us?"


   "Why, dearest mamma," answered Violet, laughing to think that her


mother did not comprehend so very plain an affair, "this is our little


snow-sister, whom we have just been making!"


   "Yes, dear mamma," cried Peony, running to his mother, and


looking up simply into her face. "This is our snow-image! Is it not


a nice 'ittle child?"


   At this instant a flock of snow-birds came flitting through the


air. As was very natural, they avoided Violet and Peony. But- and this


looked strange- they flew at once to the white-robed child,


fluttered eagerly about her head, alighted on her shoulders, and


seemed to claim her as an old acquaintance. She, on her part, was


evidently as glad to see these little birds, old Winter's


grandchildren, as they were to see her, and welcomed them by holding


out both her hands. Hereupon, they each and all tried to alight on her


two palms and ten small fingers and thumbs, crowding one another


off, with an immense fluttering of their tiny wings. One dear little


bird nestled tenderly in her bosom; another put its bill to her


lips. They were as joyous, all the while, and seemed as much in


their element, as you may have seen them when sporting with a


snow-storm.


   Violet and Peony stood laughing at this pretty sight; for they


enjoyed the merry time which their new playmate was having with


these small-winged visitants, almost as much as if they themselves


took part in it.


   "Violet," said her mother, greatly perplexed, "tell me the truth,


without any jest. Who is this little girl?"


   "My darling mamma," answered Violet, looking seriously into her


mother's face, and apparently surprised that she should need any


further explanation, "I have told you truly who she is. It is our


little snow-image, which Peony and I have been making. Peony will tell


you so, as well as I."


   "Yes, mamma," asseverated Peony, with much gravity in his crimson


little phiz; "this is 'ittle snow-child. Is not she a nice one? But,


mamma, her hand is, oh, so very cold!"


   While mamma still hesitated what to think and what to do, the


street-gate was thrown open, and the father of Violet and Peony


appeared, wrapped in a pilot-cloth sack, with a fur cap drawn down


over his ears, and the thickest of gloves upon his hands. Mr.


Lindsey was a middle-aged man, with a weary and yet a happy look in


his wind-flushed and frost-pinched face, as if he had been busy all


the day long, and was glad to get back to his quiet home. His eyes


brightened at the sight of his wife and children, although he could


not help uttering a word or two of surprise, at finding the whole


family in the open air, on so bleak a day, and after sunset too. He


soon perceived the little white stranger, sporting to and fro in the


garden, like a dancing snow-wreath, and the flock of snow-birds


fluttering about 14 her head.


   "Pray, what little girl may that be?" inquired this very sensible


man. "Surely her mother must be crazy, to let her go out in such


bitter weather as it has been today, with only that flimsy white gown,


and those thin slippers!"


   "My dear husband," said his wife, "I know no more about the


little thing than you do. Some neighbor's child, I suppose. Our Violet


and Peony," she added, laughing at herself for repeating so absurd a


story, "insist that she is nothing but a snow-image, which they have


been busy about in the garden, almost all the afternoon."


   As she said this, the mother glanced her eyes toward the spot where


the children's snow-image had been made. What was her surprise, on


perceiving that there was not the slightest trace of so much labor!-


no image at all!- no piled-up heap of snow!- nothing whatever, save


the prints of little footsteps around a vacant space!


   "This is very strange!" said she.


   "What is strange, dear mother?" asked Violet. "Dear father, do


not you see how it is? This is our snow-image, which Peony and I


have made, because we wanted another playmate. Did not we, Peony?"


   "Yes, papa," said crimson Peony. "This be our 'ittle snow-sister.


Is she not beau-ti-ful? But she gave me such a cold kiss!"


   "Poh, nonsense, children!" cried their good, honest father, who, as


we have already intimated, had an exceedingly common-sensible way of


looking at matters. "Do not tell me of making live figures out of


snow. Come, wife; this little stranger must not stay out in the


bleak air a moment longer. We will bring her into the parlor; and


you shall give her a supper of warm bread and milk, and make her as


comfortable as you can. Meanwhile, I will inquire among the neighbors;


or, if necessary, send the city-crier about the streets, to give


notice of a lost child."


    So saying, this honest and very kind-hearted man was going


toward the little white damsel, with the best intentions in the world.


But Violet and Peony, each seizing their father by the hand, earnestly


besought him not to make her come in.


    "Dear father," cried Violet, putting herself before him, "it is


true what I have been telling you! This is our little snow-girl, and


she cannot live any longer than while she breathes the cold west wind.


Do not make her come into the hot room!"


   "Yes, father, shouted Peony, stamping his little foot, so


mightily was he in earnest, "this be nothing but our 'ittle


snow-child! She will not love the hot fire!"


   "Nonsense, children, nonsense, nonsense!" cried the father, half


vexed, half laughing at what he considered their foolish obstinacy.


"Run into the house, this moment! It is too late to play any longer,


now. I must take care of this little girl immediately, or she will


catch her death-a-cold!"


   "Husband! dear husband!" said his wife, in a low voice- for she had


been looking narrowly at the snow-child, and was more perplexed than


ever- "there is something very singular in all this. You will think me


foolish- but- but- may it not be that some invisible angel has been


attracted by the simplicity and good faith with which our children set


about their undertaking? May he not have spent an hour of his


immortality in playing with those dear little souls? and so the result


is what we call a miracle. No, no! Do not laugh at me; I see what a


foolish thought it is!"


   "My dear wife," replied the husband, laughing heartily, "you are as


much a child as Violet and Peony."


   And in one sense so she was, for all through life she had kept


her heart full of childlike simplicity and faith, which was as pure


and clear as crystal; and, looking at all matters through this


transparent medium, she sometimes saw truths so profound, that other


people laughed at them as nonsense and absurdity.


   But now kind Mr. Lindsey had entered the garden, breaking away from


his two children, who still sent their shrill voices after him,


beseeching him to let the snow-child stay and enjoy herself in the


cold west wind. As he approached, the snow-birds took to flight. The


little white damsel, also, fled backward, shaking her head, as if to


say, "Pray, do not touch me!" and roguishly, as it appeared, leading


him through the deepest of the snow. Once, the good man stumbled,


and floundered down upon his face, so that, gathering himself up


again, with the snow sticking to his rough pilot-cloth sack, he looked


as white and wintry as a snow-image of the largest size. Some of the


neighbors, meanwhile, seeing him from their windows, wondered what


could possess poor Mr. Lindsey to be running about his garden in


pursuit of a snow-drift, which the west wind was driving hither and


thither! At length, after a vast deal of trouble, he chased the little


stranger into a corner, where she could not possibly escape him. His


wife had been looking on, and, it being nearly twilight, was


wonder-struck to observe how the snow-child gleamed and sparkled,


and how she seemed to shed a glow all round about her; and when driven


into the corner, she positively glistened like a star! It was a frosty


kind of brightness, too, like that of an icicle in the moonlight.


The wife thought it strange that good Mr. Lindsey should see nothing


remarkable in the snow-child's appearance.


   "Come, you odd little thing!" cried the honest man, seizing her


by the hand, I have caught you at last, and will make you


comfortable in spite of yourself. We will put a nice warm pair of


worsted stockings on your frozen little feet, and you shall have a


good thick shawl to wrap yourself in. Your poor white nose, I am


afraid, is actually frost-bitten. But we will make it all right.


Come along in."


   And so, with a most benevolent smile on his sagacious visage, all


purple as it was with the cold, this very well-meaning gentleman


took the snow-child by the hand and led her towards the house. She


followed him, droopingly and reluctant; for all the glow and sparkle


was gone out of her figure; and whereas just before she had


resembled a bright, frosty, star-gemmed evening, with a crimson


gleam on the cold horizon, she now looked as dull and languid as a


thaw. As kind Mr. Lindsey led her up the steps of the door, Violet and


Peony looked into his face- their eyes full of tears, which froze


before they could run down their cheeks- and again entreated him not


to bring their snow-image into the house.


   "Not bring her in!" exclaimed the kind-hearted man. "Why, you are


crazy, my little Violet!- quite crazy, my small Peony! She is so cold,


already, that her hand has almost frozen mine, in spite of my thick


gloves. Would you have her freeze to death?"


   His wife, as he came up the steps, had been taking another long,


earnest, almost awe-stricken gaze at the little white stranger. She


hardly knew whether it was a dream or no; but she could not help


fancying that she saw the delicate print of Violet's fingers on the


child's neck. It looked just as if, while Violet was shaping out the


image, she had given it a gentle pat with her hand, and had


neglected to smooth the impression quite away.


   "After all, husband," said the mother, recurring to her idea that


the angels would be as much delighted to play with Violet and Peony as


she herself was, "after all, she does look strangely like a


snow-image! I do believe she is made of snow!"


   A puff of the west wind blew against the snow-child, and again


she sparkled like a star.


   "Snow!" repeated good Mr. Lindsey, drawing the reluctant guest over


his hospitable threshold. "No wonder she looks like snow. She is


half frozen, poor little thing! But a good fire will put everything to


rights."


   Without further talk, and always with the same best intentions,


this highly benevolent and common-sensible individual led the little


white damsel- drooping, drooping, drooping, more and more- out of


the frosty air, and into his comfortable parlor. A Heidenberg stove,


filled to the brim with intensely burning anthracite, was sending a


bright gleam through the isinglass of its iron door, and causing the


vase of water on its top to fume and bubble with excitement. A warm,


sultry smell was diffused throughout the room. A thermometer on the


wall furthest from the stove stood at eighty degrees. The parlor was


hung with red curtains, and covered with a red carpet, and looked just


as warm as it felt. The difference betwixt the atmosphere here and the


cold, wintry twilight out of doors, was like stepping at once from


Nova Zembla to the hottest part of India, or from the North Pole


into an oven. O, this was a fine place for the little white stranger!


   The common-sensible man placed the snow-child on the hearth-rug,


right in front of the hissing and fuming stove.


   "Now she will be comfortable!" cried Mr. Lindsey, rubbing his hands


and looking about him, with the pleasantest smile you ever saw.


"Make yourself at home, my child."


   Sad, sad and drooping, looked the little white maiden, as she stood


on the hearth-rug, with the hot blast of the stove striking through


her like a pestilence. Once, she threw a glance wistfully toward the


windows, and caught a glimpse, through its red curtains, of the


snow-covered roofs, and the stars glimmering frostily, and all the


delicious intensity of the cold night. The bleak wind rattled the


window-panes, as if it were summoning her to come forth. But there


stood the snow-child, drooping, before the hot stove!


   But the common-sensible man saw nothing amiss.


   "Come, wife," said he, "let her have a pair of thick stockings


and a woollen shawl or blanket directly; and tell Dora to give her


some warm supper as soon as the milk boils. You, Violet and Peony,


amuse your little friend. She is out of spirits, you see, at finding


herself in a strange place. For my part, I will go around among the


neighbors, and find out where she belongs."


   The mother, meanwhile, had gone in search of the shawl and


stockings; for her own view of the matter, however subtle and


delicate, had given way, as it always did, to the stubborn materialism


of her husband. Without heeding the remonstrances of his two children,


who still kept murmuring that their little snow-sister did not love


the warmth, good Mr. Lindsey took his departure, shutting the parlor


door carefully behind him. Turning up the collar of his sack over


his ears, he emerged from the house, and had barely reached the


street-gate, when he was recalled by the screams of Violet and


Peony, and the rapping of a thimbled finger against the parlor window.


   "Husband! husband!" cried his wife, showing her horror-stricken


face through the window-panes. "There is no need of going for the


child's parents!"


   "We told you so, father!" screamed Violet and Peony, as he


reentered the parlor. "You would bring her in; and now our poor- dear-


beau-ti-ful little snow-sister is thawed!"


   And their own sweet little faces were already dissolved in tears;


so that their father, seeing what strange things occasionally happen


in this every-day world, felt not a little anxious lest his children


might be going to thaw too! In the utmost perplexity, he demanded an


explanation of his wife. She could only reply, that, being summoned to


the parlor by the cries of Violet and Peony, she found no trace of the


little white maiden, unless it were the remains of a heap of snow,


which, while she was gazing at it, melted quite away upon the


hearth-rug.


   "And there you see all that is left of it!" added she, pointing


to a pool of water, in front of the stove.


   "Yes, father, said Violet, looking reproachfully at him, through


her tears, "there is all that is left of our dear little snow-sister!"


   "Naughty father!" cried Peony, stamping his foot, and- I shudder to


say- shaking his little fist at the common-sensible man. "We told


you how it would be! What for did you bring her in?"


   And the Heidenberg stove, through the isinglass of its door, seemed


to glare at good Mr. Lindsey, like a red-eyed demon, triumphing in the


mischief which it had done!


   This, you will observe, was one of those rare cases, which yet will


occasionally happen, where common-sense finds itself at fault. The


remarkable story of the snow-image, though to that sagacious class


of people to whom good Mr. Lindsey belongs it may seem but a


childish affair, is, nevertheless, capable of being moralized in


various methods, greatly for their edification. One of its lessons,


for instance, might be, that it behooves men, and especially men of


benevolence, to consider well what they are about, and, before


acting on their philanthropic purposes, to be quite sure that they


comprehend the nature and all the relations of the business in hand.


What has been established as an element of good to one being may prove


absolute mischief to another; even as the warmth of the parlor was


proper enough for children of flesh and blood, like Violet and


Peony- though by no means very wholesome, even for them- but


involved nothing short of annihilation to the unfortunate snow-image.


   But, after all, there is no teaching anything to wise men of good


Mr. Lindsey's stamp. They know everything- oh, to be sure!- everything


that has been, and everything that is, and everything that, by any


future possibility, can be. And, should some phenomenon of nature or


providence transcend their system, they will not recognize it, even if


it come to pass under their very noses.


   "Wife," said Mr. Lindsey, after a fit of silence, "see what a


quantity of snow the children have brought in on their feet! It has


made quite a puddle here before the stove. Pray tell Dora to bring


some towels and sop it up!"








                        THE END


.




<HTML>

<HEAD>

   <META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">

   <META NAME="Author" CONTENT="Yuan Ping">

   <META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Mozilla/4.03 [en] (Win95; I) [Netscape]">

   <TITLE>Twice-Told Tales</TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY>



<CENTER><B><I><FONT SIZE=+3>Twice-Told Tales</FONT></I></B></CENTER>



<CENTER><B><FONT SIZE=+2>by Nathaniel Hawthorne</FONT></B></CENTER>



<CENTER>

<HR WIDTH="100%"></CENTER>



<UL>

<UL>

<UL>

<UL><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- ALICE DOANE'S APPEAL.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Alice

Doane's Appeal</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- EARTH'S HOLOCAUST.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Earth's

Holocaust</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- EGOTISM.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Egotism</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- ETHAN BRAND.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Ethan Brand,

A Chapter from an Abortive Romance</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- FEATHERTOP, A MORALIZED LEGEND.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Feathertop,

A Moralized Legend</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- LADY ELEANORE'S MANTLE.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Lady

Eleanore's Mantle</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- MR. HIGGINBOTHAN'S CASTROPHE.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Mr.

Higginbothan's Castrophe</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- MY KINSMAN, MAJOR MOLINEUX.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>My

Kinsman, Major Molineux</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- OLD ESTHER DUDLEY.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Old

Esther Dudley</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- PETER GOLDTHWAITE'S TREASURE.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Peter

Goldthwaite's Treasure</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- RAPPACCINI'S DAUGHTER.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Rappaccini's

Daughter</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE AMBITIOUS GUEST.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Ambitious Guest</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE ARTIST OF THE BEAUTIFUL.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Artist of the Beautiful</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE BIRTHMARK.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The Birthmark</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE CELESTIAL RAILROAD.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Celestial Railroad</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE GREAT STONE FACE.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Great Stone Face</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE HOLLOW OF THE THREE HILLS.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Hollow of the Three Hills</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE MAYPOLE OF MERRY MOUNT.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Maypole of&nbsp; Merry Mount</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE MINISTER'S BLACK VEIL, A PARABLE.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Minister's Black Veil, A Parable</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE PROPHETIC PICTURES.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Prophetic Pictures</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE SNOW-IMAGE, A CHILDISH MIRACLE.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Snow-Image, A Childish Miracle</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- THE WEDDING KNELL.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>The

Wedding Knell</FONT></A>

<BR><A HREF="TWICE-TOLD TALES- YOUNG GOODMAN BROWN.TXT"><FONT SIZE=+1>Young

Goodman Brown</FONT></A>

<BR><FONT SIZE=+1><A HREF="TWIVE-TOLD TALES- DR. HEIDEGGER'S EXPERIMENT.TXT">Dr.

Heidegger's Experiment</A></FONT></UL>

</UL>

</UL>

</UL>



<CENTER>

<HR WIDTH="100%"></CENTER>

&nbsp;

</BODY>

</HTML>



                                      1836


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                           THE MINISTER'S BLACK VEIL


                                   A PARABLE


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   THE SEXTON stood in the porch of Milford meeting-house, pulling


busily at the bell-rope. The old people of the village came stooping


along the street. Children, with bright faces, tripped merrily


beside their parents, or mimicked a graver gait, in the conscious


dignity of their Sunday clothes. Spruce bachelors looked sidelong at


the pretty maidens, and fancied that the Sabbath sunshine made them


prettier than on week days. When the throng had mostly streamed into


the porch, the sexton began to toll the bell, keeping his eye on the


Reverend Mr. Hooper's door. The first glimpse of the clergyman's


figure was the signal for the bell to cease its summons.


   "But what has good Parson Hooper got upon his face?" cried the


sexton in astonishment.


   All within hearing immediately turned about, and beheld the


semblance of Mr. Hooper, pacing slowly his meditative way towards


the meeting-house. With one accord they started, expressing more


wonder than if some strange minister were coming to dust the


cushions of Mr. Hooper's pulpit.


   "Are you sure it is our parson?" inquired Goodman Gray of the


sexton.


   "Of a certainty it is good Mr. Hooper," replied the sexton. "He was


to have exchanged pulpits with Parson Shute, of Westbury; but Parson


Shute sent to excuse himself yesterday, being to preach a funeral


sermon."


   The cause of so much amazement may appear sufficiently slight.


Mr. Hooper, a gentlemanly person, of about thirty, though still a


bachelor, was dressed with due clerical neatness, as if a careful wife


had starched his band, and brushed the weekly dust from his Sunday's


garb. There was but one thing remarkable in his appearance. Swathed


about his forehead, and hanging down over his face, so low as to be


shaken by his breath, Mr. Hooper had on a black veil. On a nearer view


it seemed to consist of two folds of crape, which entirely concealed


his features, except the mouth and chin, but probably did not


intercept his sight, further than to give a darkened aspect to all


living and inanimate things. With this gloomy shade before him, good


Mr. Hooper walked onward, at a slow and quiet pace, stooping somewhat,


and looking on the ground, as is customary with abstracted men, yet


nodding kindly to those of his parishioners who still waited on the


meeting-house steps. But so wonder-struck were they that his


greeting hardly met with a return.


   "I can't really feel as if good Mr. Hooper's face was behind that


piece of crape," said the sexton.


   "I don't like it," muttered an old woman, as she hobbled into the


meeting-house. "He has changed himself into something awful, only by


hiding his face."


   "Our parson has gone mad!" cried Goodman Gray, following him across


the threshold.


   A rumor of some unaccountable phenomenon had preceded Mr. Hooper


into the meeting-house, and set all the congregation astir. Few


could refrain from twisting their heads towards the door; many stood


upright, and turned directly about; while several little boys


clambered upon the seats, and came down again with a terrible


racket. There was a general bustle, a rustling of the women's gowns


and shuffling of the men's feet, greatly at variance with that


hushed repose which should attend the entrance of the minister. But


Mr. Hooper appeared not to notice the perturbation of his people. He


entered with an almost noiseless step, bent his head mildly to the


pews on each side, and bowed as he passed his oldest parishioner, a


white-haired great-grandsire, who occupied an arm-chair in the


centre of the aisle. It was strange to observe how slowly this


venerable man became conscious of something singular in the appearance


of his pastor. He seemed not fully to partake of the prevailing


wonder, till Mr. Hooper had ascended the stairs, and showed himself in


the pulpit, face to face with his congregation, except for the black


veil. That mysterious emblem was never once withdrawn. It shook with


his measured breath, as he gave out the psalm; it threw its


obscurity between him and the holy page, as he read the Scriptures;


and while he prayed, the veil lay heavily on his uplifted countenance.


Did he seek to hide it from the dread Being whom he was addressing?


   Such was the effect of this simple piece of crape, that more than


one woman of delicate nerves was forced to leave the meeting-house.


Yet perhaps the pale-faced congregation was almost as fearful a


sight to the minister, as his black veil to them.


   Mr. Hooper had the reputation of a good preacher, but not an


energetic one: he strove to win his people heavenward by mild,


persuasive influences, rather than to drive them thither by the


thunders of the Word. The sermon which he now delivered was marked


by the same characteristics of style and manner as the general


series of his pulpit oratory. But there was something, either in the


sentiment of the discourse itself, or in the imagination of the


auditors, which made it greatly the most powerful effort that they had


ever heard from their pastor's lips. It was tinged, rather more darkly


than usual, with the gentle gloom of Mr. Hooper's temperament. The


subject had reference to secret sin, and those sad mysteries which


we hide from our nearest and dearest, and would fain conceal from


our own consciousness, even forgetting that the Omniscient can


detect them. A subtle power was breathed into his words. Each member


of the congregation, the most innocent girl, and the man of hardened


breast, felt as if the preacher had crept upon them, behind his


awful veil, and discovered their hoarded iniquity of deed or


thought. Many spread their clasped hands on their bosoms. There was


nothing terrible in what Mr. Hooper said, at least, no violence; and


yet, with every tremor of his melancholy voice, the hearers quaked. An


unsought pathos came hand in hand with awe. So sensible were the


audience of some unwonted attribute in their minister, that they


longed for a breath of wind to blow aside the veil, almost believing


that a stranger's visage would be discovered, though the form,


gesture, and voice were those of Mr. Hooper.


   At the close of the services, the people hurried out with


indecorous confusion, eager to communicate their pent-up amazement,


and conscious of lighter spirits the moment they lost sight of the


black veil. Some gathered in little circles, huddled closely together,


with their mouths all whispering in the centre; some went homeward


alone, wrapt in silent meditation; some talked loudly, and profaned


the Sabbath day with ostentatious laughter. A few shook their


sagacious heads, intimating that they could penetrate the mystery;


while one or two affirmed that there was no mystery at all, but only


that Mr. Hooper's eyes were so weakened by the midnight lamp, as to


require a shade. After a brief interval, forth came good Mr. Hooper


also, in the rear of his flock. Turning his veiled face from one group


to another, he paid due reverence to the hoary heads, saluted the


middle aged with kind dignity as their friend and spiritual guide,


greeted the young with mingled authority and love, and laid his


hands on the little children's heads to bless them. Such was always


his custom on the Sabbath day. Strange and bewildered looks repaid him


for his courtesy. None, as on former occasions, aspired to the honor


of walking by their pastor's side. Old Squire Saunders, doubtless by


an accidental lapse of memory, neglected to invite Mr. Hooper to his


table, where the good clergyman had been wont to bless the food,


almost every Sunday since his settlement. He returned, therefore, to


the parsonage, and, at the moment of closing the door, was observed to


look back upon the people, all of whom had their eyes fixed upon the


minister. A sad smile gleamed faintly from beneath the black veil, and


flickered about his mouth, glimmering as he disappeared.


   "How strange," said a lady, "that a simple black veil, such as


any woman might wear on her bonnet, should become such a terrible


thing on Mr. Hooper's face!"


   "Something must surely be amiss with Mr. Hooper's intellects,"


observed her husband, the physician of the village. "But the strangest


part of the affair is the effect of this vagary, even on a


sober-minded man like myself. The black veil, though it covers only


our pastor's face, throws its influence over his whole person, and


makes him ghostlike from head to foot. Do you not feel it so?"


   "Truly do I," replied the lady; "and I would not be alone with


him for the world. I wonder he is not afraid to be alone with


himself!"


   "Men sometimes are so," said her husband.


   The afternoon service was attended with similar circumstances. At


its conclusion, the bell tolled for the funeral of a young lady. The


relatives and friends were assembled in the house, and the more


distant acquaintances stood about the door, speaking of the good


qualities of the deceased, when their talk was interrupted by the


appearance of Mr. Hooper, still covered with his black veil. It was


now an appropriate emblem. The clergyman stepped into the room where


the corpse was laid, and bent over the coffin, to take a last farewell


of his deceased parishioner. As he stooped, the veil hung straight


down from his forehead, so that, if her eyelids had not been closed


forever, the dead maiden might have seen his face. Could Mr. Hooper be


fearful of her glance, that he so hastily caught back the black


veil? A person who watched the interview between the dead and


living, scrupled not to affirm, that, at the instant when the


clergyman's features were disclosed, the corpse had slightly


shuddered, rustling the shroud and muslin cap, though the


countenance retained the composure of death. A superstitious old woman


was the only witness of this prodigy. From the coffin Mr. Hooper


passed into the chamber of the mourners, and thence to the head of the


staircase, to make the funeral prayer. It was a tender and


heart-dissolving prayer, full of sorrow, yet so imbued with


celestial hopes, that the music of a heavenly harp, swept by the


fingers of the dead, seemed faintly to be heard among the saddest


accents of the minister. The people trembled, though they but darkly


understood him when he prayed that they, and himself, and all of


mortal race, might be ready, as he trusted this young maiden had been,


for the dreadful hour that should snatch the veil from their faces.


The bearers went heavily forth, and the mourners followed, saddening


all the street, with the dead before them, and Mr. Hooper in his black


veil behind.


   "Why do you look back?" said one in the procession to his partner.


   I had a fancy," replied she, "that the minister and the maiden's


spirit were walking hand in hand."


   "And so had I, at the same moment," said the other.


   That night, the handsomest couple in Milford village were to be


joined in wedlock. Though reckoned a melancholy man, Mr. Hooper had


a placid cheerfulness for such occasions, which often excited a


sympathetic smile where livelier merriment would have been thrown


away. There was no quality of his disposition which made him more


beloved than this. The company at the wedding awaited his arrival with


impatience, trusting that the strange awe, which had gathered over him


throughout the day, would now be dispelled. But such was not the


result. When Mr. Hooper came, the first thing that their eyes rested


on was the same horrible black veil, which had added deeper gloom to


the funeral, and could portend nothing but evil to the wedding. Such


was its immediate effect on the guests that a cloud seemed to have


rolled duskily from beneath the black crape, and dimmed the light of


the candles. The bridal pair stood up before the minister. But the


bride's cold fingers quivered in the tremulous hand of the bridegroom,


and her deathlike paleness caused a whisper that the maiden who had


been buried a few hours before was come from her grave to be


married. If ever another wedding were so dismal, it was that famous


one where they tolled the wedding knell. After performing the


ceremony, Mr. Hooper raised a glass of wine to his lips, wishing


happiness to the new-married couple in a strain of mild pleasantry


that ought to have brightened the features of the guests, like a


cheerful gleam from the hearth. At that instant, catching a glimpse of


his figure in the looking-glass, the black veil involved his own


spirit in the horror with which it overwhelmed all others. His frame


shuddered, his lips grew white, he spilt the untasted wine upon the


carpet, and rushed forth into the darkness. For the Earth, too, had on


her Black Veil.


   The next day, the whole village of Milford talked of little else


than Parson Hooper's black veil. That, and the mystery concealed


behind it, supplied a topic for discussion between acquaintances


meeting in the street, and good women gossiping at their open windows.


It was the first item of news that the tavern-keeper told to his


guests. The children babbled of it on their way to school. One


imitative little imp covered his face with an old black


handkerchief, thereby so affrighting his playmates that the panic


seized himself, and he well-nigh lost his wits by his own waggery.


   It was remarkable that of all the busybodies and impertinent people


in the parish, not one ventured to put the plain question to Mr.


Hooper, wherefore he did this thing. Hitherto, whenever there appeared


the slightest call for such interference, he had never lacked


advisers, nor shown himself adverse to be guided by their judgment. If


he erred at all, it was by so painful a degree of self-distrust,


that even the mildest censure would lead him to consider an


indifferent action as a crime. Yet, though so well acquainted with


this amiable weakness, no individual among his parishioners chose to


make the black veil a subject of friendly remonstrance. There was a


feeling of dread, neither plainly confessed nor carefully concealed,


which caused each to shift the responsibility upon another, till at


length it was found expedient to send a deputation of the church, in


order to deal with Mr. Hooper about the mystery, before it should grow


into a scandal. Never did an embassy so ill discharge its duties.


The minister received them with friendly courtesy, but became


silent, after they were seated, leaving to his visitors the whole


burden of introducing their important business. The topic, it might be


supposed, was obvious enough. There was the black veil swathed round


Mr. Hooper's forehead, and concealing every feature above his placid


mouth, on which, at times, they could perceive the glimmering of a


melancholy smile. But that piece of crape, to their imagination,


seemed to hang down before his heart, the symbol of a fearful secret


between him and them. Were the veil but cast aside, they might speak


freely of it, but not till then. Thus they sat a considerable time,


speechless, confused, and shrinking uneasily from Mr. Hooper's eye,


which they felt to be fixed upon them with an invisible glance.


Finally, the deputies returned abashed to their constituents,


pronouncing the matter too weighty to be handled, except by a


council of the churches, if, indeed, it might not require a general


synod.


   But there was one person in the village unappalled by the awe


with which the black veil had impressed all beside herself. When the


deputies returned without an explanation, or even venturing to


demand one, she, with the calm energy of her character, determined


to chase away the strange cloud that appeared to be settling round Mr.


Hooper, every moment more darkly than before. As his plighted wife, it


should be her privilege to know what the black veil concealed. At


the minister's first visit, therefore, she entered upon the subject


with a direct simplicity, which made the task easier both for him


and her. After he had seated himself, she fixed her eyes steadfastly


upon the veil, but could discern nothing of the dreadful gloom that


had so overawed the multitude: it was but a double fold of crape,


hanging down from his forehead to his mouth, and slightly stirring


with his breath.


   "No," said she aloud, and smiling, "there is nothing terrible in


this piece of crape, except that it hides a face which I am always


glad to look upon. Come, good sir, let the sun shine from behind the


cloud. First lay aside your black veil: then tell me why you put it


on."


   Mr. Hooper's smile glimmered faintly.


   "There is an hour to come," said he, "when all of us shall cast


aside our veils. Take it not amiss, beloved friend, if I wear this


piece of crape till then."


   "Your words are a mystery, too," returned the young lady. "Take


away the veil from them, at least."


   "Elizabeth, I will," said he, "so far as my vow may suffer me.


Know, then, this veil is a type and a symbol, and I am bound to wear


it ever, both in light and darkness, in solitude and before the gaze


of multitudes, and as with strangers, so with my familiar friends.


No mortal eye will see it withdrawn. This dismal shade must separate


me from the world: even you, Elizabeth, can never come behind it!"


   "What grievous affliction hath befallen you," she earnestly


inquired, "that you should thus darken your eyes forever?"


   "If it be a sign of mourning," replied Mr. Hooper, "I, perhaps,


like most other mortals, have sorrows dark enough to be typified by


a black veil."


   "But what if the world will not believe that it is the type of an


innocent sorrow?" urged Elizabeth. "Beloved and respected as you


are, there may be whispers that you hide your face under the


consciousness of secret sin. For the sake of your holy office, do away


this scandal!"


   The color rose into her cheeks as she intimated the nature of the


rumors that were already abroad in the village. But Mr. Hooper's


mildness did not forsake him. He even smiled again- that same sad


smile, which always appeared like a faint glimmering of light,


proceeding from the obscurity beneath the veil.


   "If I hide my face for sorrow, there is cause enough," he merely


replied; "and if I cover it for secret sin, what mortal might not do


the same?"


   And with this gentle, but unconquerable obstinacy did he resist all


her entreaties. At length Elizabeth sat silent. For a few moments


she appeared lost in thought, considering, probably, what new


methods might be tried to withdraw her lover from so dark a fantasy,


which, if it had no other meaning, was perhaps a symptom of mental


disease. Though of a firmer character than his own, the tears rolled


down her cheeks. But, in an instant, as it were, a new feeling took


the place of sorrow: her eyes were fixed insensibly on the black veil,


when, like a sudden twilight in the air, its terrors fell around


her. She arose, and stood trembling before him.


   "And do you feel it then, at last?" said he mournfully.


   She made no reply, but covered her eyes with her hand, and turned


to leave the room. He rushed forward and caught her arm.


   "Have patience with me, Elizabeth!" cried he, passionately. "Do not


desert me, though this veil must be between us here on earth. Be mine,


and hereafter there shall be no veil over my face, no darkness between


our souls! It is but a mortal veil- it is not for eternity! O! you


know not how lonely I am, and how frightened, to be alone behind my


black veil. Do not leave me in this miserable obscurity forever!"


   "Lift the veil but once, and look me in the face," said she.


   "Never! It cannot be!" replied Mr. Hooper.


   "Then farewell!" said Elizabeth.


   She withdrew her arm from his grasp, and slowly departed, pausing


at the door, to give one long shuddering gaze, that seemed almost to


penetrate the mystery of the black veil. But, even amid his grief, Mr.


Hooper smiled to think that only a material emblem had separated him


from happiness, though the horrors, which it shadowed forth, must be


drawn darkly between the fondest of lovers.


   From that time no attempts were made to remove Mr. Hooper's black


veil, or, by a direct appeal, to discover the secret which it was


supposed to hide. By persons who claimed a superiority to popular


prejudice, it was reckoned merely an eccentric whim, such as often


mingles with the sober actions of men otherwise rational, and tinges


them all with its own semblance of insanity. But with the multitude,


good Mr. Hooper was irreparably a bugbear. He could not walk the


street with any peace of mind, so conscious was he that the gentle and


timid would turn aside to avoid him, and that others would make it a


point of hardihood to throw themselves in his way. The impertinence of


the latter class compelled him to give up his customary walk at sunset


to the burial ground; for when he leaned pensively over the gate,


there would always be faces behind the gravestones, peeping at his


black veil. A fable went the rounds that the stare of the dead


people drove him thence. It grieved him, to the very depth of his kind


heart, to observe how the children fled from his approach, breaking up


their merriest sports, while his melancholy figure was yet afar off.


Their instinctive dread caused him to feel more strongly than aught


else, that a preternatural horror was interwoven with the threads of


the black crape. In truth, his own antipathy to the veil was known


to be so great, that he never willingly passed before a mirror, nor


stooped to drink at a still fountain, lest, in its peaceful bosom,


he should be affrighted by himself. This was what gave plausibility to


the whispers, that Mr. Hooper's conscience tortured him for some great


crime too horrible to be entirely concealed, or otherwise than so


obscurely intimated. Thus, from beneath the black veil, there rolled a


cloud into the sunshine, an ambiguity of sin or sorrow, which


enveloped the poor minister, so that love or sympathy could never


reach him. It was said that ghost and fiend consorted with him


there. With self-shudderings and outward terrors, he walked


continually in its shadow, groping darkly within his own soul, or


gazing through a medium that saddened the whole world. Even the


lawless wind, it was believed, respected his dreadful secret, and


never blew aside the veil. But still good Mr. Hooper sadly smiled at


the pale visages of the worldly throng as he passed by.


   Among all its bad influences, the black veil had the one


desirable effect, of making its wearer a very efficient clergyman.


By the aid of his mysterious emblem- for there was no other apparent


cause- he became a man of awful power over souls that were in agony


for sin. His converts always regarded him with a dread peculiar to


themselves, affirming, though but figuratively, that, before he


brought them to celestial light, they had been with him behind the


black veil. Its gloom, indeed, enabled him to sympathize with all dark


affections. Dying sinners cried aloud for Mr. Hooper, and would not


yield their breath till he appeared; though ever, as he stooped to


whisper consolation, they shuddered at the veiled face so near their


own. Such were the terrors of the black veil, even when Death had


bared his visage! Strangers came long distances to attend service at


his church, with the mere idle purpose of gazing at his figure,


because it was forbidden them to behold his face. But many were made


to quake ere they departed! Once, during Governor Belcher's


administration, Mr. Hooper was appointed to preach the election


sermon. Covered with his black veil, he stood before the chief


magistrate, the council, and the representatives, and wrought so


deep an impression that the legislative measures of that year were


characterized by all the gloom and piety of our earliest ancestral


sway.


   In this manner Mr. Hooper spent a long life, irreproachable in


outward act, yet shrouded in dismal suspicions; kind and loving,


though unloved, and dimly feared; a man apart from men, shunned in


their health and joy, but ever summoned to their aid in mortal


anguish. As years wore on, shedding their snows above his sable


veil, he acquired a name throughout the New England churches, and they


called him Father Hooper. Nearly all his parishioners, who were of


mature age when he was settled, had been borne away by many a funeral:


he had one congregation in the church, and a more crowded one in the


churchyard; and having wrought so late into the evening, and done


his work so well, it was now good Father Hooper's turn to rest.


   Several persons were visible by the shaded candle-light, in the


death chamber of the old clergyman. Natural connections he had none.


But there was the decorously grave, though unmoved physician,


seeking only to mitigate the last pangs of the patient whom he could


not save. There were the deacons, and other eminently pious members of


his church. There, also, was the Reverend Mr. Clark, of Westbury, a


young and zealous divine, who had ridden in haste to pray by the


bedside of the expiring minister. There was the nurse, no hired


handmaiden of death, but one whose calm affection had endured thus


long in secrecy, in solitude, amid the chill of age, and would not


perish, even at the dying hour. Who, but Elizabeth! And there lay


the hoary head of good Father Hooper upon the death pillow, with the


black veil still swathed about his brow, and reaching down over his


face, so that each more difficult gasp of his faint breath caused it


to stir. All through life that piece of crape had hung between him and


the world: it had separated him from cheerful brotherhood and


woman's love, and kept him in that saddest of all prisons, his own


heart; and still it lay upon his face, as if to deepen the gloom of


his darksome chamber, and shade him from the sunshine of eternity.


   For some time previous, his mind had been confused, wavering


doubtfully between the past and the present, and hovering forward,


as it were, at intervals, into the indistinctness of the world to


come. There had been feverish turns, which tossed him from side to


side, and wore away what little strength he had. But in his most


convulsive struggles, and in the wildest vagaries of his intellect,


when no other thought retained its sober influence, he still showed an


awful solicitude lest the black veil should slip aside. Even if his


bewildered soul could have forgotten, there was a faithful woman at


his pillow, who, with averted eyes, would have covered that aged face,


which she had last beheld in the comeliness of manhood. At length


the death-stricken old man lay quietly in the torpor of mental and


bodily exhaustion, with an imperceptible pulse, and breath that grew


fainter and fainter, except when a long, deep, and irregular


inspiration seemed to prelude the flight of his spirit.


   The minister of Westbury approached the bedside.


   "Venerable Father Hooper," said he, "the moment of your release


is at hand. Are you ready for the lifting of the veil that shuts in


time from eternity?"


   Father Hooper at first replied merely by a feeble motion of his


head; then, apprehensive, perhaps, that his meaning might be doubtful,


he exerted himself to speak.


   "Yea," said he, in faint accents, "my soul hath a patient weariness


until that veil be lifted."


   "And is it fitting," resumed the Reverend Mr. Clark, "that a man so


given to prayer, of such a blameless example, holy in deed and


thought, so far as mortal judgment may pronounce; is it fitting that a


father in the church should leave a shadow on his memory, that may


seem to blacken a life so pure? I pray you, my venerable brother,


let not this thing be! Suffer us to be gladdened by your triumphant


aspect as you go to your reward. Before the veil of eternity be


lifted, let me cast aside this black veil from your face!"


   And thus speaking, the Reverend Mr. Clark bent forward to reveal


the mystery of so many years. But, exerting a sudden energy, that made


all the beholders stand aghast, Father Hooper snatched both his


hands from beneath the bedclothes, and pressed them strongly on the


black veil, resolute to struggle, if the minister of Westbury would


contend with a dying man.


   "Never!" cried the veiled clergyman. "On earth, never!"


   "Dark old man!" exclaimed the affrighted minister, "with what


horrible crime upon your soul are you now passing to the judgment?"


   Father Hooper's breath heaved; it rattled in his throat; but,


with a mighty effort, grasping forward with his hands, he caught


hold of life, and held it back till he should speak. He even raised


himself in bed; and there he sat, shivering with the arms of death


around him, while the black veil hung down, awful at that last moment,


in the gathered terrors of a lifetime. And yet the faint, sad smile,


so often there, now seemed to glimmer from its obscurity, and linger


on Father Hooper's lips.


   "Why do you tremble at me alone?" cried he, turning his veiled face


round the circle of pale spectators. "Tremble also at each other! Have


men avoided me, and women shown no pity, and children screamed and


fled, only for my black veil? What, but the mystery which it obscurely


typifies, has made this piece of crape so awful? When the friend shows


his inmost heart to his friend; the lover to his best beloved; when


man does not vainly shrink from the eye of his Creator, loathsomely


treasuring up the secret of his sin; then deem me a monster, for the


symbol beneath which I have lived, and die! I look around me, and, lo!


on every visage a Black Veil!"


   While his auditors shrank from one another, in mutual affright,


Father Hooper fell back upon his pillow, a veiled corpse, with a faint


smile lingering on the lips. Still veiled, they laid him in his


coffin, and a veiled corpse they bore him to the grave. The grass of


many years has sprung up and withered on that grave, the burial


stone is moss-grown, and good Mr. Hooper's face is dust; but awful


is still the thought that it mouldered beneath the Black Veil!





   NOTE. Another clergyman in New England, Mr. Joseph Moody, of


York, Maine, who died about eighty years since, made himself


remarkable by the same eccentricity that is here related of the


Reverend Mr. Hooper. In his case, however, the symbol had a


different import. In early life he had accidentally killed a beloved


friend; and from that day till the hour of his own death, he hid his


face from men.








                        THE END


.




                                      1837


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                           DR. HEIDEGGER'S EXPERIMENT


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   THAT VERY SINGULAR MAN, old Dr. Heidegger, once invited four


venerable friends to meet him in his study. There were three


white-bearded gentlemen, Mr. Medbourne, Colonel Killigrew, and Mr.


Gascoigne, and a withered gentlewoman, whose name was the Widow


Wycherly. They were all melancholy old creatures, who had been


unfortunate in life, and whose greatest misfortune it was that they


were not long ago in their graves. Mr. Medbourne, in the vigor of


his age, had been a prosperous merchant, but had lost his all by a


frantic speculation, and was now little better than a mendicant.


Colonel Killigrew had wasted his best years, and his health and


substance, in the pursuit of sinful pleasures, which had given birth


to a brood of pains, such as the gout, and divers other torments of


soul and body. Mr. Gascoigne was a ruined politician, a man of evil


fame, or at least had been so till time had buried him from the


knowledge of the present generation, and made him obscure instead of


infamous. As for the Widow Wycherly, tradition tells us that she was a


great beauty in her day; but, for a long while past, she had lived


in deep seclusion, on account of certain scandalous stories which


had prejudiced the gentry of the town against her. It is a


circumstance worth mentioning that each of these three old


gentlemen, Mr. Medbourne, Colonel Killigrew, and Mr. Gascoigne, were


early lovers of the Widow Wycherly, and had once been on the point


of cutting each other's throats for her sake. And, before proceeding


further, I will merely hint that Dr. Heidegger and all his four guests


were sometimes thought to be a little beside themselves- as is not


unfrequently the case with old people, when worried either by


present troubles or woful recollections.


   "My dear old friends," said Dr. Heidegger, motioning them to be


seated, I am desirous of your assistance in one of those little


experiments with which I amuse myself here in my study."


   If all stories were true, Dr. Heidegger's study must have been a


very curious place. It was a dim, old-fashioned chamber, festooned


with cobwebs, and besprinkled with antique dust. Around the walls


stood several oaken bookcases, the lower shelves of which were


filled with rows of gigantic folios and black-letter quartos, and


the upper with little parchment-covered duodecimos. Over the central


bookcase was a bronze bust of Hippocrates, with which, according to


some authorities, Dr. Heidegger was accustomed to hold consultations


in all difficult cases of his practice. In the obscurest corner of the


room stood a tall and narrow oaken closet, with its door ajar,


within which doubtfully appeared a skeleton. Between two of the


bookcases hung a looking-glass, presenting its high and dusty plate


within a tarnished gilt frame. Among many wonderful stories related of


this mirror, it was fabled that the spirits of all the doctor's


deceased patients dwelt within its verge, and would stare him in the


face whenever he looked thitherward. The opposite side of the


chamber was ornamented with the full-length portrait of a young


lady, arrayed in the faded magnificence of silk, satin, and brocade,


and with a visage as faded as her dress. Above half a century ago, Dr.


Heidegger had been on the point of marriage with this young lady; but,


being affected with some slight disorder, she had swallowed one of her


lover's prescriptions, and died on the bridal evening. The greatest


curiosity of the study remains to be mentioned; it was a ponderous


folio volume, bound in black leather, with massive silver clasps.


There were no letters on the back, and nobody could tell the title


of the book. But it was well known to be a book of magic; and once,


when a chambermaid had lifted it, merely to brush away the dust, the


skeleton had rattled in its closet, the picture of the young lady


had stepped one foot upon the floor, and several ghastly faces had


peeped forth from the mirror; while the brazen head of Hippocrates


frowned, and said- "Forbear!"


   Such was Dr. Heidegger's study. On the summer afternoon of our tale


a small round table, as black as ebony, stood in the centre of the


room, sustaining a cut-glass vase of beautiful form and elaborate


workmanship. The sunshine came through the window, between the heavy


festoons of two faded damask curtains, and fell directly across this


vase; so that a mild splendor was reflected from it on the ashen


visages of the five old people who sat around. Four champagne


glasses were also on the table.


   "My dear old friends," repeated Dr. Heidegger, "may I reckon on


your aid in performing an exceedingly curious experiment?"


   Now Dr. Heidegger was a very strange old gentleman, whose


eccentricity had become the nucleus for a thousand fantastic


stories. Some of these fables, to my shame be it spoken, might


possibly be traced back to my own veracious self; and if any


passages of the present tale should startle the reader's faith, I must


be content to bear the stigma of a fiction monger.


   When the doctor's four guests heard him talk of his proposed


experiment, they anticipated nothing more wonderful than the murder of


a mouse in an air pump, or the examination of a cobweb by the


microscope, or some similar nonsense, with which he was constantly


in the habit of pestering his intimates. But without waiting for a


reply, Dr. Heidegger hobbled across the chamber, and returned with the


same ponderous folio, bound in black leather, which common report


affirmed to be a book of magic. Undoing the silver clasps, he opened


the volume, and took from among its black-letter pages a rose, or what


was once a rose, though now the green leaves and crimson petals had


assumed one brownish hue, and the ancient flower seemed ready to


crumble to dust in the doctor's hands.


   "This rose, said Dr. Heidegger, with a sigh, "this same withered


and crumbling flower, blossomed five and fifty years ago. It was given


me by Sylvia Ward, whose portrait hangs yonder; and I meant to wear it


in my bosom at our wedding. Five and fifty years it has been treasured


between the leaves of this old volume. Now, would you deem it possible


that this rose of half a century could ever bloom again?"


   "Nonsense!" said the Widow Wycherly, with a peevish toss of her


head. "You might as well ask whether an old woman's wrinkled face


could ever bloom again."


   "See!" answered Dr. Heidegger.


   He uncovered the vase, and threw the faded rose into the water


which it contained. At first, it lay lightly on the surface of the


fluid, appearing to imbibe none of its moisture. Soon, however, a


singular change began to be visible. The crushed and dried petals


stirred, and assumed a deepening tinge of crimson, as if the flower


were reviving from a deathlike slumber; the slender stalk and twigs of


foliage became green; and there was the rose of half a century,


looking as fresh as when Sylvia Ward had first given it to her


lover. It was scarcely full blown; for some of its delicate red leaves


curled modestly around its moist bosom, within which two or three


dewdrops were sparkling.


   "That is certainly a very pretty deception," said the doctor's


friends; carelessly, however, for they had witnessed greater


miracles at a conjurer's show; "pray how was it effected?"


   "Did you never hear of the 'Fountain of Youth'?" asked Dr.


Heidegger, "which Ponce de Leon, the Spanish adventurer, went in


search of two or three centuries ago?"


   "But did Ponce de Leon ever find it?" said the Widow Wycherly.


   "No, answered Dr. Heidegger, "for he never sought it in the right


place. The famous Fountain of Youth, if I am rightly informed, is


situated in the southern part of the Floridian peninsula, not far from


Lake Macaco. Its source is overshadowed by several gigantic magnolias,


which, though numberless centuries old, have been kept as fresh as


violets by the virtues of this wonderful water. An acquaintance of


mine, knowing my curiosity in such matters, has sent me what you see


in the vase."


   "Ahem!" said Colonel Killigrew, who believed not a word of the


doctor's story: "and what may be the effect of this fluid on the human


frame?"


   "You shall judge for yourself, my dear colonel," replied Dr.


Heidegger; "and all of you, my respected friends, are welcome to so


much of this admirable fluid as may restore to you the bloom of youth.


For my own part, having had much trouble in growing old, I am in no


hurry to grow young again. With your permission, therefore, I will


merely watch the progress of the experiment."


   While he spoke, Dr. Heidegger had been filling the four champagne


glasses with the water of the Fountain of Youth. It was apparently


impregnated with an effervescent gas, for little bubbles were


continually ascending from the depths of the glasses, and bursting


in silvery spray at the surface. As the liquor diffused a pleasant


perfume, the old people doubted not that it possessed cordial and


comfortable properties; and though utter sceptics as to its


rejuvenescent power, they were inclined to swallow it at once. But Dr.


Heidegger besought them to stay a moment.


   "Before you drink, my respectable old friends," said he, "it


would be well that, with the experience of a lifetime to direct you,


you should draw up a few general rules for your guidance, in passing a


second time through the perils of youth. Think what a sin and shame it


would be, if, with your peculiar advantages, you should not become


patterns of virtue and wisdom to all the young people of the age!"


   The doctor's four venerable friends made him no answer, except by a


feeble and tremulous laugh; so very ridiculous was the idea that,


knowing how closely repentance treads behind the steps of error,


they should ever go astray again.


   "Drink, then," said the doctor, bowing: "I rejoice that I have so


well selected the subjects of my experiment."


   With palsied hands, they raised the glasses to their lips. The


liquor, if it really possessed such virtues as Dr. Heidegger imputed


to it, could not have been bestowed on four human beings who needed it


more wofully. They looked as if they had never known what youth or


pleasure was, but had been the offspring of Nature's dotage, and


always the gray, decrepit, sapless, miserable creatures, who now sat


stooping round the doctor's table, without life enough in their


souls or bodies to be animated even by the prospect of growing young


again. They drank off the water, and replaced their glasses on the


table.


   Assuredly there was an almost immediate improvement in the aspect


of the party, not unlike what might have been produced by a glass of


generous wine, together with a sudden glow of cheerful sunshine


brightening over all their visages at once. There was a healthful


suffusion on their cheeks, instead of the ashen hue that had made them


look so corpse-like. They gazed at one another, and fancied that


some magic power had really begun to smooth away the deep and sad


inscriptions which Father Time had been so long engraving on their


brows. The Widow Wycherly adjusted her cap, for she felt almost like a


woman again.


   "Give us more of this wondrous water!" cried they, eagerly. "We are


younger- but we are still too old! Quick- give us more!"


   "Patience, patience!" quoth Dr. Heidegger, who sat watching the


experiment with philosophic coolness. "You have been a long time


growing old. Surely, you might be content to grow young in half an


hour! But the water is at your service."


   Again he filled their glasses with the liquor of youth, enough of


which still remained in the vase to turn half the old people in the


city to the age of their own grandchildren. While the bubbles were yet


sparkling on the brim, the doctor's four guests snatched their glasses


from the table, and swallowed the contents at a single gulp. Was it


delusion? even while the draught was passing down their throats, it


seemed to have wrought a change on their whole systems. Their eyes


grew clear and bright; a dark shade deepened among their silvery


locks, they sat around the table, three gentlemen of middle age, and a


woman, hardly beyond her buxom prime.


   "My dear widow, you are charming!" cried Colonel Killigrew, whose


eyes had been fixed upon her face, while the shadows of age were


flitting from it like darkness from the crimson daybreak.


   The fair widow knew, of old, that Colonel Killigrew's compliments


were not always measured by sober truth; so she started up and ran


to the mirror, still dreading that the ugly visage of an old woman


would meet her gaze. Meanwhile, the three gentlemen behaved in such


a manner as proved that the water of the Fountain of Youth possessed


some intoxicating qualities; unless, indeed, their exhilaration of


spirits were merely a lightsome dizziness caused by the sudden removal


of the weight of years. Mr. Gascoigne's mind seemed to run on


political topics, but whether relating to the past, present, or future


could not easily be determined, since the same ideas and phrases


have been in vogue these fifty years. Now he rattled forth


full-throated sentences about patriotism, national glory, and the


people's right; now he muttered some perilous stuff or other, in a sly


and doubtful whisper, so cautiously that even his own conscience could


scarcely catch the secret; and now, again, he spoke in measured


accents, and a deeply deferential tone, as if a royal ear were


listening to his well-turned periods. Colonel Killigrew all this


time had been trolling forth a jolly bottle song, and ringing his


glass in symphony with the chorus, while his eyes wandered toward


the buxom figure of the Widow Wycherly. On the other side of the


table, Mr. Medbourne was involved in a calculation of dollars and


cents, with which was strangely intermingled a project for supplying


the East Indies with ice, by harnessing a team of whales to the


polar icebergs.


   As for the Widow Wycherly, she stood before the mirror


courtesying and simpering to her own image, and greeting it as the


friend whom she loved better than all the world beside. She thrust her


face close to the glass, to see whether some long-remembered wrinkle


or crow's foot had indeed vanished. She examined whether the snow


had so entirely melted from her hair that the venerable cap could be


safely thrown aside. At last, turning briskly away, she came with a


sort of dancing step to the table.


   "My dear old doctor," cried she, "pray favor me with another


glass!"


   "Certainly, my dear madam, certainly!" replied the complaisant


doctor; "see! I have already filled the glasses."


   There, in fact, stood the four glasses, brimful of this wonderful


water, the delicate spray of which, as it effervesced from the


surface, resembled the tremulous glitter of diamonds. It was now so


nearly sunset that the chamber had grown duskier than ever; but a mild


and moonlike splendor gleamed from within the vase, and rested alike


on the four guests and on the doctor's venerable figure. He sat in a


high-backed, elaborately-carved, oaken arm-chair, with a gray


dignity of aspect that might have well befitted that very Father Time,


whose power had never been disputed, save by this fortunate company.


Even while quaffing the third draught of the Fountain of Youth, they


were almost awed by the expression of his mysterious visage.


   But, the next moment, the exhilarating gush of young life shot


through their veins. They were now in the happy prime of youth. Age,


with its miserable train of cares and sorrows and diseases, was


remembered only as the trouble of a dream, from which they had


joyously awoke. The fresh gloss of the soul, so early lost, and


without which the world's successive scenes had been but a gallery


of faded pictures, again threw its enchantment over all their


prospects. They felt like new-created beings in a new-created


universe.


   "We are young! We are young!" they cried exultingly.


   Youth, like the extremity of age, had effaced the strongly-marked


characteristics of middle life, and mutually assimilated them all.


They were a group of merry youngsters, almost maddened with the


exuberant frolicsomeness of their years. The most singular effect of


their gayety was an impulse to mock the infirmity and decrepitude of


which they had so lately been the victims. They laughed loudly at


their old-fashioned attire, the wide-skirted coats and flapped


waist-coats of the young men, and the ancient cap and gown of the


blooming girl. One limped across the floor like a gouty grandfather;


one set a pair of spectacles astride of his nose, and pretended to


pore over the black-letter pages of the book of magic; a third


seated himself in an arm-chair, and strove to imitate the venerable


dignity of Dr. Heidegger. Then all shouted mirthfully, and leaped


about the room. The Widow Wycherly- if so fresh a damsel could be


called a widow- tripped up to the doctor's chair, with a mischievous


merriment in her rosy face.


   "Doctor, you dear old soul," cried she, "get up and dance with me!"


And then the four young people laughed louder than ever, to think what


a queer figure the poor old doctor would cut.


   "Pray excuse me," answered the doctor quietly. "I am old and


rheumatic, and my dancing days were over long ago. But either of these


gay young gentlemen will be glad of so pretty a partner."


   "Dance with me, Clara!" cried Colonel Killigrew.


   "No, no, I will be her partner!" shouted Mr. Gascoigne.


   "She promised me her hand, fifty years ago!" exclaimed Mr.


Medbourne.


   They all gathered round her. One caught both her hands in his


passionate grasp- another threw his arm about her waist- the third


buried his hand among the glossy curls that clustered beneath the


widow's cap. Blushing, panting, struggling, chiding, laughing, her


warm breath fanning each of their faces by turns, she strove to


disengage herself, yet still remained in their triple embrace. Never


was there a livelier picture of youthful rivalship, with bewitching


beauty for the prize. Yet, by a strange deception, owing to the


duskiness of the chamber, and the antique dresses which they still


wore, the tall mirror is said to have reflected the figures of the


three old, gray, withered grandsires, ridiculously contending for


the skinny ugliness of a shrivelled grandam.


   But they were young: their burning passions proved them so.


Inflamed to madness by the coquetry of the girl-widow, who neither


granted nor quite withheld her favors, the three rivals began to


interchange threatening glances. Still keeping hold of the fair prize,


they grappled fiercely at one another's throats. As they struggled


to and fro, the table was overturned, and the vase dashed into a


thousand fragments. The precious Water of Youth flowed in a bright


stream across the floor, moistening the wings of a butterfly, which,


grown old in the decline of summer, had alighted there to die. The


insect fluttered lightly through the chamber, and settled on the snowy


head of Dr. Heidegger.


   "Come, come, gentlemen! come, Madam Wycherly," exclaimed the


doctor, I really must protest against this riot."


   They stood still and shivered; for it seemed as if gray Time were


calling them back from their sunny youth, far down into the chill


and darksome vale of years. They looked at old Dr. Heidegger, who


sat in his carved arm-chair, holding the rose of half a century, which


he had rescued from among the fragments of the shattered vase. At


the motion of his hand, the four rioters resumed their seats; the more


readily, because their violent exertions had wearied them, youthful


though they were.


   "My poor Sylvia's rose!" ejaculated Dr. Heidegger, holding it in


the light of the sunset clouds; "it appears to be fading again."


   And so it was. Even while the party were looking at it, the


flower continued to shrivel up, till it became as dry and fragile as


when the doctor had first thrown it into the vase. He shook off the


few drops of moisture which clung to its petals.


   "I love it as well thus as in its dewy freshness," observed he,


pressing the withered rose to his withered lips. While he spoke, the


butterfly fluttered down from the doctor's snowy head, and fell upon


the floor.


   His guests shivered again. A strange chillness, whether of the body


or spirit they could not tell, was creeping gradually over them all.


They gazed at one another, and fancied that each fleeting moment


snatched away a charm, and left a deepening furrow where none had been


before. Was it an illusion? Had the changes of a lifetime been crowded


into so brief a space, and were they now four aged people, sitting


with their old friend, Dr. Heidegger?


   "Are we grown old again, so soon?" cried they, dolefully.


   In truth they had. The Water of Youth possessed merely a virtue


more transient than that of wine. The delirium which it created had


effervesced away. Yes! they were old again. With a shuddering impulse,


that showed her a woman still, the widow clasped her skinny hands


before her face, and wished that the coffin lid were over it, since it


could be no longer beautiful.


   "Yes, friends, ye are old again," said Dr. Heidegger, "and lo!


the Water of Youth is all lavished on the ground. Well- I bemoan it


not; for if the fountain gushed at my very doorstep, I would not stoop


to bathe my lips in it- no, though its delirium were for years instead


of moments. Such is the lesson ye have taught me!"


   But the doctor's four friends had taught no such lesson to


themselves. They resolved forthwith to make a pilgrimage to Florida,


and quaff at morning, noon, and night, from the Fountain of Youth.





   NOTE. In an English review, not long since, I have been accused


of plagiarizing the idea of this story from a chapter in one of the


novels of Alexandre Dumas. There has undoubtedly been a plagiarism


on one side or the other; but as my story was written a good deal more


than twenty years ago, and as the novel is of considerably more recent


date, I take pleasure in thinking that M. Dumas has done me the


honor to appropriate one of the fanciful conceptions of my earlier


days. He is heartily welcome to it; nor is it the only instance, by


many, in which the great French romancer has exercised the privilege


of commanding genius by confiscating the intellectual property of less


famous people to his own use and behoof.





   September, 1860








                        THE END


.




                                      1852


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                         FEATHERTOP: A MORALIZED LEGEND


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   DICKON," cried Mother Rigby, "a coal for my pipe!" The pipe was


in the old dame's mouth when she said these words. She had thrust it


there after filling it with tobacco, but without stooping to light


it at the hearth, where indeed there was no appearance of a fire


having been kindled that morning. Forthwith, however, as soon as the


order was given, there was an intense red glow out of the bowl of


the pipe, and a whiff of smoke from Mother Rigby's lips. Whence the


coal came, and how brought thither by an invisible hand, I have


never been able to discover.


   "Good!" quoth Mother Rigby, with a nod of her head. "Thank ye,


Dickon! And now for making this scarecrow. Be within call, Dickon,


in case I need you again."


      The good woman had risen thus early (for as yet it was


scarcely sunrise) in order to set about making a scarecrow, which


she intended to put in the middle of her corn-patch. It was now the


latter week of May, and the crows and blackbirds had already


discovered the little, green, rolled-up leaf of the Indian corn just


peeping out of the soil. She was determined, therefore, to contrive as


lifelike a scarecrow as ever was seen, and to finish it immediately,


from top to toe, so that it should begin its sentinel's duty that very


morning. Now Mother Rigby (as everybody must have heard) was one of


the most cunning and potent witches in New England, and might, with


very little trouble, have made a scarecrow ugly enough to frighten the


minister himself. But on this occasion, as she had awakened in an


uncommonly pleasant humor, and was further dulcified by her pipe of


tobacco, she resolved to produce something fine, beautiful, and


splendid, rather than hideous and horrible.


   "I don't want to set up a hobgoblin in my own corn-patch, and


almost at my own doorstep," said Mother Rigby to herself, puffing


out a whiff of smoke; "I could do it if I pleased, but I'm tired of


doing marvellous things, and so I'll keep within the bounds of


everyday business just for variety's sake. Besides, there is no use in


scaring the little children for a mile roundabout, though 'tis true


I'm a witch."


   It was settled, therefore, in her own mind, that the scarecrow


should represent a fine gentleman of the period, so far as the


materials at hand would allow. Perhaps it may be as well to


enumerate the chief of the articles that went to the composition of


this figure.


   The most important item of all, probably, although it made so


little show, was a certain broomstick, on which Mother Rigby had taken


many an airy gallop at midnight, and which now served the scarecrow by


way of a spinal column, or, as the unlearned phrase it, a backbone.


One of its arms was a disabled flail which used to be wielded by


Goodman Rigby, before his spouse worried him out of this troublesome


world; the other, if I mistake not, was composed of the pudding


stick and a broken rung of a chair, tied loosely together at the


elbow. As for its legs, the right was a hoe handle, and the left an


undistinguished and miscellaneous stick from the woodpile. Its


lungs, stomach, and other affairs of that kind were nothing better


than a meal bag stuffed with straw. Thus we have made out the skeleton


and entire corporosity of the scarecrow, with the exception of its


head; and this was admirably supplied by a somewhat withered and


shrivelled pumpkin, in which Mother Rigby cut two holes for the


eyes, and a slit for the mouth, leaving a bluish-colored knob in the


middle to pass for a nose. It was really quite a respectable face.


   "I've seen worse ones on human shoulders, at any rate," said Mother


Rigby. "And many a fine gentleman has a pumpkin head, as well as my


scarecrow."


   But the clothes, in this case, were to be the making of the man. So


the good old woman took down from a peg an ancient plum-colored coat


of London make, and with relics of embroidery on its seams, cuffs,


pocket-flaps, and button-holes, but lamentably worn and faded, patched


at the elbows, tattered at the skirts, and threadbare all over. On the


left breast was a round hole, whence either a star of nobility had


been rent away, or else the hot heart of some former wearer had


scorched it through and through. The neighbors said that this rich


garment belonged to the Black Man's wardrobe, and that he kept it at


Mother Rigby's cottage for the convenience of slipping it on


whenever he wished to make a grand appearance at the governor's table.


To match the coat there was a velvet waistcoat of very ample size, and


formerly embroidered with foliage that had been as brightly golden


as the maple leaves in October, but which had now quite vanished out


of the substance of the velvet. Next came a pair of scarlet


breeches, once worn by the French governor of Louisbourg, and the


knees of which had touched the lower step of the throne of Louis le


Grand. The Frenchman had given these small-clothes to an Indian


powwow, who parted with them to the old witch for a gill of strong


waters, at one of their dances in the forest. Furthermore, Mother


Rigby produced a pair of silk stockings and put them on the figure's


legs, where they showed as unsubstantial as a dream, with the wooden


reality of the two sticks making itself miserably apparent through the


holes. Lastly, she put her dead husband's wig on the bare scalp of the


pumpkin, and surmounted the whole with a dusty three-cornered hat,


in which was stuck the longest tail feather of a rooster.


   Then the old dame stood the figure up in a corner of her cottage


and chuckled to behold its yellow semblance of a visage, with its


nobby little nose thrust into the air. It had a strangely


self-satisfied aspect, and seemed to say, "Come look at me!"


   "And you are well worth looking at, that's a fact!" quoth Mother


Rigby, in admiration at her own handiwork. "I've made many a puppet


since I've been a witch, but methinks this is the finest of them


all. 'Tis almost too good for a scarecrow. And, by the by, I'll just


fill a fresh pipe of tobacco and then take him out to the corn-patch."


   While filling her pipe the old woman continued to gaze with


almost motherly affection at the figure in the corner. To say the


truth, whether it were chance, or skill, or downright witchcraft,


there was something wonderfully human in this ridiculous shape,


bedizened with its tattered finery; and as for the countenance, it


appeared to shrivel its yellow surface into a grin- a funny kind of


expression betwixt scorn and merriment, as if it understood itself


to be a jest at mankind. The more Mother Rigby looked the better she


was pleased.


   "Dickon," cried she sharply, "another coal for my pipe!"


   Hardly had she spoken, than, just as before, there was a


red-glowing coal on the top of the tobacco. She drew in a long whiff


and puffed it forth again into the bar of morning sunshine which


struggled through the one dusty pane of her cottage window. Mother


Rigby always liked to flavor her pipe with a coal of fire from the


particular chimney corner whence this had been brought. But where that


chimney corner might be, or who brought the coal from it- further than


that the invisible messenger seemed to respond to the name of


Dickon- I cannot tell.


   "That puppet yonder," thought Mother Rigby, still with her eyes


fixed on the scarecrow, "is too good a piece of work to stand all


summer in a corn-patch, frightening away the crows and blackbirds.


He's capable of better things. Why, I've danced with a worse one, when


partners happened to be scarce, at our witch meetings in the forest!


What if I should let him take his chance among the other men of


straw and empty fellows who go bustling about the world?"


   The old witch took three or four more whiffs of her pipe and


smiled.


   "He'll meet plenty of his brethren at every street corner!"


continued she. "Well; I didn't mean to dabble in witchcraft today,


further than the lighting of my pipe, but a witch I am, and a witch


I'm likely to be, and there's no use trying to shirk it. I'll make a


man of my scarecrow, were it only for the joke's sake!"


   While muttering these words, Mother Rigby took the pipe from her


own mouth and thrust it into the crevice which represented the same


feature in the pumpkin visage of the scarecrow.


   "Puff, darling, puff!" said she. "Puff away, my fine fellow! your


life depends on it!"


   This was a strange exhortation, undoubtedly, to be addressed to a


mere thing of sticks, straw, and old clothes, with nothing better than


a shrivelled pumpkin for a head- as we know to have been the


scarecrow's case. Nevertheless, as we must carefully hold in


remembrance, Mother Rigby was a witch of singular power and dexterity;


and, keeping this fact duly before our minds, we shall see nothing


beyond credibility in the remarkable incidents of our story. Indeed,


the great difficulty will be at once got over, if we can only bring


ourselves to believe that, as soon as the old dame bade him puff,


there came a whiff of smoke from the scarecrow's mouth. It was the


very feeblest of whiffs, to be sure; but it was followed by another


and another, each more decided than the preceding one.


   "Puff away, my pet! puff away, my pretty one!" Mother Rigby kept


repeating, with her pleasantest smile. "It is the breath of life to


ye; and that you may take my word for."


   Beyond all question the pipe was bewitched. There must have been


a spell either in the tobacco or in the fiercely-glowing coal that


so mysteriously burned on top of it, or in the pungently-aromatic


smoke which exhaled from the kindled weed. The figure, after a few


doubtful attempts, at length blew forth a volley of smoke extending


all the way from the obscure corner into the bar of sunshine. There it


eddied and melted away among the motes of dust. It seemed a convulsive


effort; for the two or three next whiffs were fainter, although the


coal still glowed and threw a gleam over the scarecrow's visage. The


old witch clapped her skinny hands together, and smiled


encouragingly upon her handiwork. She saw that the charm worked


well. The shrivelled, yellow face, which heretofore had been no face


at all, had already a thin, fantastic haze, as it were of human


likeness, shifting to and fro across it: sometimes vanishing entirely,


but growing more perceptible than ever with the next whiff from the


pipe. The whole figure, in like manner, assumed a show of life, such


as we impart to ill-defined shapes among the clouds, and half


deceive ourselves with the pastime of our own fancy.


   If we must needs pry closely into the matter, it may be doubted


whether there was any real change, after all, in the sordid,


wornout, worthless, and ill-jointed substance of the scarecrow; but


merely a spectral illusion, and a cunning effect of light and shade so


colored and contrived as to delude the eyes of most men. The


miracles of witchcraft seem always to have had a very shallow


subtlety; and, at least, if the above explanation do not hit the truth


of the process, I can suggest no better.


   "Well puffed, my pretty lad!" still cried old Mother Rigby.


"Come, another good stout whiff, and let it be with might and main.


Puff for thy life, I tell thee! Puff out of the very bottom of thy


heart, if any heart thou hast, or any bottom to it! Well done,


again! Thou didst suck in that mouthful as if for the pure love of


it."


   And then the witch beckoned to the scarecrow, throwing so much


magnetic potency into her gesture that it seemed as if it must


inevitably be obeyed, like the mystic call of the loadstone when it


summons the iron.


   "Why lurkest thou in the corner, lazy one?" said she. "Step


forth! Thou hast the world before thee!"


   Upon my word, if the legend were not one which I heard on my


grandmother's knee, and which had established its place among things


credible before my childish judgment could analyze its probability,


I question whether I should have the face to tell it now.


   In obedience to Mother Rigby's word, and extending its arm as if to


reach her outstretched hand, the figure made a step forward- a kind of


hitch and jerk, however, rather than a step- then tottered and


almost lost its balance. What could the witch expect? It was


nothing, after all, but a scarecrow stuck upon two sticks. But the


strong-willed old beldam scowled, and beckoned, and flung the energy


of her purpose so forcibly at this poor combination of rotten wood,


and musty straw, and ragged garments, that it was compelled to show


itself a man, in spite of the reality of things. So it stepped into


the bar of sunshine. There it stood- poor devil of a contrivance


that it was!- with only the thinnest vesture of human similitude about


it, through which was evident the stiff, rickety, incongruous,


faded, tattered, good-for-nothing patchwork of its substance, ready to


sink in a heap upon the floor, as conscious of its own unworthiness to


be erect. Shall I confess the truth? At its present point of


vivification, the scarecrow reminds me of some of the lukewarm and


abortive characters, composed of heterogeneous materials, used for the


thousandth time, and never worth using, with which romance writers


(and myself, no doubt, among the rest) have so over-peopled the


world of fiction.


   But the fierce old hag began to get angry and show a glimpse of her


diabolic nature (like a snake's head, peeping with a hiss out of her


bosom), at this pusillanimous behavior of the thing which she had


taken the trouble to put together.


   "Puff away, wretch!" cried she, wrathfully. "Puff, puff, puff, thou


thing of straw and emptiness! thou rag or two! thou meal bag! thou


pumpkin head! thou nothing! Where shall I find a name vile enough to


call thee by? Puff, I say, and suck in thy fantastic life along with


the smoke! else I snatch the pipe from thy mouth and hurl thee where


that red coal came from."


   Thus threatened, the unhappy scarecrow had nothing for it but to


puff away for dear life. As need was, therefore, it applied itself


lustily to the pipe, and sent forth such abundant volleys of tobacco


smoke that the small cottage kitchen became all vaporous. The one


sunbeam struggled mistily through, and could but imperfectly define


the image of the cracked and dusty window pane on the opposite wall.


Mother Rigby, meanwhile, with one brown arm akimbo and the other


stretched towards the figure, loomed grimly amid the obscurity with


such port and expression as when she was wont to heave a ponderous


nightmare on her victims and stand at the bedside to enjoy their


agony. In fear and trembling did this poor scarecrow puff. But its


efforts, it must be acknowledged, served an excellent purpose; for,


with each successive whiff, the figure lost more and more of its dizzy


and perplexing tenuity and seemed to take denser substance. Its very


garments, moreover, partook of the magical change, and shone with


the gloss of novelty and glistened with the skilfully embroidered gold


that had long ago been rent away. And, half revealed among the


smoke, a yellow visage bent its lustreless eyes on Mother Rigby.


   At last the old witch clinched her fist and shook it at the figure.


Not that she was positively angry, but merely acting on the principle-


perhaps untrue, or not the only truth, though as high a one as


Mother Rigby could be expected to attain- that feeble and torpid


natures, being incapable of better inspiration, must be stirred up


by fear. But here was the crisis. Should she fail in what she now


sought to effect, it was her ruthless purpose to scatter the miserable


simulacre into its original elements.


   "Thou hast a man's aspect," said she, sternly. "Have also the


echo and mockery of a voice! I bid thee speak!"


   The scarecrow gasped, struggled, and at length emitted a murmur,


which was so incorporated with its smoky breath that you could


scarcely tell whether it were indeed a voice or only a whiff of


tobacco. Some narrators of this legend hold the opinion that Mother


Rigby's conjurations and the fierceness of her will had compelled a


familiar spirit into the figure, and that the voice was his.


   "Mother," mumbled the poor stifled voice, "be not so awful with me!


I would fain speak; but being without wits, what can I say?"


   "Thou canst speak, darling, canst thou?" cried Mother Rigby,


relaxing her grim countenance into a smile. "And what shalt thou


say, quotha! Say, indeed! Art thou of the brotherhood of the empty


skull, and demandest of me what thou shalt say? Thou shalt say a


thousand things, and saying them a thousand times over, thou shalt


still have said nothing! Be not afraid, I tell thee! When thou


comest into the world (whither I purpose sending thee forthwith)


thou shalt not lack the wherewithal to talk. Talk! Why, thou shalt


babble like a mill-stream, if thou wilt. Thou hast brains enough for


that, I trow!"


   "At your service, mother," responded the figure.


   "And that was well said, my pretty one," answered Mother Rigby.


"Then thou speakest like thyself, and meant nothing. Thou shalt have a


hundred such set phrases, and five hundred to the boot of them. And


now, darling, I have taken so much pains with thee and thou art so


beautiful, that, by my troth, I love thee better than any witch's


puppet in the world; and I've made them of all sorts- clay, wax,


sticks, night fog, morning mist, sea foam, and chimney smoke. But thou


art the very best. So give heed to what I say."


   "Yes, kind mother," said the figure, "with all my heart!"


   "With all thy heart!" cried the old witch, setting her hands to her


sides and laughing loudly. "Thou hast such a pretty way of speaking.


With all thy heart! And thou didst put thy hand to the left side of


thy waistcoat as if thou really hadst one!"


   So now, in high good humor with this fantastic contrivance of hers,


Mother Rigby told the scarecrow that it must go and play its part in


the great world, where not one man in a hundred, she affirmed, was


gifted with more real substance than itself. And, that he might hold


up his head with the best of them, she endowed him, on the spot,


with an unreckonable amount of wealth. It consisted partly of a gold


mine in Eldorado, and of ten thousand shares in a broken bubble, and


of half a million acres of vineyard at the North Pole, and of a castle


in the air, and a chateau in Spain, together with all the rents and


income therefrom accruing. She further made over to him the cargo of a


certain ship, laden with salt of Cadiz, which she herself, by her


necromantic arts, had caused to founder, ten years before, in the


deepest part of mid-ocean. If the salt were not dissolved, and could


be brought to market, it would fetch a pretty penny among the


fishermen. That he might not lack ready money, she gave him a copper


farthing of Birmingham manufacture, being all the coin she had about


her, and likewise a great deal of brass, which she applied to his


forehead, thus making it yellower than ever.


   "With that brass alone," quoth Mother Rigby, "thou canst pay thy


way all over the earth. Kiss me, pretty darling! I have done my best


for thee."


   Furthermore, that the adventurer might lack no possible advantage


towards a fair start in life, this excellent old dame gave him a token


by which he was to introduce himself to a certain magistrate, member


of the council, merchant, and elder of the church (the four capacities


constituting but one man), who stood at the head of society in the


neighboring metropolis. The token was neither more nor less than a


single word, which Mother Rigby whispered to the scarecrow, and


which the scarecrow was to whisper to the merchant.


   "Gouty as the old fellow is, he'll run thy errands for thee, when


once thou hast given him that word in his ear," said the old witch.


"Mother Rigby knows the worshipful Justice Gookin, and the


worshipful Justice knows Mother Rigby!"


   Here the witch thrust her wrinkled face close to the puppet's,


chuckling irrepressibly, and fidgeting all through her system with


delight at the idea which she meant to communicate.


   "The worshipful Master Gookin," whispered she, "hath a comely


maiden to his daughter. And hark ye, my pet! Thou hast a fair outside,


and a pretty wit enough of thine own. Yea, a pretty wit enough! Thou


wilt think better of it when thou hast seen more of other people's


wits. Now, with thy outside and thy inside, thou art the very man to


win a young girl's heart. Never doubt it! I tell thee it shall be


so. Put but a bold face on the matter, sigh, smile, flourish thy


hat, thrust forth thy leg like a dancing-master, put thy right hand to


the left side of thy waistcoat, and pretty Polly Gookin is thine own!"


   All this while the new creature had been sucking in and exhaling


the vapory fragrance of his pipe, and seemed now to continue this


occupation as much for the enjoyment it afforded as because it was


an essential condition of his existence. It was wonderful to see how


exceedingly like a human being it behaved. Its eyes (for it appeared


to possess a pair) were bent on Mother Rigby, and at suitable


junctures it nodded or shook its head. Neither did it lack words


proper for the occasion: "Really! Indeed! Pray tell me! Is it


possible! Upon my word! By no means! Oh! Ah! Hem!" and other such


weighty utterances as imply attention, inquiry, acquiescence, or


dissent on the part of the auditor. Even had you stood by and seen the


scarecrow made, you could scarcely have resisted the conviction that


it perfectly understood the cunning counsels which the old witch


poured into its counterfeit of an ear. The more earnestly it applied


its lips to the pipe, the more distinctly was its human likeness


stamped among visible realities, the more sagacious grew its


expression, the more lifelike its gestures and movements, and the more


intelligibly audible its voice. Its garments, too, glistened so much


the brighter with an illusory magnificence. The very pipe, in which


burned the spell of all this wonderwork, ceased to appear as a


smoke-blackened earthen stump, and became a meerschaum, with painted


bowl and amber mouthpiece.


   It might be apprehended, however, that as the life of the


illusion seemed identical with the vapor of the pipe, it would


terminate simultaneously with the reduction of the tobacco to ashes.


But the beldam foresaw the difficulty.


   "Hold thou the pipe, my precious one," said she, "while I fill it


for thee again."


   It was sorrowful to behold how the fine gentleman began to fade


back into a scarecrow while Mother Rigby shook the ashes out of the


pipe and proceeded to replenish it from her tobacco-box.


   "Dickon," cried she, in her high, sharp tone, "another coal for


this pipe!"


   No sooner said than the intensely red speck of fire was glowing


within the pipe-bowl; and the scarecrow, without waiting for the


witch's bidding, applied the tube to his lips and drew in a few short,


convulsive whiffs, which soon, however, became regular and equable.


   "Now, mine own heart's darling," quoth Mother Rigby, "whatever


may happen to thee, thou must stick to thy pipe. Thy life is in it;


and that, at least, thou knowest well, if thou knowest nought besides.


Stick to thy pipe, I say! Smoke, puff, blow thy cloud; and tell the


people, if any question be made, that it is for thy health, and that


so the physician orders thee to do. And, sweet one, when thou shalt


find thy pipe getting low, go apart into some corner, and (first


filling thyself with smoke) cry sharply, 'Dickon, a fresh pipe of


tobacco!' and, 'Dickon, another coal for my pipe!' and have it into


thy pretty mouth as speedily as may be. Else, instead of a gallant


gentleman in a gold-laced coat, thou wilt be but a jumble of sticks


and tattered clothes, and a bag of straw, and a withered pumpkin!


Now depart, my treasure, and good luck go with thee!"


   "Never fear, mother!" said the figure, in a stout voice, and


sending forth a courageous whiff of smoke, "I will thrive, if an


honest man and a gentleman may!"


   "Oh, thou wilt be the death of me!" cried the old witch,


convulsed with laughter. "That was well said. If an honest man and a


gentleman may! Thou playest thy part to perfection. Get along with


thee for a smart fellow; and I will wager on thy head, as a man of


pith and substance, with a brain and what they call a heart, and all


else that a man should have, against any other thing on two legs. I


hold myself a better witch than yesterday, for thy sake. Did not I


make thee? And I defy any witch in New England to make such another!


Here; take my staff along with thee!"


   The staff, though it was but a plain oaken stick, immediately


took the aspect of a gold-headed cane.


   "That gold head has as much sense in it as thine own," said


Mother Rigby, "and it will guide thee straight to worshipful Master


Gookin's door. Get thee gone, my pretty pet, my darling, my precious


one, my treasure; and if any ask thy name, it is Feathertop. For


thou hast a feather in thy hat, and I have thrust a handful of


feathers into the hollow of thy head, and thy wig, too, is of the


fashion they call Feathertop- so be Feathertop thy name!"


   And, issuing from the cottage, Feathertop strode manfully towards


town. Mother Rigby stood at the threshold, well pleased to see how the


sunbeams glistened on him, as if all his magnificence were real, and


how diligently and lovingly he smoked his pipe, and how handsomely


he walked, in spite of a little stiffness of his legs. She watched him


until out of sight, and threw a witch benediction after her darling,


when a turn of the road snatched him from her view.


   Betimes in the forenoon, when the principal street of the


neighboring town was just at its acme of life and bustle, a stranger


of very distinguished figure was seen on the sidewalk. His port as


well as his garments betokened nothing short of nobility. He wore a


richly-embroidered plum-colored coat, a waistcoat of costly velvet,


magnificently adorned with golden foliage, a pair of splendid


scarlet breeches, and the finest and glossiest of white silk


stockings. His head was covered with a peruke, so daintily powdered


and adjusted that it would have been sacrilege to disorder it with a


hat; which, therefore (and it was a gold-laced hat, set off with a


snowy feather), he carried beneath his arm. On the breast of his


coat glistened a star. He managed his gold-headed cane with an airy


grace, peculiar to the fine gentlemen of the period; and, to give


the highest possible finish to his equipment, he had lace ruffles at


his wrist, of a most ethereal delicacy, sufficiently avouching how


idle and aristocratic must be the hands which they half concealed.


   It was a remarkable point in the accoutrement of this brilliant


personage that he held in his left hand a fantastic kind of a pipe,


with an exquisitely painted bowl and an amber mouthpiece. This he


applied to his lips as often as every five or six paces, and inhaled a


deep whiff of smoke, which, after being retained a moment in his


lungs, might be seen to eddy gracefully from his mouth and nostrils.


   As may well be supposed, the street was all astir to find out the


stranger's name.


   "It is some great nobleman, beyond question," said one of the


towns-people. "Do you see the star at his breast?"


   "Nay; it is too bright to be seen," said another. "Yes; he must


needs be a nobleman, as you say. But by what conveyance, think you,


can his lordship have voyaged or travelled hither? There has been no


vessel from the old country for a month past; and if he have arrived


overland from the southward, pray where are his attendants and


equipage?"


   "He needs no equipage to set off his rank," remarked a third. "If


he came among us in rags, nobility would shine through a hole in his


elbow. I never saw such dignity of aspect. He has the old Norman blood


in his veins, I warrant him."


   "I rather take him to be a Dutchman, or one of your high


Germans," said another citizen. "The men of those countries have


always the pipe at their mouths."


   "And so has a Turk," answered his companion. "But, in my


judgment, this stranger hath been bred at the French court, and hath


there learned politeness and grace of manner, which none understand so


well as the nobility of France. That gait, now! A vulgar spectator


might deem it stiff- he might call it a hitch and jerk- but, to my


eye, it hath an unspeakable majesty, and must have been acquired by


constant observation of the deportment of the Grand Monarque. The


stranger's character and office are evident enough. He is a French


ambassador, come to treat with our rulers about the cession of


Canada."


   "More probably a Spaniard," said another, "and hence his yellow


complexion; or, most likely, he is from the Havana, or from some


port on the Spanish Main, and comes to make investigation about the


piracies which our government is thought to connive at. Those settlers


in Peru and Mexico have skins as yellow as the gold which they dig out


of their mines."


   "Yellow or not," cried a lady, "he is a beautiful man! so tall,


so slender! such a fine, noble face, with so well-shaped a nose, and


all that delicacy of expression about the mouth! And, bless me, how


bright his star is! It positively shoots out flames!"


   "So do your eyes, fair lady," said the stranger, with a bow and a


flourish of his pipe; for he was just passing at the instant. "Upon my


honor, they have quite dazzled me."


   "Was ever so original and exquisite a compliment?" murmured the


lady, in an ecstasy of delight.


   Amid the general admiration excited by the stranger's appearance,


there were only two dissenting voices. One was that of an


impertinent cur, which, after snuffing at the heels of the


glistening figure, put its tail between its legs and skulked into


its master's back yard, vociferating an execrable howl. The other


dissentient was a young child, who squalled at the fullest stretch


of his lungs, and babbled some unintelligible nonsense about a


pumpkin.


   Feathertop meanwhile pursued his way along the street. Except for


the few complimentary words to the lady, and now and then a slight


inclination of the head in requital of the profound reverences of


the bystanders, he seemed wholly absorbed in his pipe. There needed no


other proof of his rank and consequence than the perfect equanimity


with which he comported himself, while the curiosity and admiration of


the town swelled almost into clamor around him. With a crowd gathering


behind his footsteps, he finally reached the mansion-house of the


worshipful Justice Gookin, entered the gate, ascended the steps of the


front door, and knocked. In the interim, before his summons was


answered, the stranger was observed to shake the ashes out of his


pipe.


   "What did he say in that sharp voice?" inquired one of the


spectators.


   "Nay, I know not," answered his friend. "But the sun dazzles my


eyes strangely. How dim and faded his lordship looks all of a


sudden! Bless my wits, what is the matter with me?"


   "The wonder is, said the other, "that his pipe, which was out


only an instant ago, should be all alight again, and with the


reddest coal I ever saw. There is something mysterious about this


stranger. What a whiff of smoke was that! Dim and faded did you call


him? Why, as he turns about the star on his breast is all ablaze."


   "It is, indeed," said his companion; "and it will go near to dazzle


pretty Polly Gookin, whom I see peeping at it out of the chamber


window."


   The door being now opened, Feathertop turned to the crowd, made a


stately bend of his body like a great man acknowledging the


reverence of the meaner sort, and vanished into the house. There was a


mysterious kind of a smile, if it might not better be called a grin or


grimace, upon his visage; but, of all the throng that beheld him,


not an individual appears to have possessed insight enough to detect


the illusive character of the stranger except a little child and a cur


dog.


   Our legend here loses somewhat of its continuity, and, passing over


the preliminary explanation between Feathertop and the merchant,


goes in quest of the pretty Polly Gookin. She was a damsel of a


soft, round figure, with light hair and blue eyes, and a fair, rosy


face, which seemed neither very shrewd nor very simple. This young


lady had caught a glimpse of the glistening stranger while standing at


the threshold, and had forthwith put on a laced cap, a string of


beads, her finest kerchief, and her stiffest damask petticoat in


preparation for the interview. Hurrying from her chamber to the


parlor, she had ever since been viewing herself in the large


looking-glass and practising pretty airs- now a smile, now a


ceremonious dignity of aspect, and now a softer smile than the former,


kissing her hand likewise, tossing her head, and managing her fan;


while within the mirror an unsubstantial little maid repeated every


gesture and did all the foolish things that Polly did, but without


making her ashamed of them. In short, it was the fault of pretty


Polly's ability rather than her will if she failed to be as complete


an artifice as the illustrious Feathertop himself; and, when she


thus tampered with her own simplicity, the witch's phantom might


well hope to win her.


   No sooner did Polly hear her father's gouty footsteps approaching


the parlor door, accompanied with the stiff clatter of Feathertop's


high-heeled shoes, than she seated herself bolt upright and innocently


began warbling a song.


   "Polly! daughter Polly!" cried the old merchant. "Come hither,


child."


   Master Gookin's aspect, as he opened the door, was doubtful and


troubled.


   "This gentleman," continued he, presenting the stranger, "is the


Chevalier Feathertop- nay, I beg his pardon, my Lord Feathertop- who


hath brought me a token of remembrance from an ancient friend of mine.


Pay your duty to his lordship, child, and honor him as his quality


deserves."


   After these few words of introduction, the worshipful magistrate


immediately quitted the room. But, even in that brief moment, had


the fair Polly glanced aside at her father instead of devoting herself


wholly to the brilliant guest, she might have taken warning of some


mischief nigh at hand. The old man was nervous, fidgety, and very


pale. Purposing a smile of courtesy, he had deformed his face with a


sort of galvanic grin, which, when Feathertop's back was turned, he


exchanged for a scowl, at the same time shaking his fist and


stamping his gouty foot- an incivility which brought its retribution


along with it. The truth appears to have been that Mother Rigby's word


of introduction, whatever it might be, had operated far more on the


rich merchant's fears than on his good will. Moreover, being a man


of wonderfully acute observation, he had noticed that these painted


figures on the bowl of Feathertop's pipe were in motion. Looking


more closely, he became convinced that these figures were a party of


little demons, each duly provided with horns and a tail, and dancing


hand in hand, with gestures of diabolical merriment, round the


circumference of the pipe bowl. As if to confirm his suspicions, while


Master Gookin ushered his guest along a dusky passage from his private


room to the parlor, the star on Feathertop's breast had scintillated


actual flames, and threw a flickering gleam upon the wall, the


ceiling, and the floor.


   With such sinister prognostics manifesting themselves on all hands,


it is not to be marvelled at that the merchant should have felt that


he was committing his daughter to a very questionable acquaintance. He


cursed, in his secret soul, the insinuating elegance of Feathertop's


manners, as this brilliant personage bowed, smiled, put his hand on


his heart, inhaled a long whiff from his pipe, and enriched the


atmosphere with the smoky vapor of a fragrant and visible sigh. Gladly


would poor Master Gookin have thrust his dangerous guest into the


street; but there was a constraint and terror within him. This


respectable old gentleman, we fear, at an earlier period of life,


had given some pledge or other to the evil principle, and perhaps


was now to redeem it by the sacrifice of his daughter.


   It so happened that the parlor door was partly of glass, shaded


by a silken curtain, the folds of which hung a little awry. So


strong was the merchant's interest in witnessing what was to ensue


between the fair Polly and the gallant Feathertop that, after quitting


the room, he could by no means refrain from peeping through the


crevice of the curtain.


   But there was nothing very miraculous to be seen; nothing- except


the trifles previously noticed- to confirm the idea of a


supernatural peril environing the pretty Polly. The stranger it is


true was evidently a thorough and practised man of the world,


systematic and self-possessed, and therefore the sort of a person to


whom a parent ought not to confide a simple, young girl without due


watchfulness for the result. The worthy magistrate, who had been


conversant with all degrees and qualities of mankind, could not but


perceive every motion and gesture of the distinguished Feathertop came


in its proper place; nothing had been left rude or native in him; a


well-digested conventionalism had incorporated itself thoroughly


with his substance and transformed him into a work of art. Perhaps


it was this peculiarity that invested him with a species of


ghastliness and awe. It is the effect of anything completely and


consummately artificial, in human shape, that the person impresses


us as an unreality and as having hardly pith enough to cast a shadow


upon the floor. As regarded Feathertop, all this resulted in a wild,


extravagant, and fantastical impression, as if his life and being were


akin to the smoke that curled upward from his pipe.


   But pretty Polly Gookin felt not thus. The pair were now


promenading the room: Feathertop with his dainty stride and no less


dainty grimace; the girl with a native maidenly grace, just touched,


not spoiled, by a slightly affected manner, which seemed caught from


the perfect artifice of her companion. The longer the interview


continued, the more charmed was pretty Polly, until, within the


first quarter of an hour (as the old magistrate noted by his watch),


she was evidently beginning to be in love. Nor need it have been


witchcraft that subdued her in such a hurry; the poor child's heart,


it may be, was so very fervent that it melted her with its own


warmth as reflected from the hollow semblance of a lover. No matter


what Feathertop said, his words found depth and reverberation in her


ear; no matter what he did, his action was heroic to her eye. And by


this time it is to be supposed there was a blush on Polly's cheek, a


tender smile about her mouth, and a liquid softness in her glance;


while the star kept coruscating on Feathertop's breast, and the little


demons careered with more frantic merriment than ever about the


circumference of his pipe bowl. O pretty Polly Gookin, why should


these imps rejoice so madly that a silly maiden's heart was about to


be given to a shadow! Is it so unusual a misfortune, so rare a


triumph?


   By and by Feathertop paused, and throwing himself into an


imposing attitude, seemed to summon the fair girl to survey his figure


and resist him longer if she could. His star, his embroidery, his


buckles glowed at that instant with unutterable splendor; the


picturesque hues of his attire took a richer depth of coloring;


there was a gleam and polish over his whole presence betokening the


perfect witchery of well-ordered manners. The maiden raised her eyes


and suffered them to linger upon her companion with a bashful and


admiring gaze. Then, as if desirous of judging what value her own


simple comeliness might have side by side with so much brilliancy, she


cast a glance towards the full-length looking-glass in front of


which they happened to be standing. It was one of the truest plates in


the world and incapable of flattery. No sooner did the images


therein reflected meet Polly's eye than she shrieked, shrank from


the stranger's side, gazed at him for a moment in the wildest


dismay, and sank insensible upon the floor. Feathertop likewise had


looked towards the mirror, and there beheld, not the glittering


mockery of his outside show, but a picture of the sordid patchwork


of his real composition, stripped of all witchcraft.


   The wretched simulacrum! We almost pity him. He threw up his arms


with an expression of despair that went further than any of his


previous manifestations towards vindicating his claims to be


reckoned human; for, perchance the only time since this so often empty


and deceptive life of mortals began its course, an illusion had seen


and fully recognized itself.


   Mother Rigby was seated by her kitchen hearth in the twilight of


this eventful day, and had just shaken the ashes out of a new pipe,


when she heard a hurried tramp along the road. Yet it did not seem


so much the tramp of human footsteps as the clatter of sticks or the


rattling of dry bones.


   "Ha!" thought the old witch, "what step is that? Whose skeleton


is out of its grave now, I wonder?"


   A figure burst headlong into the cottage door. It was Feathertop!


His pipe was still alight; the star still flamed upon his breast;


the embroidery still glowed upon his garments; nor had he lost, in any


degree or manner that could be estimated, the aspect that


assimilated him with our mortal brotherhood. But yet, in some


indescribable way (as is the case with all that has deluded us when


once found out), the poor reality was felt beneath the cunning


artifice.


   "What has gone wrong?" demanded the witch. "Did yonder sniffling


hypocrite thrust my darling from his door? The villain! I'll set


twenty fiends to torment him till he offer thee his daughter on his


bended knees!"


   "No, mother," said Feathertop despondingly; "it was not that."


   "Did the girl scorn my precious one?" asked Mother Rigby, her


fierce eyes glowing like two coals of Tophet. "I'll cover her face


with pimples! Her nose shall be as red as the coal in thy pipe! Her


front teeth shall drop out! In a week hence she shall not be worth thy


having!"


   "Let her alone, mother," answered poor Feathertop; "the girl was


half won; and methinks a kiss from her sweet lips might have made me


altogether human. But," he added, after a brief pause and then a


howl of self-contempt, "I've seen myself, mother! I've seen myself for


the wretched, ragged, empty thing I am! I'll exist no longer!"


   Snatching the pipe from his mouth, he flung it with all his might


against the chimney, and at the same instant sank upon the floor, a


medley of straw and tattered garments, with some sticks protruding


from the heap, and a shrivelled pumpkin in the midst. The eyeholes


were now lustreless; but the rudely-carved gap, that just before had


been a mouth, still seemed to twist itself into a despairing grin, and


was so far human.


   "Poor fellow!" quoth Mother Rigby, with a rueful glance at the


relics of her ill-fated contrivance. "My poor, dear, pretty


Feathertop! There are thousands upon thousands of coxcombs and


charlatans in the world, made up of just such a jumble of wornout,


forgotten, and good-for-nothing trash as he was! Yet they live in fair


repute, and never see themselves for what they are. And why should


my poor puppet be the only one to know himself and perish for it?"


   While thus muttering, the witch had filled a fresh pipe of tobacco,


and held the stem between her fingers, as doubtful whether to thrust


it into her own mouth or Feathertop's.


   "Poor Feathertop!" she continued. "I could easily give him


another chance and send him forth again tomorrow. But no; his feelings


are too tender, his sensibilities too deep. He seems to have too


much heart to bustle for his own advantage in such an empty and


heartless world. Well! well! I'll make a scarecrow of him after all.


'Tis an innocent and useful vocation, and will suit my darling well;


and, if each of his human brethren had as fit a one, 'twould be the


better for mankind; and as for this pipe of tobacco, I need it more


than he."


   So saying, Mother Rigby put the stem between her lips. "Dickon!"


cried she, in her high, sharp tone, "another coal for my pipe!"








                        THE END


.




                                      1844


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                          THE ARTIST OF THE BEAUTIFUL


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   AN ELDERLY MAN, with his pretty daughter on his arm, was passing


along the street, and emerged from the gloom of the cloudy evening


into the light that fell across the pavement from the window of a


small shop. It was a projecting window; and on the inside were


suspended a variety of watches- pinchbeck, silver, and one or two of


gold- all with their faces turned from the street, as if churlishly


disinclined to inform the wayfarers what o'clock it was. Seated within


the shop, sidelong to the window, with his pale face bent earnestly


over some delicate piece of mechanism, on which was thrown the


concentrated lustre of a shade-lamp, appeared a young man.


   "What can Owen Warland be about?" muttered old Peter Hovenden-


himself a retired watchmaker, and the former master of this same young


man, whose occupation he was now wondering at. "What can the fellow be


about? These six months past, I have never come by his shop without


seeing him just as steadily at work as now. It would be a flight


beyond his usual foolery to seek for the Perpetual Motion. And yet I


know enough of my old business to be certain, that what he is now so


busy with is no part of the machinery of a watch."


   "Perhaps, father," said Annie, without showing much interest in the


question, "Owen is inventing a new kind of time-keeper. I am sure he


has ingenuity enough."


   "Pooh, child! he has not the sort of ingenuity to invent anything


better than a Dutch toy," answered her father, who had formerly been


put to much vexation by Owen Warland's irregular genius. "A plague


on such ingenuity! All the effect that ever I knew of it was, to spoil


the accuracy of some of the best watches in my shop. He would turn the


sun out of its orbit, and derange the whole course of time, if, as I


said before, his ingenuity could grasp anything bigger than a


child's toy!"


   "Hush, father! he hears you," whispered Annie, pressing the old


man's arm. "His ears are as delicate as his feelings, and you know how


easily disturbed they are. Do let us move on."


   So Peter Hovenden and his daughter Annie plodded on, without


further conversation, until, in a by-street of the town, they found


themselves passing the open door of a blacksmith's shop. Within was


seen the forge, now blazing up, and illuminating the high and dusky


roof, and now confining its lustre to a narrow precinct of the


coal-strewn floor, according as the breath of the bellows was puffed


forth, or again inhaled into its vast leathern lungs. In the intervals


of brightness, it was easy to distinguish objects in remote corners of


the shop, and the horse-shoes that hung upon the wall; in the


momentary gloom, the fire seemed to be glimmering amidst the vagueness


of un-enclosed space. Moving about in this red glare and alternate


dusk, was the figure of the blacksmith, well worthy to be viewed in so


picturesque an aspect of light and shade, where the bright blaze


struggled with the black night, as if each would have snatched his


comely strength from the other. Anon, he drew a white-hot bar of


iron from the coals, laid it on the anvil, uplifted his arm of


might, and was seen enveloped in the myriads of sparks which the


strokes of his hammer scattered into the surrounding gloom.


   "Now, that is a pleasant sight," said the old watchmaker. "I know


what it is to work in gold, but give me the worker in iron, after


all is said and done. He spends his labor upon a reality. What say


you, daughter Annie?"


   "Pray don't speak so loud, father," whispered Annie. "Robert


Danforth will hear you."


   "And what if he should hear me?" said Peter Hovenden; "I say again,


it is a good and a wholesome thing to depend upon main strength and


reality, and to earn one's bread with the bare and brawny arm of a


blacksmith. A watchmaker gets his brain puzzled by his wheels within a


wheel, or loses his health or the nicety of his eyesight, as was my


case; and finds himself, at middle age, or a little after, past


labor at his own trade, and fit for nothing else, yet too poor to live


at his ease. So, I say once again, give me main strength for my money.


And then, how it takes the nonsense out of a man! Did you ever hear of


a blacksmith being such a fool as Owen Warland, yonder?"


   "Well said, uncle Hovenden!" shouted Robert Danforth, from the


forge, in a full, deep, merry voice, that made the roof reecho. "And


what says Miss Annie to that doctrine? She, I suppose, will think it a


genteeler business to tinker up a lady's watch than to forge a


horse-shoe or make a gridiron!"


   Annie drew her father onward, without giving him time for reply.


   But we must return to Owen Warland's shop, and spend more


meditation upon his history and character than either Peter


Hovenden, or probably his daughter Annie, or Owen's old school-fellow,


Robert Danforth, would have thought due to so slight a subject. From


the time that his little fingers could grasp a pen-knife, Owen had


been remarkable for a delicate ingenuity, which sometimes produced


pretty shapes in wood, principally figures of flowers and birds, and


sometimes seemed to aim at the hidden mysteries of mechanism. But it


was always for purposes of grace, and never with any mockery of the


useful. He did not, like the crowd of school-boy artizans, construct


little windmills on the angle of a barn, or watermills across the


neighboring brook. Those who discovered such peculiarity in the boy,


as to think it worth their while to observe him closely, sometimes saw


reason to suppose that he was attempting to imitate the beautiful


movements of nature, as exemplified in the flight of birds or the


activity of little animals. It seemed, in fact, a new development of


the love of the Beautiful, such as might have made him a poet, a


painter, or a sculptor, and which was as completely refined from all


utilitarian coarseness, as it could have been in either of the fine


arts. He looked with singular distaste at the stiff and regular


processes of ordinary machinery. Being once carried to see a


steam-engine, in the expectation that his intuitive comprehension of


mechanical principle would be gratified, he turned pale, and grew


sick, as if something monstrous and unnatural had been presented to


him. This horror was partly owing to the size and terrible energy of


the Iron Laborer; for the character of Owen's mind was microscopic,


and tended naturally to the minute, in accordance with his


diminutive frame, and the marvellous smallness and delicate power of


his fingers. Not that his sense of beauty was thereby diminished


into a sense of prettiness. The beautiful Idea has no relation to


size, and may be as perfectly developed in a space too minute for


any but microscopic investigation, as within the ample verge that is


measured by the arc of the rainbow. But, at all events, this


characteristic minuteness in his objects and accomplishments made


the world even more incapable than it might otherwise have been, of


appreciating Owen Warland's genius. The boy's relatives saw nothing


better to be done- as perhaps there was not- than to bind him


apprentice to a watchmaker, hoping that his strange ingenuity might


thus be regulated, and put to utili-tarian purposes.


   Peter Hovenden's opinion of his apprentice has already been


expressed. He could make nothing of the lad. Owen's apprehension of


the professional mysteries, it is true, was inconceivably quick. But


he altogether forgot or despised the grand object of a watchmaker's


business, and cared no more for the measurement of time than if it had


been merged into eternity. So long, however, as he remained under


his old master's care, Owen's lack of sturdiness made it possible,


by strict injunctions and sharp oversight, to restrain his creative


eccentricity within bounds. But when his apprenticeship was served


out, and he had taken the little shop which Peter Hovenden's failing


eyesight compelled him to relinquish, then did people recognize how


unfit a person was Owen Warland to lead old blind Father Time along


his daily course. One of his most rational projects was, to connect


a musical operation with the machinery of his watches, so that all the


harsh dissonances of life might be rendered tuneful, and each flitting


moment fall into the abyss of the Past in golden drops of harmony.


If a family-clock was entrusted to him for repair- one of those


tall, ancient clocks that have grown nearly allied to human nature, by


measuring out the lifetime of many generations- he would take upon


himself to arrange a dance or funeral procession of figures across its


venerable face, representing twelve mirthful or melancholy hours.


Several freaks of this kind quite destroyed the young watchmaker's


credit with that steady and matter-of-fact class of people, who hold


the opinion that time is not to be trifled with, whether considered as


the medium of advancement and prosperity in this world, or preparation


for the next. His custom rapidly diminished- a misfortune, however,


that was probably reckoned among his better accidents by Owen Warland,


who was becoming more and more absorbed in a secret occupation,


which drew all his science and manual dexterity into itself, and


likewise gave full employment to the characteristic tendencies of


his genius. This pursuit had already consumed many months.


   After the old watchmaker and his pretty daughter had gazed at


him, out of the obscurity of the street, Owen Warland was seized


with a fluttering of the nerves, which made his hand tremble too


violently to proceed with such delicate labor as he was now engaged


upon.


   "It was Annie herself!" murmured he. "I should have known by this


throbbing of my heart, before I heard her father's voice. Ah, how it


throbs! I shall scarcely be able to work again on this exquisite


mechanism tonight. Annie- dearest Annie- thou shouldst give firmness


to my heart and hand, and not shake them thus; for if I strive to


put the very spirit of Beauty into form, and give it motion, it is for


thy sake alone. Oh, throbbing heart, be quiet! If my labor be thus


thwarted, there will come vague and unsatisfied dreams, which will


leave me spiritless tomorrow."


   As he was endeavoring to settle himself again to his task, the


shop-door opened, and gave admittance to no other than the stalwart


figure which Peter Hovenden had paused to admire, as seen amid the


light and shadow of the blacksmith's shop. Robert Danforth had brought


a little anvil of his own manufacture, and peculiarly constructed,


which the young artist had recently bespoken. Owen examined the


article, and pronounced it fashioned according to his wish.


   "Why, yes," said Robert Danforth, his strong voice filling the shop


as with the sound of a bass-viol, "I consider myself equal to anything


in the way of my own trade; though I should have made but a poor


figure at yours, with such a fist as this"- added he, laughing, as


he laid his vast hand beside the delicate one of Owen. "But what then?


I put more main strength into one blow of my sledge-hammer, than all


that you have expended since you were a 'prentice. Is not that the


truth?"


   "Very probably," answered the low and slender voice of Owen.


"Strength is an earthly monster. I make no pretensions to it. My


force, whatever there may be of it, is altogether spiritual."


   "Well, but, Owen, what are you about?" asked his old school-fellow,


still in such a hearty volume of tone that it made the artist


shrink; especially as the question related to a subject so sacred as


the absorbing dream of his imagination. "Folks do say, that you are


trying to discover the Perpetual Motion."


   "The Perpetual Motion? nonsense!" replied Owen Warland, with a


movement of disgust; for he was full of little petulances. "It never


can be discovered! It is a dream that may delude men whose brains


are mystified with matter, but not me. Besides, if such a discovery


were possible, it would not be worth my while to make it, only to have


the secret turned to such purposes as are now effected by steam and


water-power. I am not ambitious to be honored with the paternity of


a new kind of cotton-machine."


   "That would be droll enough!" cried the blacksmith, breaking out


into such an uproar of laughter, that Owen himself, and the


bell-glasses on his work-board, quivered in unison. "No, no, Owen!


No child of yours will have iron joints and sinews. Well, I won't


hinder you any more. Good night, Owen, and success; and if you need


any assistance, so far as a downright blow of hammer upon anvil will


answer the purpose, I'm your man!"


   And with another laugh, the man of main strength left the shop.


   "How strange it is," whispered Owen Warland to himself, leaning his


head upon his hand, "that all my musings, my purposes, my passion


for the Beautiful, my consciousness of power to create it- a finer,


more ethereal power, of which this earthly giant can have no


conception- all, all, look so vain and idle, whenever my path is


crossed by Robert Danforth! He would drive me mad, were I to meet


him often. His hard, brute force darkens and confuses the spiritual


element within me. But I, too, will be strong in my own way. I will


not yield to him!"


   He took from beneath a glass, a piece of minute machinery, which he


set in the condensed light of his lamp, and, looking intently at it


through a magnifying glass, proceeded to operate with a delicate


instrument of steel. In an instant, however, he fell back in his


chair, and clasped his hands, with a look of horror on his face,


that made its small features as impressive as those of a giant would


have been.


   "Heaven! What have I done!" exclaimed he. "The vapor! the influence


of that brute force! it has bewildered me, and obscured my perception.


I have made the very stroke- the fatal stroke- that I have dreaded


from the first! It is all over- the toil of months- the object of my


life! I am ruined!"


   And there he sat, in strange despair, until his lamp flickered in


the socket, and left the Artist of the Beautiful in darkness.


   Thus it is, that ideas which grow up within the imagination, and


appear so lovely to it, and of a value beyond whatever men call


valuable, are exposed to be shattered and annihilated by contact


with the Practical. It is requisite for the ideal artist to possess


a force of character that seems hardly compatible with its delicacy;


he must keep his faith in himself, while the incredulous world assails


him with its utter disbelief; he must stand up against mankind and


be his own sole disciple, both as respects his genius, and the objects


to which it is directed.


   For a time, Owen Warland succumbed to this severe, but inevitable


test. He spent a few sluggish weeks, with his head so continually


resting in his hands, that the townspeople had scarcely an opportunity


to see his countenance. When, at last, it was again uplifted to the


light of day, a cold, dull, nameless change was perceptible upon it.


In the opinion of Peter Hovenden, however, and that order of sagacious


understandings who think that life should be regulated, like


clock-work, with leaden weights, the alteration was entirely for the


better. Owen now, indeed, applied himself to business with dogged


industry. It was marvellous to witness the obtuse gravity with which


he would inspect the wheels of a great, old silver watch; thereby


delighting the owner, in whose fob it had been worn till he deemed


it a portion of his own life, and was accordingly jealous of its


treatment. In consequence of the good report thus acquired, Owen


Warland was invited by the proper authorities to regulate the clock in


the church-steeple. He succeeded so admirably in this matter of public


interest, that the merchants gruffly acknowledged his merits on


'Change; the nurse whispered his praises, as she gave the potion in


the sick-chamber; the lover blessed him at the hour of appointed


interview; and the town in general thanked Owen for the punctuality of


dinner-time. In a word, the heavy weight upon his spirits kept


everything in order, not merely within his own system, but wheresoever


the iron accents of the church-clock were audible. It was a


circumstance, though minute, yet characteristic of his present


state, that, when employed to engrave names or initials on silver


spoons, he now wrote the requisite letters in the plainest possible


style; omitting a variety of fanciful flourishes, that had


heretofore distinguished his work in this kind.


   One day, during the era of this happy transformation, old Peter


Hovenden came to visit his former apprentice.


   "Well, Owen," said he, I am glad to hear such good accounts of


you from all quarters; and especially from the town-clock yonder,


which speaks in your commendation every hour of the twenty-four.


Only get rid altogether of your nonsensical trash about the Beautiful-


which I, nor nobody else, nor yourself to boot, could ever understand-


only free yourself of that, and your success in life is as sure as


daylight. Why, if you go on in this way, I should even venture to


let you doctor this precious old watch of mine; though, except my


daughter Annie, I have nothing else so valuable in the world."


   "I should hardly dare touch it, sir," replied Owen in a depressed


tone; for he was weighed down by his old master's presence.


   "In time, said the latter, "in time, you will be capable of it."


   The old watchmaker, with the freedom naturally consequent on his


former authority, went on inspecting the work which Owen had in hand


at the moment, together with other matters that were in progress.


The artist, meanwhile, could scarcely lift his head. There was nothing


so antipodal to his nature as this man's cold, unimaginative sagacity,


by contact with which everything was converted into a dream, except


the densest matter of the physical world. Owen groaned in spirit,


and prayed fervently to be delivered from him.


   "But what is this?" cried Peter Hovenden abruptly, taking up a


dusty bell-glass, beneath which appeared a mechanical something, as


delicate and minute as the system of a butterfly's anatomy. "What have


we here! Owen, Owen! there is witchcraft in these little chains, and


wheels, and paddles! See! with one pinch of my finger and thumb, I


am going to deliver you from all future peril."


   "For Heaven's sake," screamed Owen Warland, springing up with


wonderful energy, "as you would not drive me mad- do not touch it! The


slightest pressure of your finger would ruin me for ever.


   "Aha, young man! And is it so?" said the old watchmaker, looking at


him with just enough of penetration to torture Owen's soul with the


bitterness of worldly criticism. "Well; take your own course. But I


warn you again, that in this small piece of mechanism lives your


evil spirit. Shall I exorcise him?"


   "You are my Evil Spirit," answered Owen, much excited- "you, and


the hard, coarse world! The leaden thoughts and the despondency that


you fling upon me are my clogs. Else, I should long ago have


achieved the task that I was created for."


   Peter Hovenden shook his head, with the mixture of contempt and


indignation which mankind, of whom he was partly a representative,


deem themselves entitled to feel towards all simpletons who seek other


prizes than the dusty one along the highway. He then took his leave


with an uplifted finger, and a sneer upon his face, that haunted the


artist's dreams for many a night afterwards. At the time of his old


master's visit, Owen was probably on the point of taking up the


relinquished task; but, by this sinister event, he was thrown back


into the state whence he had been slowly emerging.


   But the innate tendency of his soul had only been accumulating


fresh vigor, during its apparent sluggishness. As the summer advanced,


he almost totally relinquished his business, and permitted Father


Time, so far as the old gentleman was represented by the clocks and


watches under his control, to stray at random through human life,


making infinite confusion among the train of bewildered hours. He


wasted the sunshine, as people said, in wandering through the woods


and fields, and along the banks of streams. There, like a child, he


found amusement in chasing butterflies, or watching the motions of


water-insects. There was something truly mysterious in the


intentness with which he contemplated these living playthings, as they


sported on the breeze; or examined the structure of an imperial insect


whom he had imprisoned. The chase of butterflies was an apt emblem


of the ideal pursuit in which he had spent so many golden hours.


But, would the Beautiful Idea ever be yielded to his hand, like the


butterfly that symbolized it? Sweet, doubtless, were these days, and


congenial to the artist's soul. They were full of bright


conceptions, which gleamed through his intellectual world, as the


butterflies gleamed through the outward atmosphere, and were real to


him for the instant, without the toil and perplexity, and many


disappointments, of attempting to make them visible to the sensual


eye. Alas, that the artist, whether in poetry or whatever other


material, may not content himself with the inward enjoyment of the


Beautiful, but must chase the flitting mystery beyond the verge of his


ethereal domain, and crush its frail being in seizing it with a


material grasp! Owen Warland felt the impulse to give external reality


to his ideas, as irresistibly as any of the poets or painters, who


have arrayed the world in a dimmer and fainter beauty, imperfectly


copied from the richness of their visions.


   The night was now his time for the slow progress of recreating


the one Idea, to which all his intellectual activity referred


itself. Always at the approach of dusk, he stole into the town, locked


himself within his shop, and wrought with patient delicacy of touch,


for many hours. Sometimes he was startled by the rap of the


watchman, who, when all the world should be asleep, had caught the


gleam of lamplight through the crevices of Owen Warland's shutters.


Daylight, to the morbid sensibility of his mind, seemed to have an


intrusiveness that interfered with his pursuits. On cloudy and


inclement days, therefore, he sat with his head upon his hands,


muffling, as it were, his sensitive brain in a mist of indefinite


musings; for it was a relief to escape from the sharp distinctness


with which he was compelled to shape out his thoughts, during his


nightly toil.


   From one of these fits of torpor, he was aroused by the entrance of


Annie Hovenden, who came into the shop with the freedom of a customer,


and also with something of the familiarity of a childish friend. She


had worn a hole through her silver thimble, and wanted Owen to


repair it.


   "But I don't know whether you will condescend to such a task," said


she, laughing, "now that you are so taken up with the notion of


putting spirit into machinery."


   "Where did you get that idea, Annie?" said Owen, starting in


surprise.


   "Oh, out of my own head," answered she, "and from something that


I heard you say, long ago, when you were but a boy, and I a little


child. But, come! will you mend this poor thimble of mine?"


   "Anything for your sake, Annie," said Owen Warland- "anything! even


were it to work at Robert Danforth's forge."


   "And that would be a pretty sight!" retorted Annie, glancing with


imperceptible slightness at the artist's small and slender frame.


"Well; here is the thimble."


   "But that is a strange idea of yours," said Owen, "about the


spiritualization of matter!"


   And then the thought stole into his mind, that this young girl


possessed the gift to comprehend him, better than all the world


beside. And what a help and strength would it be to him, in his lonely


toil, if he could gain the sympathy of the only being whom he loved!


To persons whose pursuits are insulated from the common business of


life- who are either in advance of mankind, or apart from it- there


often comes a sensation of moral cold, that makes the spirit shiver,


as if it had reached the frozen solitudes around the pole. What the


prophet, the poet, the reformer, the criminal, or any other man,


with human yearnings, but separated from the multitude by a peculiar


lot, might feel, poor Owen Warland felt.


   "Annie," cried he, growing pale as death at the thought, "how


gladly would I tell you the secret of my pursuit! You, methinks, would


estimate it rightly. You, I know, would hear it with a reverence


that I must not expect from the harsh, material world."


   "Would I not! to be sure I would!" replied Annie Hovenden,


lightly laughing. "Come; explain to me quickly what is the meaning


of this little whirligig, so delicately wrought that it might be a


plaything for Queen Mab. See; I will put it in motion."


   "Hold," exclaimed Owen, hold!"


   Annie had but given the slightest possible touch, with the point of


a needle, to the same minute portion of complicated machinery which


has been more than once mentioned, when the artist seized her by the


wrist with a force that made her scream aloud. She was affrighted at


the convulsion of intense rage and anguish that writhed across his


features. The next instant he let his head sink upon his hands.


   "Go, Annie," murmured he, "I have deceived myself, and must


suffer for it. I yearned for sympathy- and thought- and fancied- and


dreamed- that you might give it me. But you lack the talisman,


Annie, that should admit you into my secrets. That touch has undone


the toil of months, and the thought of a lifetime! It was not your


fault, Annie- but you have ruined me!"


   Poor Owen Warland! He had indeed erred, yet pardonably; for if


any human spirit could have sufficiently reverenced the processes so


sacred in his eyes, it must have been a woman's. Even Annie


Hovenden, possibly, might not have disappointed him, had she been


enlightened by the deep intelligence of love.


   The artist spent the ensuing winter in a way that satisfied any


persons, who had hitherto retained a hopeful opinion of him, that he


was, in truth, irrevocably doomed to inutility as regarded the


world, and to an evil destiny on his own part. The decease of a


relative had put him in possession of a small inheritance. Thus


freed from the necessity of toil, and having lost the steadfast


influence of a great purpose- great, at least, to him- he abandoned


himself to habits from which, it might have been supposed, the mere


delicacy of his organization would have availed to secure him. But


when the ethereal portion of a man of genius is obscured, the


earthly part assumes an influence the more uncontrollable, because the


character is now thrown off the balance to which Providence had so


nicely adjusted it, and which, in coarser natures, is adjusted by some


other method. Owen Warland made proof of whatever show of bliss may be


found in riot. He looked at the world through the golden medium of


wine, and contemplated the visions that bubble up so gaily around


the brim of the glass, and that people the air with shapes of pleasant


madness, which so soon grow ghostly and forlorn. Even when this dismal


and inevitable change had taken place, the young man might still


have continued to quaff the cup of enchantments, though its vapor


did but shroud life in gloom, and fill the gloom with spectres that


mocked at him. There was a certain irksomeness of spirit, which, being


real, and the deepest sensation of which the artist was now conscious,


was more intolerable than any fantastic miseries and horrors that


the abuse of wine could summon up. In the latter case, he could


remember, even out of the midst of his trouble, that all was but a


delusion; in the former, the heavy anguish was his actual life.


   From this perilous state, he was redeemed by an incident which more


than one person witnessed, but of which the shrewdest could not


explain nor conjecture the operation on Owen Warland's mind. It was


very simple. On a warm afternoon of Spring, as the artist sat among


his riotous companions, with a glass of wine before him, a splendid


butterfly flew in at the open window, and fluttered about his head.


   "Ah!" exclaimed Owen, who had drunk freely, "are you alive again,


child of the sun, and playmate of the summer breeze, after your dismal


winter's nap! Then it is time for me to be at work!"


   And leaving his unemptied glass upon the table, he departed, and


was never known to sip another drop of wine.


   And now, again, he resumed his wanderings in the woods and


fields. It might be fancied that the bright butterfly, which had


come so spiritlike into the window, as Owen sat with the rude


revellers, was indeed a spirit, commissioned to recall him to the


pure, ideal life that had so etherealised him among men. It might be


fancied, that he went forth to seek this spirit, in its sunny


haunts; for still, as in the summer-time gone by, he was seen to steal


gently up, wherever a butterfly had alighted, and lose himself in


contemplation of it. When it took flight, his eyes followed the winged


vision, as if its airy track would show the path to heaven. But what


could be the purpose of the unseasonable toil, which was again


resumed, as the watchman knew by the lines of lamp-light through the


crevices of Owen Warland's shutters? The townspeople had one


comprehensive explanation of all these singularities. Owen Warland had


gone mad! How universally efficacious- how satisfactory, too, and


soothing to the injured sensibility of narrowness and dullness- is


this easy method of accounting for whatever lies beyond the world's


most ordinary scope! From Saint Paul's days, down to our poor little


Artist of the Beautiful, the same talisman had been applied to the


elucidation of all mysteries in the words or deeds of men, who spoke


or acted too wisely or too well. In Owen Warland's case, the


judgment of his townspeople may have been correct. Perhaps he was mad.


The lack of sympathy- that contrast between himself and his neighbors,


which took away the restraint of example- was enough to make him so.


Or, possibly, he had caught just so much of ethereal radiance as


served to bewilder him, in an earthly sense, by its intermixture


with the common day light.


   One evening, when the artist had returned from a customary


ramble, and had just thrown the lustre of his lamp on the delicate


piece of work, so often interrupted, but still taken up again, as if


his fate were embodied in its mechanism, he was surprised by the


entrance of old Peter Hovenden. Owen never met this man without a


shrinking of the heart. Of all the world, he was most terrible, by


reason of a keen understanding, which saw so distinctly what it did


see, and disbelieved so uncompromisingly in what it could not see.


On this occasion, the old watchmaker had merely a gracious word or two


to say.


   "Owen, my lad," said he, "we must see you at my house tomorrow


night."


   The artist began to mutter some excuse.


   "Oh, but it must be so," quoth Peter Hovenden, "for the sake of the


days when you were one of the household. What, my boy, don't you


know that my daughter Annie is engaged to Robert Danforth? We are


making an entertainment, in our humble way, to celebrate the event."


   "Ah!" said Owen.


   That little monosyllable was all he uttered; its tone seemed cold


and unconcerned, to an ear like Peter Hovenden's; and yet there was in


it the stifled outcry of the poor artist's heart, which he


compressed within him like a man holding down an evil spirit. One


slight out-break, however, imperceptible to the old watchmaker, he


allowed himself. Raising the instrument with which he was about to


begin his work, he let it fall upon the little system of machinery


that had, anew, cost him months of thought and toil. It was


shattered by the stroke!


   Owen Warland's story would have been no tolerable representation of


the troubled life of those who strive to create the Beautiful, if,


amid all other thwarting influences, love had not interposed to


steal the cunning from his hand. Outwardly he had been no ardent or


enterprising lover; the career of his passion had confined its tumults


and vicissitudes so entirely within the artist's imagination, that


Annie herself had scarcely more than a woman's intuitive perception of


it. But, in Owen's view, it covered the whole field of his life.


Forgetful of the time when she had shown herself incapable of any deep


response, he had persisted in connecting all his dreams of


artistical success with Annie's image; she was the visible shape in


which the spiritual power that he worshipped, and on whose altar he


hoped to lay a not unworthy offering, was made manifest to him. Of


course he had deceived himself; there were no such attributes in Annie


Hovenden as his imagination had endowed her with. She, in the aspect


which she wore to his inward vision, was as much a creation of his


own, as the mysterious piece of mechanism would be were it ever


realized. Had he become convinced of his mistake through the medium of


successful love; had he won Annie to his bosom, and there beheld her


fade from angel into ordinary woman, the disappointment might have


driven him back, with concentrated energy, upon his sole remaining


object. On the other hand, had he found Annie what he fancied, his lot


would have been so rich in beauty, that out of its mere redundancy


he might have wrought the Beautiful into many a worthier type than


he had toiled for. But the guise in which his sorrow came to him,


the sense that the angel of his life had been snatched away and


given to a rude man of earth and iron, who could neither need nor


appreciate her ministrations; this was the very perversity of fate,


that makes human existence appear too absurd and contradictory to be


the scene of one other hope or one other fear. There was nothing


left for Owen Warland but to sit down like a man that had been


stunned.


   He went through a fit of illness. After his recovery, his small and


slender frame assumed an obtuser garniture of flesh than it had ever


before worn. His thin cheeks became round; his delicate little hand,


so spiritually fashioned to achieve fairy task-work, grew plumper than


the hand of a thriving infant. His aspect had a childishness, such


as might have induced a stranger to pat him on the head- pausing,


however, in the act, to wonder what manner of child was here. It was


as if the spirit had gone out of him, leaving the body to flourish


in a sort of vegetable existence. Not that Owen Warland was idiotic.


He could talk, and not irrationally. Somewhat of a babbler, indeed,


did people begin to think him; for he was apt to discourse at


wearisome length, of marvels of mechanism that he had read about in


books, but which he had learned to consider as absolutely fabulous.


Among them he enumerated the Man of Brass, constructed by Albertus


Magnus, and the Brazen Head of Friar Bacon; and, coming down to


later times, the automata of a little coach and horses, which, it


was pretended, had been manufactured for the Dauphin of France;


together with an insect that buzzed about the ear like a living fly,


and yet was but a contrivance of minute steel springs. There was a


story, too, of a duck that waddled, and quacked, and ate; though,


had any honest citizen purchased it for dinner, he would have found


himself cheated with the mere mechanical apparition of a duck.


   "But all these accounts," said Owen Warland, "I am now satisfied,


are mere impositions."


   Then, in a mysterious way, he would confess that he once thought


differently. In his idle and dreamy days he had considered it


possible, in a certain sense, to spiritualize machinery; and to


combine with the new species of life and motion, thus produced, a


beauty that should attain to the ideal, which Nature has proposed to


herself, in all her creatures, but has never taken pains to realize.


He seemed, however, to retain no very distinct perception either of


the process of achieving this object, or of the design itself.


   "I have thrown it all aside now," he would say. "It was a dream,


such as young men are always mystifying themselves with. Now that I


have acquired a little common sense, it makes me laugh to think of it.


   Poor, poor, and fallen Owen Warland! These were the symptoms that


he had ceased to be an inhabitant of the better sphere that lies


unseen around us. He had lost his faith in the invisible, and now


prided himself, as such unfortunates invariably do, in the wisdom


which rejected much that even his eye could see, and trusted


confidently in nothing but what his hand could touch. This is the


calamity of men whose spiritual part dies out of them, and leaves


the grosser understanding to assimilate them more and more to the


things of which alone it can take cognizance. But, in Owen Warland,


the spirit was not dead, nor past away; it only slept.


   How it awoke again, is not recorded. Perhaps, the torpid slumber


was broken by a convulsive pain. Perhaps, as in a former instance, the


butterfly came and hovered about his head, and reinspired him- as,


indeed, this creature of the sunshine had always a mysterious


mission for the artist- reinspired him with the former purpose of


his life. Whether it were pain or happiness that thrilled through


his veins, his first impulse was to thank Heaven for rendering him


again the being of thought, imagination, and keenest sensibility, that


he had long ceased to be.


   "Now for my task," said he. "Never did I feel such strength for


it as now."


   Yet, strong as he felt himself, he was incited to toil the more


diligently, by an anxiety lest death should surprise him in the


midst of his labors. This anxiety, perhaps, is common to all men who


set their hearts upon anything so high, in their own view of it,


that life becomes of importance only as conditional to its


accomplishment. So long as we love life for itself, we seldom dread


the losing it. When we desire life for the attainment of an object, we


recognize the frailty of its texture. But, side by side with this


sense of insecurity, there is a vital faith in our invulnerability


to the shaft of death, while engaged in any task that seems assigned


by Providence as our proper thing to do, and which the world would


have cause to mourn for, should we leave it unaccomplished. Can the


philosopher, big with the inspiration of an idea that is to reform


mankind, believe that he is to be beckoned from this sensible


existence, at the very instant when he is mustering his breath to


speak the word of light? Should he perish so, the weary ages may


pass away- the world's whole life- sand may fall, drop by drop- before


another intellect is prepared to develope the truth that might have


been uttered then. But history affords many an example, where the most


precious spirit, at any particular epoch manifested in human shape,


has gone hence untimely, without space allowed him, so far as mortal


judgment could discern, to perform his mission on the earth. The


prophet dies; and the man of torpid heart and sluggish brain lives on.


The poet leaves his song half sung, or finishes it, beyond the scope


of mortal ears, in a celestial choir. The painter- as Allston did-


leaves half his conception on the canvas, to sadden us with its


imperfect beauty, and goes to picture forth the whole, if it be no


irreverence to say so, in the hues of Heaven. But, rather, such


incomplete designs of this life will be perfected nowhere. This so


frequent abortion of man's dearest projects must be taken as a


proof, that the deeds of earth, however etherealized by piety or


genius, are without value, except as exercises and manifestations of


the spirit. In Heaven, all ordinary thought is higher and more


melodious than Milton's song. Then, would he add another verse to


any strain that he had left unfinished here?


   But to return to Owen Warland. It was his fortune, good or ill,


to achieve the purpose of his life. Pass we over a long space of


intense thought, yearning effort, minute toil, and wasting anxiety,


succeeded by an instant of solitary triumph; let all this be imagined;


and then behold the artist, on a winter evening, seeking admittance to


Robert Danforth's fireside circle. There he found the Man of Iron,


with his massive substance, thoroughly warmed and attempered by


domestic influences. And there was Annie, too, now transformed into


a matron, with much of her husband's plain and sturdy nature, but


imbued, as Owen Warland still believed, with a finer grace, that might


enable her to be the interpreter between Strength and Beauty. It


happened, likewise, that old Peter Hovenden was a guest, this evening,


at his daughter's fireside; and it was his well-remembered


expression of keen, cold criticism, that first encountered the


artist's glance.


   "My old friend Owen!" cried Robert Danforth, starting up, and


compressing the artist's delicate fingers within a hand that was


accustomed to gripe bars of iron. "This is kind and neighborly, to


come to us at last! I was afraid your Perpetual Motion had bewitched


you out of the remembrance of old times."


   "We are glad to see you!" said Annie, while a blush reddened her


matronly cheek. "It was not like a friend to stay from us so long."


   "Well, Owen," inquired the old watchmaker, as his first greeting,


"how comes on the Beautiful? Have you created it at last?"


   The artist did not immediately reply, being startled by the


apparition of a young child of strength, that was tumbling about on


the carpet; a little personage who had come mysteriously out of the


infinite, but with something so sturdy and real in his composition


that he seemed moulded out of the densest substance which earth


could supply. This hopeful infant crawled towards the newcomer, and


setting himself on end- as Robert Danforth expressed the posture-


stared at Owen with a look of such sagacious observation, that the


mother could not help exchanging a proud glance with her husband.


But the artist was disturbed by the child's look, as imagining a


resemblance between it and Peter Hovenden's habitual expression. He


could have fancied that the old watchmaker was compressed into this


baby-shape, and looking out of those baby-eyes, and repeating- as he


now did- the malicious question: "The Beautiful, Owen! How comes on


the Beautiful? Have you succeeded in creating the Beautiful?"


   "I have succeeded," replied the artist, with a momentary light of


triumph in his eyes, and a smile of sunshine, yet steeped in such


depth of thought, that it was almost sadness. "Yes, my friends, it


is the truth. I have succeeded!"


   "Indeed!" cried Annie, a look of maiden mirthfulness peeping out of


her face again. "And is it lawful, now, to inquire what the secret


is?"


   "Surely; it is to disclose it, that I have come," answered Owen


Warland. "You shall know, and see, and touch, and possess the


secret! For, Annie- if by that name I may still address the friend


of my boyish years- Annie, it is for your bridal gift that I have


wrought this spiritualized mechanism, this harmony of motion, this


Mystery of Beauty! It comes late, indeed; but it is as we go onward in


life, when objects begin to lose their freshness of hue, and our souls


their delicacy of perception, that the spirit of Beauty is most


needed. If- forgive me, Annie- if you know how to value this gift,


it can never come too late!"


   He produced, as he spoke, what seemed a jewel-box. It was carved


richly out of ebony by his own hand, and inlaid with a fanciful


tracery of pearl, representing a boy in pursuit of a butterfly, which,


elsewhere, had become a winged spirit, and was flying heavenward;


while the boy, or youth, had found such efficacy in his strong desire,


that he ascended from earth to cloud, and from cloud to celestial


atmosphere, to win the Beautiful. This case of ebony the artist


opened, and bade Annie place her finger on its edge. She did so, but


almost screamed, as a butterfly fluttered forth, and, alighting on her


finger's tip, sat waving the ample magnificence of its purple and


gold-speckled wings, as if in prelude to a flight. It is impossible to


express by words the glory, the splendor, the delicate gorgeousness,


which were softened into the beauty of this object. Nature's ideal


butterfly was here realized in all its perfection; not in the


pattern of such faded insects as flit among earthly flowers, but of


those which hover across the meads of Paradise, for child-angels and


the spirits of departed infants to disport themselves with. The rich


down was visible upon its wings; the lustre of its eyes seemed


instinct with spirit. The firelight glimmered around this wonder-


the candles gleamed upon it- but it glistened apparently by its own


radiance, and illuminated the finger and outstretched hand on which it


rested, with a white gleam like that of precious stones. In its


perfect beauty, the consideration of size was entirely lost. Had its


wings overreached  the firmament, the mind could not have been more


filled or satisfied.


   "Beautiful! Beautiful!" exclaimed Annie. "Is it alive? Is it


alive?"


   "Alive? To be sure it is," answered her husband. "Do you suppose


any mortal has skill enough to make a butterfly- or would put


himself to the trouble of making one, when any child may catch a score


of them in a summer's afternoon? Alive? certainly! But this pretty box


is undoubtedly of our friend Owen's manufacture; and really it does


him credit."


   At this moment, the butterfly waved its wings anew, with a motion


so absolutely lifelike that Annie was startled, and even awe-stricken;


for, in spite of her husband's opinion, she could not satisfy


herself whether it was indeed a living creature, or a piece of


wondrous mechanism.


   "Is it alive?" she repeated, more earnestly than before.


   "Judge for yourself," said Owen Warland, who stood gazing in her


face with fixed attention.


   The butterfly now flung itself upon the air, fluttered round


Annie's head, and soared into a distant region of the parlor, still


making itself perceptible to sight by the starry gleam in which the


motion of its wings enveloped it. The infant, on the floor, followed


its course with his sagacious little eyes. After flying about the


room, it returned, in a spiral curve, and settled again on Annie's


finger.


   "But is it alive?" exclaimed she again; and the finger, on which


the gorgeous mystery had alighted, was so tremulous that the butterfly


was forced to balance himself with his wings. "Tell me if it be alive,


or whether you created it?"


   "Wherefore ask who created it, so it be beautiful?" replied Owen


Warland. "Alive? Yes, Annie; it may well be said to possess life,


for it has absorbed my own being into itself; and in the secret of


that butterfly, and in its beauty- which is not merely outward, but


deep as its whole system- is represented the intellect, the


imagination, the sensibility, the soul, of an Artist of the Beautiful!


Yes, I created it. But"- and here his countenance somewhat changed-


"this butterfly is not now to me what it was when I beheld it afar


off, in the day-dreams of my youth."


   "Be it what it may, it is a pretty plaything," said the blacksmith,


grinning with childlike delight. "I wonder whether it would condescend


to alight on such a great clumsy finger as mine? Hold it hither,


Annie!"


   By the artist's direction, Annie touched her finger's tip to that


of her husband; and, after a momentary delay, the butterfly


fluttered from one to the other. It preluded a second flight by a


similar, yet not precisely the same waving of wings, as in the first


experiment. Then ascending from the blacksmith's stalwart finger, it


rose in a gradually enlarging curve to the ceiling, made one wide


sweep around the room, and returned with an undulating movement to the


point whence it had started.


   "Well, that does beat all nature!" cried Robert Danforth, bestowing


the heartiest praise that he could find expression for; and, indeed,


had he paused there, a man of finer words and nicer perception could


not easily have said more. "That goes beyond me, I confess! But what


then? There is more real use in one downright blow of my


sledge-hammer, than in the whole five years' labor that our friend


Owen has wasted on this butterfly!"


   Here the child clapped his hands, and made a great babble of


indistinct utterance, apparently demanding that the butterfly should


be given him for a plaything.


   Owen Warland, meanwhile, glanced sidelong at Annie, to discover


whether she sympathized in her husband's estimate of the comparative


value of the Beautiful and the Practical. There was, amid all her


kindness towards himself, amid all the wonder and admiration with


which she contemplated the marvellous work of his hands, and


incarnation of his ideal a secret scorn; too secret, perhaps, for


her own consciousness, and perceptible only to such intuitive


discernment as that of the artist. But Owen, in the latter stages of


his pursuit, had risen out of the region in which such a discovery


might have been torture. He knew that the world, and Annie as the


representative of the world, whatever praise might be bestowed,


could never say the fitting word, nor feel the fitting sentiment which


should be the perfect recompense of an artist who, symbolizing a lofty


moral by a material trifle- converting what was earthly to spiritual


gold- had won the Beautiful into his handiwork. Not at this latest


moment was he to learn that the reward of all high performance must be


sought within itself, or sought in vain. There was, however, a view of


the matter, which Annie, and her husband, and even Peter Hovenden,


might fully have understood, and which would have satisfied them


that the toil of years had here been worthily bestowed. Owen Warland


might have told them, that this butterfly, this plaything, this


bridal-gift of a poor watchmaker to a blacksmith's wife, was, in


truth, a gem of art that a monarch would have purchased with honors


and abundant wealth, and have treasured it among the jewels of his


kingdom, as the most unique and wondrous of them all! But the artist


smiled and kept the secret to himself.


   "Father," said Annie, thinking that a word of praise from the old


watchmaker might gratify his former apprentice, "do come and admire


this pretty butterfly!"


   "Let us see," said Peter Hovenden, rising from his chair, with a


sneer upon his face that always made people doubt, as he himself


did, in everything but a material existence. "Here is my finger for it


to alight upon. I shall understand it better when once I have


touched it."


   But, to the increased astonishment of Annie, when the tip of her


father's finger was pressed against that of her husband, on which


the butterfly still rested, the insect drooped its wings, and seemed


on the point of falling to the floor. Even the bright spots of gold


upon its wings and body, unless her eyes deceived her, grew dim, and


the glowing purple took a dusky hue, and the starry lustre that


gleamed around the blacksmith's hand became faint, and vanished.


   "It is dying! it is dying!" cried Annie, in alarm.


   "It has been delicately wrought," said the artist, calmly. "As I


told you, it has imbibed a spiritual essence- call it magnetism, or


what you will. In an atmosphere of doubt and mockery, its exquisite


susceptibility suffers torture, as does the soul of him who


instilled his own life into it. It has already lost its beauty; in a


few moments more, its mechanism would be irreparably injured."


   "Take away your hand, father!" entreated Annie, turning pale. "Here


is my child; let it rest on his innocent hand. There, perhaps, its


life will revive, and its colors grow brighter than ever."


   Her father, with an acrid smile, withdrew his finger. The butterfly


then appeared to recover the power of voluntary motion; while its hues


assumed much of their original lustre, and the gleam of starlight,


which was its most ethereal attribute, again formed a halo round about


it. At first, when transferred from Robert Danforth's hand to the


small finger of the child, this radiance grew so powerful that it


positively threw the little fellow's shadow back against the wall. He,


meanwhile, extended his plump hand as he had seen his father and


mother do, and watched the waving of the insect's wings with infantine


delight. Nevertheless, there was a certain odd expression of sagacity,


that made Owen Warland feel as if here were old Peter Hovenden,


partially, and but partially, redeemed from his hard scepticism into


childish faith.


   "How wise the little monkey looks!" whispered Robert Danforth to


his wife.


   "I never saw such a look on a child's face," answered Annie,


admiring her own infant, and with good reason, far more than the


artistic butterfly. "The darling knows more of the mystery than we


do."


   As if the butterfly, like the artist, were conscious of something


not entirely congenial in the child's nature, it alternately


sparkled and grew dim. At length, it arose from the small hand of


the infant with an airy motion, that seemed to bear it upward


without an effort; as if the ethereal instincts, with which its


master's spirit had endowed it, impelled this fair vision


involuntarily to a higher sphere. Had there been no obstruction, it


might have soared into the sky, and grown immortal. But its lustre


gleamed upon the ceiling; the exquisite texture of its wings brushed


against that earthly medium; and a sparkle or two, as if stardust,


floated downward and lay glimmering on the carpet. Then the


butterfly came fluttering down, and, instead of returning to the


infant, was apparently attracted towards the artist's hand.


   "Not so, not so!" murmured Owen Warland, as if his handiwork


could have understood him. "Thou hast gone forth out of thy master's


heart. There is no return for thee!"


   With a wavering movement, and emitting a tremulous radiance, the


butterfly struggled, as it were, towards the infant, and was about


to alight upon his finger. But, while it still hovered in the air, the


little Child of Strength, with his grandsire's sharp and shrewd


expression in his face, made a snatch at the marvellous insect, and


compressed it in his hand. Annie screamed! Old Peter Hovenden burst


into a cold and scornful laugh. The blacksmith, by main force,


unclosed the infant's hand, and found within the palm a small heap


of glittering fragments, whence the Mystery of Beauty had fled for


ever. And as for Owen Warland, he looked placidly at what seemed the


ruin of his life's labor, and which yet was no ruin. He had caught a


far other butterfly than this. When the artist rose high enough to


achieve the Beautiful, the symbol by which he made it perceptible to


mortal senses became of little value in his eyes, while his spirit


possessed itself in the enjoyment of the reality.








                        THE END


.




                                      1851


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                                  ETHAN BRAND


                       A CHAPTER FROM AN ABORTIVE ROMANCE


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   BARTRAM THE LIME-BURNER, a rough, heavy-looking man, begrimed


with charcoal, sat watching his kiln, at nightfall, while his little


son played at building houses with the scattered fragments of


marble, when, on the hill-side below them, they heard a roar of


laughter, not mirthful, but slow, and even solemn, like a wind shaking


the boughs of the forest.


   "Father, what is that?" asked the little boy, leaving his play, and


pressing betwixt his father's knees.


   "O, some drunken man, I suppose," answered the lime-burner; "some


merry fellow from the bar-room in the village, who dared not laugh


loud enough within doors, lest he should blow the roof of the house


off. So here he is, shaking his jolly sides at the foot of Gray-lock."


   "But, father," said the child, more sensitive than the obtuse,


middle-aged clown, "he does not laugh like a man that is glad. So


the noise frightens me!"


   "Don't be a fool, child!" cried his father, gruffly. "You will


never make a man, I do believe; there is too much of your mother in


you. I have known the rustling of a leaf startle you. Hark! Here comes


the merry fellow, now. You shall see that there is no harm in him."


   Bartram and his little son, while they were talking thus, sat


watching the same lime-kiln that had been the scene of Ethan Brand's


solitary and meditative life, before he began his search for the


Unpardonable Sin. Many years, as we have seen, had now elapsed,


since that portentous night when the IDEA was first developed. The


kiln, however, on the mountain-side, stood unimpaired, and was in


nothing changed since he had thrown his dark thoughts into the intense


glow of its furnace, and melted them, as it were, into the one thought


that took possession of his life. It was a rude, round, tower-like


structure, about twenty feet high, heavily built of rough stones,


and with a hillock of earth heaped about the larger part of its


circumference; so that the blocks and fragments of marble might be


drawn by cart-loads, and thrown in at the top. There was an opening at


the bottom of the tower, like an oven-mouth, but large enough to admit


a man in a stooping posture, and provided with a massive iron door.


With the smoke and jets of flame issuing from the chinks and


crevices of this door, which seemed to give admittance into the


hill-side, it resembled nothing so much as the private entrance to the


infernal regions, which the shepherds of the Delectable Mountains were


accustomed to show to pilgrims.


   There are many such lime-kilns in that tract of country, for the


purpose of burning the white marble which composes a large part of the


substance of the hills. Some of them, built years ago, and long


deserted, with weeds growing in the vacant round of the interior,


which is open to the sky, and grass and wild-flowers rooting


themselves into the chinks of the stones, look already like relics


of antiquity, and may yet be overspread with the lichens of


centuries to come. Others, where the lime-burner still feeds his daily


and nightlong fire, afford points of interest to the wanderer among


the hills, who seats himself on a log of wood or a fragment of marble,


to hold a chat with the solitary man. It is a lonesome, and, when


the character is inclined to thought, may be an intensely thoughtful


occupation; as it proved in the case of Ethan Brand, who had mused


to such strange purpose, in days gone by, while the fire in this


very kiln was burning.


   The man who now watched the fire was of a different order, and


troubled himself with no thoughts save the very few that were


requisite to his business. At frequent intervals, he flung back the


clashing weight of the iron door, and, turning his face from the


insufferable glare, thrust in huge logs of oak, or stirred the immense


brands with a long pole. Within the furnace were seen the curling


and riotous flames, and the burning marble, almost molten with the


intensity of heat; while without, the reflection of the fire


quivered on the dark intricacy of the surrounding forest, and showed


in the foreground a bright and ruddy little picture of the hut, the


spring beside its door, the athletic and coal-begrimed figure of the


lime-burner, and the half-frightened child, shrinking into the


protection of his father's shadow. And when again the iron door was


closed, then reappeared the tender light of the half-full moon,


which vainly strove to trace out the indistinct shapes of the


neighboring mountains; and, in the upper sky, there was a flitting


congregation of clouds, still faintly tinged with the rosy sunset,


though thus far down into the valley the sunshine had vanished long


and long ago.


   The little boy now crept still closer to his father, as footsteps


were heard ascending the hill-side, and a human form thrust aside


the bushes that clustered beneath the trees.


   "Halloo! who is it?" cried the lime-burner, vexed at his son's


timidity, yet half infected by it. "Come forward, and show yourself,


like a man, or I'll fling this chunk of marble at your head!"


   "You offer me a rough welcome," said a gloomy voice, as the unknown


man drew nigh. "Yet I neither claim nor desire a kinder one, even at


my own fireside."


   To obtain a distincter view, Bartram threw open the iron door of


the kiln, whence immediately issued a gush of fierce light, that smote


full upon the stranger's face and figure. To a careless eye there


appeared nothing very remarkable in his aspect, which was that of a


man in a coarse, brown, country-made suit of clothes, tall and thin,


with the staff and heavy shoes of a wayfarer. As he advanced, he fixed


his eyes- which were very bright- intently upon the brightness of


the furnace, as if he beheld, or expected to behold, some object


worthy of note within it.


   "Good evening, stranger," said the lime-burner; "whence come you,


so late in the day?"


   "I come from my search," answered the wayfarer; "for, at last, it


is finished."


   "Drunk!- or crazy!" muttered Bartram to himself. "I shall have


trouble with the fellow. The sooner I drive him away, the better."


   The little boy, all in a tremble, whispered to his father, and


begged him to shut the door of the kiln, so that there might not be so


much light; for that there was something in the man's face which he


was afraid to look at, yet could not look away from. And, indeed, even


the lime-burner's dull and torpid sense began to be impressed by an


indescribable something in that thin, rugged, thoughtful visage,


with the grizzled hair hanging wildly about it, and those


deeply-sunken eyes, which gleamed like fires within the entrance of


a mysterious cavern. But, as he closed the door, the stranger turned


towards him, and spoke in a quiet, familiar way, that made Bartram


feel as if he were a sane and sensible man, after all.


   "Your task draws to an end, I see," said he. "This marble has


already been burning three days. A few hours more will convert the


stone to lime."


   "Why, who are you?" exclaimed the lime-burner. "You seem as well


acquainted with my business as I am myself."


   "And well I may be," said the stranger; "for I followed the same


craft many a long year, and here, too, on this very spot. But you


are a newcomer in these parts. Did you never hear of Ethan Brand?"


   "The man that went in search of the Unpardonable Sin?" asked


Bartram, with a laugh.


   "The same," answered the stranger. "He has found what he sought,


and therefore he comes back again."


   "What! then you are Ethan Brand himself?" cried the lime-burner, in


amazement. "I am a newcomer here, as you say, and they call it


eighteen years since you left the foot of Gray-lock. But, I can tell


you, the good folks still talk about Ethan Brand, in the village


yonder, and what a strange errand took him away from his lime-kiln.


Well, and so you have found the Unpardonable Sin?"


   "Even so!" said the stranger, calmly.


   "If the question is a fair one," proceeded Bartram, "where might it


be?"


   Ethan Brand laid his finger on his own heart.


   "Here!" replied he.


   And then, without mirth in his countenance, but as if moved by an


involuntary recognition of the infinite absurdity of seeking


throughout the world for what was the closest of all things to


himself, and looking into every heart, save his own, for what was


hidden in no other breast, he broke into a laugh of scorn. It was


the same slow, heavy laugh, that had almost appalled the lime-burner


when it heralded the wayfarer's approach.


   The solitary mountain-side was made dismal by it. Laughter, when


out of place, mistimed, or bursting forth from a disordered state of


feeling, may be the most terrible modulation of the human voice. The


laughter of one asleep, even if it be a little child- the madman's


laugh- the wild, screaming laugh of a born idiot- are sounds that we


sometimes tremble to hear, and would always willingly forget. Poets


have imagined no utterance of fiends or hobgoblins so fearfully


appropriate as a laugh. And even the obtuse lime-burner felt his


nerves shaken, as this strange man looked inward at his own heart, and


burst into laughter that rolled away into the night, and was


indistinctly reverberated among the hills.


   "Joe," said he to his little son, "scamper down to the tavern in


the village, and tell the jolly fellows there that Ethan Brand has


come back, and that he has found the Unpardonable Sin!"


   The boy darted away on his errand, to which Ethan Brand made no


objection, nor seemed hardly to notice it. He sat on a log of wood,


looking steadfastly at the iron door of the kiln. When the child was


out of sight, and his swift and light footsteps ceased to be heard


treading first on the fallen leaves and then on the rocky mountain


path, the lime-burner began to regret his departure. He felt that


the little fellow's presence had been a barrier between his guest


and himself, and that he must now deal, heart to heart, with a man


who, on his own confession, had committed the one only crime for which


Heaven could afford no mercy. That crime, in its indistinct blackness,


seemed to overshadow him. The lime-burner's own sins rose up within


him, and made his memory riotous with a throng of evil shapes that


asserted their kindred with the Master Sin, whatever it might be,


which it was within the scope of man's corrupted nature to conceive


and cherish. They were all of one family; they went to and fro between


his breast and Ethan Brand's, and carried dark greetings from one to


the other.


   Then Bartram remembered the stories which had grown traditionary in


reference to this strange man, who had come upon him like a shadow


of the night, and was making himself at home in his old place, after


so long absence that the dead people, dead and buried for years, would


have had more right to be at home, in any familiar spot, than he.


Ethan Brand, it was said, had conversed with Satan himself in the


lurid blaze of this very kiln. The legend had been matter of mirth


heretofore but looked grisly now. According to this tale, before Ethan


Brand departed on his search, he had been accustomed to evoke a


fiend from the hot furnace of the lime-kiln, night after night, in


order to confer with him about the Unpardonable Sin; the man and the


fiend each laboring to frame the image of some mode of guilt which


could neither be atoned for nor forgiven. And, with the first gleam of


light upon the mountain-top, the fiend crept in at the iron door,


there to abide the intensest element of fire, until again summoned


forth to share in the dreadful task of extending man's possible


guilt beyond the scope of Heaven's else infinite mercy.


   While the lime-burner was struggling with the horror of these


thoughts, Ethan Brand rose from the log, and flung open the door of


the kiln. The action was in such accordance with the idea in Bartram's


mind, that he almost expected to see the Evil One issue forth, red-hot


from the raging furnace.


   "Hold! hold!" cried he, with a tremulous attempt to laugh; for he


was ashamed of his fears, although they overmastered him. "Don't,


for mercy's sake, bring out your devil now!"


   "Man!" sternly replied Ethan Brand, "what need have I of the devil?


I have left him behind me, on my track. It is with such halfway


sinners as you that he busies himself. Fear not because I open the


door. I do but act by old custom, and am going to trim your fire, like


a lime-burner, as I was once."


   He stirred the vast coals, thrust in more wood, and bent forward to


gaze into the hollow prison-house of the fire, regardless of the


fierce glow that reddened upon his face. The lime-burner sat


watching him, and half suspected his strange guest of a purpose, if


not to evoke a fiend, at least to plunge bodily into the flames, and


thus vanish from the sight of man. Ethan Brand, however, drew


quietly back, and closed the door of the kiln.


   "I have looked, said he, "into many a human heart that was seven


times hotter with sinful passions than yonder furnace is with fire.


But I found not there what I sought. No, not the Unpardonable Sin!"


   "What is the Unpardonable Sin?" asked the lime-burner; and then


he shrank further from his companion, trembling lest his question


should be answered.


   "It is a sin that grew within my own breast," replied Ethan


Brand, standing erect, with a pride that distinguishes all enthusiasts


of his stamp. "A sin that grew nowhere else! The sin of an intellect


that triumphed over the sense of brotherhood with man and reverence


for God, and sacrificed everything to its own mighty claims! The


only sin that deserves a recompense of immortal agony! Freely, were it


to do again, would I incur the guilt. Unshrinkingly I accept the


retribution!"


   "The man's head is turned," muttered the lime-burner to himself.


"He may be a sinner, like the rest of us- nothing more likely- but,


I'll be sworn, he is a madman too."


   Nevertheless he felt uncomfortable at his situation, alone with


Ethan Brand on the wild mountain-side, and was right glad to hear


the rough murmur of tongues, and the footsteps of what seemed a pretty


numerous party, stumbling over the stones and rustling through the


underbrush. Soon appeared the whole lazy regiment that was wont to


infest the village tavern comprehending three or four individuals


who had drunk flip beside the bar-room fire through all the winters,


and smoked their pipes beneath the stoop through all the summers,


since Ethan Brand's departure. Laughing boisterously, and mingling all


their voices together in unceremonious talk, they now burst into the


moonshine and narrow streaks of fire-light that illuminated the open


space before the lime-kiln. Bartram set the door ajar again,


flooding the spot with light, that the whole company might get a


fair view of Ethan Brand, and he of them.


   There, among other old acquaintances, was a once ubiquitous man,


now almost extinct, but whom we were formerly sure to encounter at the


hotel of every thriving village throughout the country. It was the


stage-agent. The present specimen of the genus was a wilted and


smoke-dried man, wrinkled and red-nosed, in a smartly cut, brown,


bob-tailed coat, with brass buttons, who, for a length of time


unknown, had kept his desk and corner in the bar-room, and was still


puffing what seemed to be the same cigar that he had lighted twenty


years before. He had great fame as a dry joker, though, perhaps,


less on account of any intrinsic humor than from a certain flavor of


brandy-toddy and tobacco-smoke, which impregnated all his ideas and


expressions, as well as his person. Another well-remembered though


strangely altered face was that of Lawyer Giles, as people still


called him in courtesy; an elderly ragamuffin, in his soiled


shirt-sleeves and tow-cloth trousers. This poor fellow had been an


attorney, in what he called his better days, a sharp practitioner, and


in great vogue among the village litigants; but flip, and sling, and


toddy, and cocktails, imbibed at all hours, morning, noon, and


night, had caused him to slide from intellectual to various kinds


and degrees of bodily labor, till, at last, to adopt his own phrase,


he slid into a soap-vat. In other words, Giles was now a


soap-boiler, in a small way. He had come to be but the fragment of a


human being, a part of one foot having been chopped off by an axe, and


an entire hand torn away by the devilish grip of a steam-engine.


Yet, though the corporeal hand was gone, a spiritual member


remained; for, stretching forth the stump, Giles steadfastly averred


that he felt an invisible thumb and fingers with as vivid a


sensation as before the real ones were amputated. A maimed and


miserable wretch he was; but one, nevertheless, whom the world could


not trample on, and had no right to scorn, either in this or any


previous stage of his misfortunes, since he had still kept up the


courage and spirit of a man, asked nothing in charity, and with his


one hand- and that the left one- fought a stern battle against want


and hostile circumstances.


   Among the throng, too, came another personage, who, with certain


points of similarity to Lawyer Giles, had many more of difference.


It was the village doctor; a man of some fifty years, whom, at an


earlier period of his life, we introduced as paying a professional


visit to Ethan Brand during the latter's supposed insanity. He was now


a purple-visaged, rude, and brutal, yet half-gentlemanly figure,


with something wild, ruined, and desperate in his talk, and in all the


details of his gesture and manners. Brandy possessed this man like


an evil spirit, and made him as surly and savage as a wild beast,


and as miserable as a lost soul; but there was supposed to be in him


such wonderful skill, such native gifts of healing, beyond any which


medical science could impart, that society caught hold of him, and


would not let him sink out of its reach. So, swaying to and fro upon


his horse, and grumbling thick accents at the bedside, he visited


all the sick chambers for miles about among the mountain towns, and


sometimes raised a dying man, as it were, by miracle, or quite as


often, no doubt, sent his patient to a grave that was dug many a


year too soon. The doctor had an everlasting pipe in his mouth, and,


as somebody said, in allusion to his habit of swearing, it was


always alight with hell-fire.


   These three worthies pressed forward, and greeted Ethan Brand


each after his own fashion, earnestly inviting him to partake of the


contents of a certain black bottle, in which, as they averred, he


would find something far better worth seeking for than the


Unpardonable Sin. No mind, which has wrought itself by intense and


solitary meditation into a high state of enthusiasm, can endure the


kind of contact with low and vulgar modes of thought and feeling to


which Ethan Brand was now subjected. It made him doubt-and, strange to


say, it was a painful doubt-whether he had indeed found the


Unpardonable Sin, and found it within himself. The whole question on


which he had exhausted life, and more than life, looked like a


delusion.


   "Leave me," he said, bitterly, "ye brute beasts, that have made


yourselves so, shrivelling up your souls with fiery liquors! I have


done with you. Years and years ago, I groped into your hearts, and


found nothing there for my purpose. Get ye gone!"


   "Why, you uncivil scoundrel," cried the fierce doctor, "is that the


way you respond to the kindness of your best friends? Then let me tell


you the truth. You have no more found the Unpardonable Sin than yonder


boy Joe has. You are but a crazy fellow- I told you so twenty years


ago- neither better nor worse than a crazy fellow, and the fit


companion of old Humphrey, here!"


   He pointed to an old man, shabbily dressed, with long white hair,


thin visage, and unsteady eyes. For some years past this aged person


had been wandering about among the hills, inquiring of all


travellers whom he met for his daughter. The girl, it seemed, had gone


off with a company of circus-performers; and occasionally tidings of


her came to the village, and fine stories were told of her


glittering appearance as she rode on horse-back in the ring, or


performed marvellous feats on the tight-rope.


   The white-haired father now approached Ethan Brand, and gazed


unsteadily into his face.


   "They tell me you have been all over the earth," said he,


wringing his hands with earnestness. "You must have seen my


daughter, for she makes a grand figure in the world, and everybody


goes to see her. Did she send any word to her old father, or say


when she was coming back?"


   Ethan Brand's eye quailed beneath the old man's. That daughter,


from whom he so earnestly desired a word of greeting, was the Esther


of our tale, the very girl whom, with such cold and remorseless


purpose, Ethan Brand had made the subject of a psychological


experiment, and wasted, absorbed, and perhaps annihilated her soul, in


the process.


   "Yes," murmured he, turning away from the hoary wanderer; "it is no


delusion. There is an Unpardonable Sin!"


   While these things were passing, a merry scene was going forward in


the area of cheerful light, beside the spring and before the door of


the hut. A number of the youth of the village, young men and girls,


had hurried up the hill-side, impelled by curiosity to see Ethan


Brand, the hero of so many a legend familiar to their childhood.


Finding nothing, however, very remarkable in his aspect- nothing but a


sun-burnt wayfarer, in plain garb and dusty shoes, who sat looking


into the fire, as if he fancied pictures among the coals- these


young people speedily grew tired of observing him. As it happened,


there was other amusement at hand. An old German Jew, travelling


with a diorama on his back, was passing down the mountain-road towards


the village just as the party turned aside from it, and, in hopes of


eking out the profits of the day, the showman had kept them company to


the lime-kiln.


   "Come, old Dutchman," cried one of the young men, "let us see


your pictures, if you can swear they are worth looking at!"


   "O, yes, Captain," answered the Jew- whether as a matter of


courtesy or craft, he styled everybody Captain- "I shall show you,


indeed, some very superb pictures!"


   So, placing his box in a proper position, he invited the young


men and girls to look through the glass orifices of the machine, and


proceeded to exhibit a series of the most outrageous scratchings and


daubings, as specimens of the fine arts, that ever an itinerant


showman had the face to impose upon his circle of spectators. The


pictures were worn out, moreover, tattered, full of cracks and


wrinkles, dingy with tobacco-smoke, and otherwise in a most pitiable


condition. Some purported to be cities, public edifices, and ruined


castles in Europe; others represented Napoleon's battles and


Nelson's sea-fights; and in the midst of these would be seen a


gigantic, brown, hairy hand- which might have been mistaken for the


Hand of Destiny, though, in truth, it was only the showman's- pointing


its forefinger to various scenes of the conflict, while its owner gave


historical illustrations. When, with much merriment at its


abominable deficiency of merit, the exhibition was concluded, the


German bade little Joe put his head into the box. Viewed through the


magnifying glasses, the boy's round, rosy visage assumed the strangest


imaginable aspect of an immense Titanic child, the mouth grinning


broadly, and the eyes and every other feature overflowing with fun


at the joke. Suddenly, however, that merry face turned pale, and its


expression changed to horror, for this easily impressed and


excitable child had become sensible that the eye of Ethan Brand was


fixed upon him through the glass.


   "You make the little man to be afraid, Captain," said the German


Jew, turning up the dark and strong outline of his visage, from his


stooping posture. "But look again, and, by chance, I shall cause you


to see somewhat that is very fine, upon my word!"


   Ethan Brand gazed into the box for an instant, and then starting


back, looked fixedly at the German. What had he seen? Nothing,


apparently; for a curious youth, who had peeped in almost at the


same moment, beheld only a vacant space of canvas.


   "I remember you now," muttered Ethan Brand to the showman.


   "Ah, Captain," whispered the Jew of Nuremberg, with a dark smile,


"I find it to be a heavy matter in my show-box- this Unpardonable Sin!


By my faith, Captain, it has wearied my shoulders, this long day, to


carry it over the mountain."


   "Peace," answered Ethan Brand, sternly, "or get thee into the


furnace yonder!"


   The Jew's exhibition had scarcely concluded, when a great,


elderly dog- who seemed to be his own master, as no person in the


company laid claim to him- saw fit to render himself the object of


public notice. Hitherto, he had shown himself a very quiet, well


disposed old dog, going round from one to another, and, by way of


being sociable, offering his rough head to be patted by any kindly


hand that would take so much trouble. But now, all of a sudden, this


grave and venerable quadruped, of his own mere motion, and without the


slightest suggestion from anybody else, began to run round after his


tail, which, to heighten the absurdity of the proceeding, was a


great deal shorter than it should have been. Never was seen such


headlong eagerness in pursuit of an object that could not possibly


be attained; never was heard such a tremendous outbreak of growling,


snarling, barking, and snapping- as if one end of the ridiculous


brute's body were at deadly and most unforgivable enmity with the


other. Faster and faster, round about went the cur; and faster and


still faster fled the unapproachable brevity of his tail; and louder


and fiercer grew his yells of rage and animosity; until, utterly


exhausted, and as far from the goal as ever, the foolish old dog


ceased his performance as suddenly as he had begun it. The next moment


he was as mild, quiet, sensible, and respectable in his deportment, as


when he first scraped acquaintance with the company.


   As may be supposed, the exhibition was greeted with universal


laughter, clapping of hands, and shouts of encore, to which the canine


performer responded by wagging all that there was to wag of his


tail, but appeared totally unable to repeat his very successful effort


to amuse the spectators.


   Meanwhile, Ethan Brand had resumed his seat upon the log, and


moved, it might be, by a perception of some remote analogy between his


own case and that of this self-pursuing cur, he broke into the awful


laugh, which, more than any other token, expressed the condition of


his inward being. From that moment, the merriment of the party was


at an end; they stood aghast, dreading lest the inauspicious sound


should be reverberated around the horizon, and that mountain would


thunder it to mountain, and so the horror be prolonged upon their


ears. Then, whispering one to another that it was late- that the


moon was almost down- that the August night was growing chill- they


hurried homewards leaving the lime-burner and little Joe to deal as


they might with their unwelcome guest. Save for these three human


beings, the open space on the hill-side was a solitude, set in a


vast gloom of forest. Beyond that darksome verge, the fire-light


glimmered on the stately trunks and almost black foliage of pines,


intermixed with the lighter verdure of sapling oaks, maples, and


poplars, while here and there lay the gigantic corpses of dead


trees, decaying on the leaf-strewn soil. And it seemed to little


Joe- a timorous and imaginative child- that the silent forest was


holding its breath, until some fearful thing should happen.


   Ethan Brand thrust more wood into the fire, and closed the door


of the kiln; then looking over his shoulder at the lime-burner and his


son, he bade, rather than advised, them to retire to rest.


   "For myself, I cannot sleep," said he. "I have matters that it


concerns me to meditate upon. I will watch the fire, as I used to do


in the old time."


   "And call the devil out of the furnace to keep you company, I


suppose," muttered Bartram, who had been making intimate


acquaintance with the black bottle above-mentioned. "But watch, if you


like, and call as many devils as you like! For my part, I shall be all


the better for a snooze. Come, Joe!"


   As the boy followed his father into the hut, he looked back at


the wayfarer, and the tears came into his eyes, for his tender


spirit had an intuition of the bleak and terrible loneliness in


which this man had enveloped himself.


   When they had gone, Ethan Brand sat listening to the crackling of


the kindled wood, and looking at the little spirts of fire that issued


through the chinks of the door. These trifles, however, once so


familiar, had but the slightest hold of his attention, while deep


within his mind he was reviewing the gradual but marvellous change


that had been wrought upon him by the search to which he had devoted


himself. He remembered how the night dew had fallen upon him- how


the dark forest had whispered to him- how the stars had gleamed upon


him- a simple and loving man, watching his fire in the years gone


by, and ever musing as it burned. He remembered with what


tenderness, with what love and sympathy for mankind, and what pity for


human guilt and woe, he had first begun to contemplate those ideas


which afterwards became the inspiration of his life; with what


reverence he had then looked into the heart of man, viewing it as a


temple originally divine, and, however desecrated, still to be held


sacred by a brother; with what awful fear he had deprecated the


success of his pursuit, and prayed that the Unpardonable Sin might


never be revealed to him. Then ensued that vast intellectual


development, which, in its progress, disturbed the counterpoise


between his mind and heart. The Idea that possessed his life had


operated as a means of education; it had gone on cultivating his


powers to the highest point of which they were susceptible; it had


raised him from the level of an unlettered laborer to stand on a


star-lit eminence, whither the philosophers of the earth, laden with


the lore of universities, might vainly strive to clamber after him. So


much for the intellect! But where was the heart? That, indeed, had


withered- had contracted- had hardened- had perished! It had ceased to


partake of the universal throb. He had lost his hold of the magnetic


chain of humanity. He was no longer a brother-man, opening the


chambers or the dungeons of our common nature by the key of holy


sympathy, which gave him a right to share in all its secrets; he was


now a cold observer, looking on mankind as the subject of his


experiment, and, at length, converting man and woman to be his


puppets, and pulling the wires that moved them to such degrees of


crime as were demanded for his study.


   Thus Ethan Brand became a fiend. He began to be so from the


moment that his moral nature had ceased to keep the pace of


improvement with his intellect. And now, as his highest effort and


inevitable development- as the bright and gorgeous flower, and rich,


delicious fruit of his life's labor- he had produced the


Unpardonable Sin!


   What more have I to seek? What more to achieve?" said Ethan Brand


to himself. "My task is done, and well done!"


   Starting from the log with a certain alacrity in his gait, and


ascending the hillock of earth that was raised against the stone


circumference of the lime-kiln, he thus reached the top of the


structure. It was a space of perhaps ten feet across, from edge to


edge, presenting a view of the upper surface of the immense mass of


broken marble with which the kiln was heaped. All these innumerable


blocks and fragments of marble were red-hot and vividly on fire,


sending up great spouts of blue flame, which quivered aloft and danced


madly, as within a magic circle, and sank and rose again, with


continual and multitudinous activity. As the lonely man bent forward


over this terrible body of fire, the blasting heat smote up against


his person with a breath that, it might be scorched and shrivelled him


up in a moment.


   Ethan Brand stood erect, and raised his arms on high. The blue


flames played upon his face, and imparted the wild and ghastly light


which alone could have suited its expression; it was that of a fiend


on the verge of plunging into his gulf of intensest torment.


   "O Mother Earth," cried he, "who art no more my Mother, and into


whose bosom this frame shall never be resolved! O mankind, whose


brotherhood I have cast off, and trampled thy great heart beneath my


feet! O stars of heaven, that shone on me of old, as if to light me


onward and upward!- farewell all, and forever. Come, deadly element of


Fire- henceforth my familiar friend! Embrace me, as I do thee!"


   That night the sound of a fearful peal of laughter rolled heavily


through the sleep of the lime-burner and his little son; dim shapes of


horror and anguish haunted their dreams, and seemed still present in


the rude hovel, when they opened their eyes to the daylight.


   "Up, boy, up!" cried the lime-burner, staring about him. "Thank


Heaven, the night is gone, at last; and rather than pass such another,


I would watch my lime-kiln, wide awake, for a twelvemonth. This


Ethan Brand, with his humbug of an Unpardonable Sin, has done me no


such mighty favor, in taking my place!"


   He issued from the hut, followed by little Joe, who kept fast


hold of his father's hand. The early sunshine was already pouring


its gold upon the mountain-tops; and though the valleys were still


in shadow, they smiled cheerfully in the promise of the bright day


that was hastening onward. The village, completely shut in by hills,


which swelled away gently about it, looked as if it had rested


peacefully in the hollow of the great hand of Providence. Every


dwelling was distinctly visible; the little spires of the two churches


pointed upwards, and caught a fore-glimmering of brightness from the


sun-gilt skies upon their gilded weather-cocks. The tavern was


astir, and the figure of the old, smoke-dried stage-agent, cigar in


mouth, was seen beneath the stoop. Old Graylock was glorified with a


golden cloud upon his head. Scattered likewise over the breasts of the


surrounding mountains, there were heaps of hoary mist, in fantastic


shapes, some of them far down into the valley, others high up


towards the summits and still others, of the same family of mist or


cloud, hovering in the gold radiance of the upper atmosphere. Stepping


from one to another of the clouds that rested on the hills, and thence


to the loftier brotherhood that sailed in air, it seemed almost as


if a mortal man might thus ascend into the heavenly regions. Earth was


so mingled with sky that it was a day-dream to look at it.


   To supply that charm of the familiar and homely, which Nature so


readily adopts into a scene like this, the stage-coach was rattling


down the mountain-road, and the driver sounded his horn, while echo


caught up the notes, and intertwined them into a rich and varied and


elaborate harmony, of which the original performer could lay claim


to little share. The great hills played a concert among themselves,


each contributing a strain of airy sweetness.


   Little Joe's face brightened at once.


   "Dear father," cried he, skipping cheerily to and fro, "that


strange man is gone, and the sky and the mountains all seem glad of


it!"


   "Yes," growled the lime-burner, with an oath, "but he has let the


fire go down, and no thanks to him if five hundred bushels of lime are


not spoiled. If I catch the fellow hereabouts again, I shall feel like


tossing him into the furnace!"


   With his long pole in his hand, he ascended to the top of the kiln.


After a moment's pause, he called to his son.


   "Come up here, Joe!" said he.


   So little Joe ran up the hillock, and stood by his father's side.


The marble was all burnt into perfect, snow-white lime. But on its


surface, in the midst of the circle- snow-white too, and thoroughly


converted into lime- lay a human skeleton, in the attitude of a person


who, after long toil, lies down to long repose. Within the ribs-


strange to say- was the shape of a human heart.


   "Was the fellow's heart made of marble?" cried Bartram, in some


perplexity at this phenomenon. "At any rate, it is burnt into what


looks like special good lime; and, taking all the bones together, my


kiln is half a bushel the richer for him."


   So saying, the rude lime-burner lifted his pole, and, letting it


fall upon the skeleton, the relics of Ethan Brand were crumbled into


fragments.








                        THE END


.




                                      1843


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                             THE CELESTIAL RAILROAD


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   NOT A GREAT WHILE AGO, passing through the gate of dreams, I


visited that region of the earth in which lies the famous city of


Destruction. It interested me much to learn that, by the public spirit


of some of the inhabitants, a railroad has recently been established


between this populous and flourishing town, and the Celestial City.


Having a little time upon my hands, I resolved to gratify a liberal


curiosity to make a trip thither. Accordingly, one fine morning, after


paying my bill at the hotel, and directing the porter to stow my


luggage behind a coach, I took my seat in the vehicle and set out


for the Station- house. It was my good fortune to enjoy the company of


a gentleman- one Mr. Smooth-it-away- who, though he had never actually


visited the Celestial City, yet seemed as well acquainted with its


laws, customs, policy, and statistics, as with those of the city of


Destruction, of which he was a native townsman. Being, moreover, a


Director of the railroad corporation, and one of its largest


stockholders, he had it in his power to give me all desirable


information respecting that praiseworthy enterprise.


   Our coach rattled out of the city, and, at a short distance from


its outskirts, passed over a bridge, of elegant construction, but


somewhat too slight, as I imagined, to sustain any considerable


weight. On both sides lay an extensive quagmire, which could not


have been more disagreeable either to sight or smell, had all the


kennels of the earth emptied their pollution there.


   "This," remarked Mr. Smooth-it-away, "is the famous Slough of


Despond- a disgrace to all the neighborhood; and the greater, that


it might so easily be converted into firm ground."


   "I have understood, said I, "that efforts have been made for that


purpose, from time immemorial. Bunyan mentions that above twenty


thousand cart-loads of wholesome instructions had been thrown in here,


without effect."


   "Very probably! and what effect could be anticipated from such


unsubstantial stuff?" cried Mr. Smooth-it-away. "You observe this


convenient bridge. We obtained a sufficient foundation for it by


throwing into the Slough some editions of books of morality, volumes


of French philosophy and German rationalism, tracts, sermons, and


essays of modern clergymen, extracts from Plato, Confucius, and


various Hindoo sages, together with a few ingenious commentaries


upon texts of Scripture- all of which, by some scientific process,


have been converted into a mass like granite. The whole bog might be


filled up with similar matter."


   It really seemed to me, however, that the bridge vibrated and


heaved up and down in a very formidable manner; and, spite of Mr.


Smooth-it-away's testimony to the solidity of its foundation, I should


be loth to cross it in a crowded omnibus; especially, if each


passenger were encumbered with as heavy luggage as that gentleman


and myself. Nevertheless, we got over without accident, and soon found


ourselves at the Station-house. This very neat and spacious edifice is


erected on the site of the little Wicket-Gate, which formerly, as


all old pilgrims will recollect, stood directly across the highway,


and, by its inconvenient narrowness, was a great obstruction to the


traveller of liberal mind and expansive stomach. The reader of John


Bunyan will be glad to know, that Christian's old friend Evangelist,


who was accustomed to supply each pilgrim with a mystic roll, now


presides at the ticket office. Some malicious persons, it is true,


deny the identity of this reputable character with the Evangelist of


old times, and even pretend to bring competent evidence of an


imposture. Without involving myself in a dispute, I shall merely


observe, that, so far as my experience goes, the square pieces of


pasteboard, now delivered to passengers, are much more convenient


and useful along the road, than the antique roll of parchment. Whether


they will be as readily received at the gate of the Celestial City,


I decline giving an opinion.


   A large number of passengers were already at the Station-house,


awaiting the departure of the cars. By the aspect and demeanor of


these persons, it was easy to judge that the feelings of the community


had undergone a very favorable change, in reference to the celestial


pilgrimage. It would have done Bunyan's heart good to see it.


Instead of a lonely and ragged man, with a huge burthen on his back,


plodding along sorrowfully on foot, while the whole city hooted


after him, here were parties of the first gentry and most


respectable people in the neighborhood, setting forth towards the


Celestial City, as cheerfully as if the pilgrimage were merely a


summer tour. Among the gentlemen were characters of deserved eminence,


magistrates, politicians, and men of wealth, by whose example religion


could not but be greatly recommended to their meaner brethren. In


the ladies' apartment, too, I rejoiced to distinguish some of those


flowers of fashionable society, who are so well fitted to adorn the


most elevated circles of the Celestial City. There was much pleasant


conversation about the news of the day, topics of business,


politics, or the lighter matters of amusement; while religion,


though indubitably the main thing at heart, was thrown tastefully into


the back-ground. Even an infidel would have heard little or nothing to


shock his sensibility.


   One great convenience of the new method of going on pilgrimage, I


must not forget to mention. Our enormous burthens, instead of being


carried on our shoulders, as had been the custom of old, were all


snugly deposited in the baggage-car, and, as I was assured, would be


delivered to their respective owners at the journey's end. Another


thing, likewise, the benevolent reader will be delighted to


understand. It may be remembered that there was an ancient feud


between Prince Beelzebub and the keeper of the Wicket-Gate, and that


the adherents of the former distinguished personage were accustomed to


shoot deadly arrows at honest pilgrims, while knocking at the door.


This dispute, much to the credit as well of the illustrious


potentate above-mentioned, as of the worthy and enlightened


Directors of the railroad, has been pacifically arranged, on the


principle of mutual compromise. The Prince's subjects are now pretty


numerously employed about the Station-house, some in taking care of


the baggage, others in collecting fuel, feeding the engines, and


such congenial occupations; and I can conscientiously affirm, that


persons more attentive to their business, more willing to accommodate,


or more generally agreeable to the passengers, are not to be found


on any railroad. Every good heart must surely exult at so satisfactory


an arrangement of an immemorial difficulty.


   "Where is Mr. Great-heart?" inquired I. "Beyond a doubt, the


Directors have engaged that famous old champion to be chief


conductor on the railroad?"


   "Why, no," said Mr. Smooth-it-away, with a dry cough. "He was


offered the situation of brake-man; but, to tell you the truth, our


friend Great-heart has grown preposterously stiff and narrow in his


old age. He has so often guided pilgrims over the road, on foot,


that he considers it a sin to travel in any other fashion. Besides,


the old fellow had entered so heartily into the ancient feud with


Prince Beelzebub, that he would have been perpetually at blows or


ill language with some of the Prince's subjects, and thus have


embroiled us anew. So, on the whole, we were not sorry when honest


Great-heart went off to the Celestial City in a huff, and left us at


liberty to choose a more suitable and accommodating man. Yonder


comes the conductor of the train. You will probably recognize him at


once."


   The engine at this moment took its station in advance of the


cars, looking, I must confess, much more like a sort of mechanical


demon that would hurry us to the infernal regions, than a laudable


contrivance for smoothing our way to the Celestial City. On its top


sat a personage almost enveloped in smoke and flame, which- not to


startle the reader- appeared to gush from his own mouth and stomach,


as well as from the engine's brazen abdomen.


   "Do my eyes deceive me?" cried I. "What on earth is this! A


living creature? If so, he is own brother to the engine he rides


upon!"


   "Poh, poh, you are obtuse!" said Mr. Smooth-it-away, with a


hearty laugh. "Don't you know Apollyon, Christian's old enemy, with


whom he fought so fierce a battle in the Valley of Humiliation? He was


the very fellow to manage the engine; and so we have reconciled him to


the custom of going on pilgrimage, and engaged him as chief


conductor."


   "Bravo, bravo!" exclaimed I, with irrepressible enthusiasm, "this


shows the liberality of the age; this proves, if anything can, that


all musty prejudices are in a fair way to be obliterated. And how will


Christian rejoice to hear of this happy transformation of his old


antagonist! I promise myself great pleasure in informing him of it,


when we reach the Celestial City."


   The passengers being all comfortably seated, we now rattled away


merrily, accomplishing a greater distance in ten minutes than


Christian probably trudged over in a day. It was laughable while we


glanced along, as it were, at the tail of a thunderbolt, to observe


two dusty foot-travellers, in the old pilgrim-guise, with cockle-shell


and staff, their mystic rolls of parchment in their hands, and their


intolerable burthens on their backs. The preposterous obstinacy of


these honest people, in persisting to groan and stumble along the


difficult pathway, rather than take advantage of modern


improvements, excited great mirth among our wiser brotherhood. We


greeted the two pilgrims with many pleasant gibes and a roar of


laughter; whereupon, they gazed at us with such woful and absurdly


compassionate visages, that our merriment grew tenfold more


obstreperous. Apollyon, also, entered heartily into the fun, and


contrived to flirt the smoke and flame of the engine, or of his own


breath, into their faces, and envelope them in an atmosphere of


scalding steam. These little practical jokes amused us mightily, and


doubtless afforded the pilgrims the gratification of considering


themselves martyrs.


   At some distance from the railroad, Mr. Smooth-it-away pointed to a


large, antique edifice, which, he observed, was a tavern of long


standing, and had formerly been a noted stopping-place for pilgrims.


In Bunyan's road-book it is mentioned as the Interpreter's House.


   "I have long had a curiosity to visit that old mansion," remarked


I.


   "It is not one of our stations, as you perceive," said my


companion. "The keeper was violently opposed to the railroad; and well


he might be, as the track left his house of entertainment on one side,


and thus was pretty certain to deprive him of all his reputable


customers. But the foot-path still passes his door; and the old


gentleman now and then receives a call from some simple traveller, and


entertains him with fare as old-fashioned as himself."


   Before our talk on this subject came to a conclusion, we were


rushing by the place where Christian's burthen fell from his


shoulders, at the sight of the Cross. This served as a theme for Mr.


Smooth-it-away, Mr. Live-for-the-world, Mr. Hide-sin-in-the-heart, Mr.


Scaly-conscience, and a knot of gentlemen from the town of


Shun-repentance, to descant upon the inestimable advantages


resulting from the safety of our baggage. Myself, and all the


passengers indeed, joined with great unanimity in this view of the


matter; for our burthens were rich in many things esteemed precious


throughout the world; and especially, we each of us possessed a


great variety of favorite Habits, which we trusted would not be out of


fashion, even in the polite circles of the Celestial City. It would


have been a sad spectacle to see such an assortment of valuable


articles tumbling into the sepulchre. Thus pleasantly conversing on


the favorable circumstances of our position, as compared with those of


past pilgrims, and of narrow-minded ones at the present day, we soon


found ourselves at the foot of the Hill Difficulty. Through the very


heart of this rocky mountain a tunnel has been constructed, of most


admirable architecture, with a lofty arch and a spacious double-track;


so that, unless the earth and rocks should chance to crumble down,


it will remain an eternal monument of the builder's skill and


enterprise. It is a great though incidental advantage, that the


materials from the heart of the Hill Difficulty have been employed


in filling up the Valley of Humiliation; thus obviating the


necessity of descending into that disagreeable and unwholesome hollow.


   "This is a wonderful improvement, indeed," said I. "Yet I should


have been glad of an opportunity to visit the Palace Beautiful, and be


introduced to the charming young ladies- Miss Prudence, Miss Piety,


Miss Charity, and the rest- who have the kindness to entertain


pilgrims there."


   "Young ladies!" cried Mr. Smooth-it-away, as soon as he could speak


for laughing. "And charming young ladies! Why, my dear fellow, they


are old maids, every soul of them- prim, starched, dry, and angular-


and not one of them, I will venture to say, has altered so much as the


fashion of her gown, since the days of Christian's pilgrimage."


   "Ah, well, said I, much comforted, "then I can very readily


dispense with their acquaintance."


   The respectable Apollyon was now putting on the steam at a


prodigious rate; anxious, perhaps, to get rid of the unpleasant


reminiscences connected with the spot where he had so disastrously


encountered Christian. Consulting Mr. Bunyan's road-book, I


perceived that we must now be within a few miles of the Valley of


the Shadow of Death; into which doleful region, at our present


speed, we should plunge much sooner than seemed at all desirable. In


truth, I expected nothing better than to find myself in the ditch on


one side, or the quag on the other. But on communicating my


apprehensions to Mr. Smooth-it-away, he assured me that the


difficulties of this passage, even in its worst condition, had been


vastly exaggerated, and that, in its present state of improvement, I


might consider myself as safe as on any railroad in Christendom.


   Even while we were speaking, the train shot into the entrance of


this dreaded Valley. Though I plead guilty to some foolish


palpitations of the heart, during our headlong rush over the


causeway here constructed, yet it were unjust to withhold the


highest encomiums on the boldness of its original conception, and


the ingenuity of those who executed it. It was gratifying, likewise,


to observe how much care had been taken to dispel the everlasting


gloom, and supply the defect of cheerful sunshine; not a ray of


which has ever penetrated among these awful shadows. For this purpose,


the inflammable gas, which exudes plentifully from the soil, is


collected by means of pipes, and thence communicated to a quadruple


row of lamps, along the whole extent of the passage. Thus a radiance


has been created, even out of the fiery and sulphurous curse that


rests for ever upon the Valley; a radiance hurtful, however, to the


eyes, and somewhat bewildering, as I discovered by the changes which


it wrought in the visages of my companions. In this respect, as


compared with natural daylight, there is the same difference as


between truth and falsehood; but if the reader have ever travelled


through the dark Valley, he will have learned to be thankful for any


light that he could get; if not from the sky above, then from the


blasted soil beneath. Such was the red brilliancy of these lamps, that


they appeared to build walls of fire on both sides of the track,


between which we held our course at lightning speed, while a


reverberating thunder filled the Valley with its echoes. Had the


engine run off the track- a catastrophe, it is whispered, by no


means unprecedented- the bottomless pit, if there be any such place,


would undoubtedly have received us. Just as some dismal fooleries of


this nature had made my heart quake, there came a tremendous shriek,


careering along the Valley as if a thousand devils had burst their


lungs to utter it, but which proved to be merely the whistle of the


engine, on arriving at a stopping-place.


   The spot, where we had now paused, is the same that our friend


Bunyan- truthful man, but infected with many fantastic notions- has


designated, in terms plainer than I like to repeat, as the mouth of


the infernal region. This, however, must be a mistake; inasmuch as Mr.


Smooth-it-away, while we remained in the smoky and lurid cavern,


took occasion to prove that Tophet has not even a metaphorical


existence. The place, he assured us, is no other than the crater of


a half-extinct volcano, in which the Directors had caused forges to be


set up, for the manufacture of railroad iron. Hence, also, is obtained


a plentiful supply of fuel for the use of the engines. Whoever had


gazed into the dismal obscurity of the broad cavern-mouth, whence ever


and anon darted huge tongues of dusky flame- and had seen the strange,


half-shaped monsters, and visions of faces horribly grotesque, into


which the smoke seemed to wreathe itself- and had heard the awful


murmurs, and shrieks, and deep shuddering whispers of the blast,


sometimes forming themselves into words almost articulate- would


have seized upon Mr. Smooth-it-away's comfortable explanation, as


greedily as we did. The inhabitants of the cavern, moreover, were


unlovely personages, dark, smoke-begrimed, generally deformed, with


mis-shapen feet, and a glow of dusky redness in their eyes; as if


their hearts had caught fire, and were blazing out of the upper


windows. It struck me as a peculiarity, that the laborers at the


forge, and those who brought fuel to the engine, when they began to


draw short breath, positively emitted smoke from their mouth and


nostrils.


   Among the idlers about the train, most of whom were puffing


cigars which they had lighted at the flame of the crater, I was


perplexed to notice several who, to my certain knowledge, had


heretofore set forth by railroad for the Celestial City. They looked


dark, wild, and smoky, with a singular resemblance, indeed, to the


native inhabitants; like whom, also, they had a disagreeable


propensity to ill-natured gibes and sneers, the habit of which had


wrought a settled contortion of their visages. Having been on speaking


terms with one of these persons- an indolent, good-for-nothing fellow,


who went by the name of Take-it-easy- I called him, and inquired


what was his business there.


   "Did you not start," said I, "for the Celestial City?"


   "That's a fact," said Mr. Take-it-easy, carelessly puffing some


smoke into my eyes. "But I heard such bad accounts, that I never


took pains to climb the hill, on which the city stands. No business


doing- no fun going on- nothing to drink, and no smoking allowed-


and a thrumming of church-music from morning till night! I would not


stay in such a place, if they offered me house-room and living free."


   "But, my good Mr. Take-it-easy," cried I, "why take up your


residence here, of all places in the world?"


   "Oh," said the loafer, with a grin, "it is very warm hereabouts,


and I meet with plenty of old acquaintances, and altogether the


place suits me. I hope to see you back again, some day soon. A


pleasant journey to you!"


   While he was speaking, the bell of the engine rang, and we dashed


away, after dropping a few passengers, but receiving no new ones.


Rattling onward through the Valley, we were dazzled with the


fiercely gleaming gas-lamps, as before. But sometimes, in the dark


of intense brightness, grim faces, that bore the aspect and expression


of individual sins, or evil passions, seemed to thrust themselves


through the veil of light, glaring upon us, and stretching forth a


great dusky hand, as if to impede our progress. I almost thought, that


they were my own sins that appalled me there. These were freaks of


imagination- nothing more, certainly- mere delusions, which I ought to


be heartily ashamed of- but, all through the Dark Valley, I was


tormented, and pestered, and dolefully bewildered, with the same


kind of waking dreams. The mephitic gases of that region intoxicate


the brain. As the light of natural day, however, began to struggle


with the glow of the lanterns, these vain imaginations lost their


vividness, and finally vanished with the first ray of sunshine that


greeted our escape from the Valley of the Shadow of Death. Ere we


had gone a mile beyond it, I could well nigh have taken my oath,


that this whole gloomy passage was a dream.


   At the end of the Valley, as John Bunyan mentions, is a cavern,


where, in his days, dwelt two cruel giants, Pope and Pagan, who had


strewn the ground about their residence with the bones of


slaughtered pilgrims. These vile old troglodytes are no longer


there; but in their deserted cave another terrible giant has thrust


himself, and makes it his business to seize upon honest travellers,


and fat them for his table with plentiful meals of smoke, mist,


moonshine, raw potatoes, and saw-dust. He is a German by birth, and is


called Giant Transcendentalist; but as to his form, his features,


his substance, and his nature generally, it is the chief peculiarity


of this huge miscreant, that neither he for himself, nor anybody for


him, has ever been able to describe them. As we rushed by the cavern's


mouth, we caught a hasty glimpse of him, looking somewhat like an


ill-proportioned figure, but considerably more like a heap of fog


and duskiness. He shouted after us but in so strange a phraseology,


that we knew not what he meant, nor whether to be encouraged or


affrighted.


   It was late in the day, when the train thundered into the ancient


city of Vanity, where Vanity Fair is still at the height of


prosperity, and exhibits an epitome of whatever is brilliant, gay, and


fascinating, beneath the sun. As I purposed to make a considerable


stay here, it gratified me to learn that there is no longer the want


of harmony between the townspeople and pilgrims, which impelled the


former to such lamentably mistaken measures as the persecution of


Christian, and the fiery martyrdom of Faithful. On the contrary, as


the new railroad brings with it great trade and a constant influx of


strangers, the lord of Vanity Fair is its chief patron, and the


capitalists of the city are among the largest stockholders. Many


passengers stop to take their pleasure or make their profit in the


Fair, instead of going onward to the Celestial City. Indeed, such


are the charms of the place, that people often affirm it to be the


true and only heaven; stoutly contending that there is no other,


that those who seek further are mere dreamers, and that, if the fabled


brightness of the Celestial City lay but a bare mile beyond the


gates of Vanity, they would not be fools enough to go thither. Without


subscribing to these, perhaps, exaggerated encomiums, I can truly say,


that my abode in the city was mainly agreeable, and my intercourse


with the inhabitants productive of much amusement and instruction.


   Being naturally of a serious turn, my attention was directed to the


solid advantages derivable from a residence here, rather than to the


effervescent pleasures, which are the grand object with too many


visitants. The Christian reader, if he have no accounts of the city


later than Bunyan's time, will be surprised to hear that almost


every street has its church, and that the reverend clergy are


nowhere held in higher respect than at Vanity Fair. And well do they


deserve such honorable estimation; for the maxims of wisdom and virtue


which fall from their lips, come from as deep a spiritual source,


and tend to as lofty a religious aim, as those of the sagest


philosophers of old. In justification of this high praise, I need only


mention the names of the Rev. Mr. Shallow-deep; the Rev. Mr.


Stumble-at-Truth; that fine old clerical character, the Rev. Mr.


This-to-day, who expects shortly to resign his pulpit to the Rev.


Mr. That-to-morrow; together with the Rev. Mr. Bewilderment; the


Rev. Mr. Clog-the-spirit; and, last and greatest, the Rev. Dr.


Wind-of-doctrine. The labors of these eminent divines are aided by


those of innumerable lecturers, who diffuse such a various profundity,


in all subjects of human or celestial science, that any man may


acquire an omnigenous erudition, without the trouble of even


learning to read. Thus literature is etherealized by assuming for


its medium the human voice; and knowledge, depositing all its


heavier particles- except, doubtless, its gold- becomes exhaled into a


sound, which forthwith steals into the ever-open ear of the community.


These ingenious methods constitute a sort of machinery, by which


thought and study are done to every person's hand, without his putting


himself to the slightest inconvenience in the matter. There is another


species of machine for the wholesale manufacture of individual


morality. This excellent result is effected by societies for all


manner of virtuous purposes; with which a man has merely to connect


himself, throwing, as it were, his quota of virtue into the common


stock; and the president and directors will take care that the


aggregate amount be well applied. All these, and other wonderful


improvements in ethics, religion, and literature, being made plain


to my comprehension, by the ingenious Mr. Smooth-it-away, inspired


me with a vast admiration of Vanity Fair.


   It would fill a volume, in an age of pamphlets, were I to record


all my observations in this great capital of human business and


pleasure. There was an unlimited range of society- the powerful, the


wise, the witty, and the famous in every walk of life- princes,


presidents, poets, generals, artists, actors, and philanthropists, all


making their own market at the Fair, and deeming no price too


exorbitant for such commodities as hit their fancy. It was well


worth one's while, even if he had no idea of buying or selling, to


loiter through the bazaars, and observe the various sorts of traffic


that were going forward.


   Some of the purchasers, I thought, made very foolish bargains.


For instance, a young man having inherited a splendid fortune, laid


out a considerable portion of it in the purchase of diseases, and


finally spent all the rest for a heavy lot of repentance and a suit of


rags. A very pretty girl bartered a heart as clear as crystal, and


which seemed her most valuable possession, for another jewel of the


same kind, but so worn and defaced as to be utterly worthless. In


one shop, there were a great many crowns of laurel and myrtle, which


soldiers, authors, statesmen, and various other people, pressed


eagerly to buy; some purchased these paltry wreaths with their


lives; others by a toilsome servitude of years; and many sacrificed


whatever was most valuable, yet finally slunk away without the


crown. There was a sort of stock or scrip, called Conscience, which


seemed to be in great demand, and would purchase almost anything.


Indeed, few rich commodities were to be obtained without paying a


heavy sum in this particular stock, and a man's business was seldom


very lucrative, unless he knew precisely when and how to throw his


hoard of Conscience into the market. Yet as this stock was the only


thing of permanent value, whoever parted with it was sure to find


himself a loser, in the long run. Several of the speculations were


of a questionable character. Occasionally, a member of Congress


recruited his pocket by the sale of his constituents; and I was


assured that public officers have often sold their country at very


moderate prices. Thousands sold their happiness for a whim. Gilded


chains were in great demand, and purchased with almost any


sacrifice. In truth, those who desired, according to the old adage, to


sell anything valuable for a song, might find customers all over the


Fair; and there were innumerable messes of pottage, piping hot, for


such as chose to buy them with their birthrights. A few articles,


however, could not be found genuine at Vanity Fair. If a customer


wished to renew his stock of youth, the dealers offered him a set of


false teeth and an auburn wig; if he demanded peace of mind, they


recommended opium or a brandy-bottle.


   Tracts of land and golden mansions, situate in the Celestial


City, were often exchanged, at very disadvantageous rates, for a few


years' lease of small, dismal, inconvenient tenements in Vanity


Fair. Prince Beelzebub himself took great interest in this sort of


traffic, and sometimes condescended to meddle with smaller matters.


I once had the pleasure to see him bargaining with a miser for his


soul, which, after much ingenious skirmishing on both sides, his


Highness succeeded in obtaining at about the value of sixpence. The


Prince remarked, with a smile, that he was a loser by the transaction.


   Day after day, as I walked the streets of Vanity, my manners and


deportment became more and more like those of the inhabitants. The


place began to seem like home; the idea of pursuing my travels to


the Celestial City was almost obliterated from my mind. I was reminded


of it, however, by the sight of the same pair of simple pilgrims at


whom we had laughed so heartily, when Apollyon puffed smoke and


steam into their faces, at the commencement of our journey. There they


stood amid the densest bustle of Vanity- the dealers offering them


their purple, and fine linen, and jewels; the men of wit and humor


gibing at them; a pair of buxom ladies ogling them askance; while


the benevolent Mr. Smooth-it-away whispered some of his wisdom at


their elbows, and pointed to a newly-erected temple- but there were


these worthy simpletons, making the scene look wild and monstrous,


merely by their sturdy repudiation of all part in its business or


pleasures.


   One of them- his name was Stick-to-the-right- perceived in my face,


I suppose, a species of sympathy and almost admiration, which, to my


own great surprise, I could not help feeling for this pragmatic


couple. It prompted him to address me.


   "Sir," inquired he, with a sad, yet mild and kindly voice, "do


you call yourself a pilgrim?"


   "Yes," I replied, "my right to that appellation is indubitable. I


am merely a sojourner here in Vanity Fair, being bound to the


Celestial City by the new railroad."


   "Alas, friend," rejoined Mr. Stick-to-the-right, "I do assure


you, and beseech you to receive the truth of my words, that that whole


concern is a bubble. You may travel on it all your lifetime, were


you to live thousands of years, and yet never get beyond the limits of


Vanity Fair! Yea; though you should deem yourself entering the gates


of the Blessed City, it will be nothing but a miserable delusion."


   "The Lord of the Celestial City," began the other pilgrim, whose


name was Mr. Foot-it-to-Heaven, "has refused, and will ever refuse, to


grant an act of incorporation for this railroad; and unless that be


obtained, no passenger can ever hope to enter his dominions.


Wherefore, every man, who buys a ticket, must lay his account with


losing the purchase-money- which is the value of his own soul."


   "Poh, nonsense!" said Mr. Smooth-it-away, taking my arm and leading


me off, "these fellows ought to be indicted for a libel. If the law


stood as it once did in Vanity Fair, we should see them grinning


through the iron bars of the prison window."


   This incident made a considerable impression on my mind, and


contributed with other circumstances to indispose me to a permanent


residence in the city of Vanity; although, of course, I was not simple


enough to give up my original plan of gliding along easily and


commodiously by railroad. Still, I grew anxious to be gone. There


was one strange thing that troubled me; amid the occupations or


amusements of the Fair, nothing was more common than for a person-


whether at a feast, theatre, or church, or trafficking for wealth


and honors, or whatever he might be doing, and however unseasonable


the interruption- suddenly to vanish like a soap-bubble, and be


never more seen of his fellows; and so accustomed were the latter to


such little accidents, that they went on with their business, as


quietly as if nothing had happened. But it was otherwise with me.


   Finally, after a pretty long residence at the Fair, I resumed my


journey towards the Celestial City, still with Mr. Smooth-it-away at


my side. At a short distance beyond the suburbs of Vanity, we passed


the ancient silver mine, of which Demas was the first discoverer,


and which is now wrought to great advantage, supplying nearly all


the coined currency of the world. A little further onward was the spot


where Lot's wife had stood for ages, under the semblance of a pillar


of salt. Curious travellers have long since carried it away piecemeal.


Had all regrets been punished as rigorously as this poor dame's


were, my yearning for the relinquished delights of Vanity Fair might


have produced a similar change in my own corporeal substance, and left


me a warning to future pilgrims.


   The next remarkable object was a large edifice, constructed of


moss-grown stone, but in a modern and airy style of architecture.


The engine came to a pause in its vicinity with the usual tremendous


shriek.


   "This was formerly the castle of the redoubted giant Despair,"


observed Mr. Smooth-it-away; "but, since his death, Mr. Flimsy-faith


has repaired it, and now keeps an excellent house of entertainment


here. It is one of our stopping-places."


   "It seems but slightly put together," remarked I, looking at the


frail, yet ponderous walls. "I do not envy Mr. Flimsy-faith his


habitation. Some day it will thunder down upon the heads of the


occupants."


   "We shall escape, at all events," said Mr. Smooth-it-away, "for


Apollyon is putting on the steam again."


   The road now plunged into a gorge of the Delectable Mountains,


and traversed the field where, in former ages, the blind men


wandered and stumbled among the tombs. One of these ancient


tomb-stones had been thrust across the track, by some malicious


person, and gave the train of cars a terrible jolt. Far up the


rugged side of a mountain, I perceived a rusty iron door, half


overgrown with bushes and creeping plants, but with smoke issuing from


its crevices.


   "Is that," inquired I, "the very door in the hill-side, which the


shepherds assured Christian was a by-way to Hell?"


   "That was a joke on the part of the shepherds," said Mr.


Smooth-it-away, with a smile. "It is neither more nor less than the


door of a cavern, which they use as a smoke-house for the


preparation of mutton hams."


   My recollections of the journey are now, for a little space, dim


and confused, inasmuch as a singular drowsiness here overcame me,


owing to the fact that we were passing over the Enchanted Ground,


the air of which encourages a disposition to sleep. I awoke,


however, as soon as we crossed the borders of the pleasant land of


Beulah. All the passengers were rubbing their eyes, comparing watches,


and con-gratulating one another on the prospect of arriving so


seasonably at the journey's end. The sweet breezes of this happy clime


came refreshingly to our nostrils; we beheld the glimmering gush of


silver fountains, overhung by trees of beautiful foliage and delicious


fruit, which were propagated by grafts from the celestial gardens.


Once, as we dashed onward like a hurricane, there was a flutter of


wings, and the bright appearance of an angel in the air, speeding


forth on some heavenly mission. The engine now announced the close


vicinity of the final Station-house, by one last and horrible


scream, in which there seemed to be distinguishable every kind of


wailing and wo, and bitter fierceness of wrath, all mixed up with


the wild laughter of a devil or a madman. Throughout our journey, at


every stopping-place, Apollyon had exercised his ingenuity in screwing


the most abominable sounds out of the whistle of the steam-engine; but


in this closing effort he outdid himself, and created an infernal


uproar, which, besides disturbing the peaceful inhabitants of


Beulah, must have sent its discord even through the celestial gates.


   While the horrid clamor was still ringing in our ears, we heard


an exulting strain, as if a thousand instruments of music, with


height, and depth, and sweetness in their tones, at once tender and


triumphant, were struck in unison, to greet the approach of some


illustrious hero, who had fought the good fight and won a glorious


victory, and was come to lay aside his battered arms for ever. Looking


to ascertain what might be the occasion of this glad harmony, I


perceived, on alighting from the cars, that a multitude of shining


ones had assembled on the other side of the river, to welcome two poor


pilgrims, who were just emerging from its depths. They were the same


whom Apollyon and ourselves had persecuted with taunts and gibes,


and scalding steam, at the commencement of our journey- the same whose


unworldly aspect and impressive words had stirred my conscience,


amid the wild revellers of Vanity Fair.


   "How amazingly well those men have got on!" cried I to Mr.


Smooth-it-away. "I wish we were secure of as good a reception."


   "Never fear- never fear!" answered my friend. "Come- make haste;


the ferry-boat will be off directly; and in three minutes you will


be on the other side of the river. No doubt you will find coaches to


carry you up to the city gates."


   A steam ferry-boat, the last improvement on this important route,


lay at the river-side, puffing, snorting, and emitting all those other


disagreeable utterances, which betoken the departure to be


immediate. I hurried on board with the rest of the passengers, most of


whom were in great perturbation; some bawling out for their baggage;


some tearing their hair and exclaiming that the boat would explode


or sink; some already pale with the heaving of the stream; some gazing


affrighted at the ugly aspect of the steersman; and some still dizzy


with the slumberous influences of the Enchanted Ground. Looking back


to the shore, I was amazed to discern Mr. Smooth-it-away waving his


hand in token of farewell!


   "Don't you go over to the Celestial City?" exclaimed I.


   "Oh, no!" answered he with a queer smile, and that same


disagreeable contortion of visage which I had remarked in the


inhabitants of the Dark Valley. "Oh, no! I have come thus far only for


the sake of your pleasant company. Good bye! We shall meet again."


   And then did my excellent friend, Mr. Smooth-it-away, laugh


outright; in the midst of which cachinnation, a smoke-wreath issued


from his mouth and nostrils, while a twinkle of lurid flame darted out


of either eye, proving indubitably that his heart was all of a red


blaze. The impudent fiend! To deny the existence of Tophet, when he


felt its fiery tortures raging within his breast! I rushed to the side


of the boat, intending to fling myself on shore. But the wheels, as


they began their revolutions, threw a dash of spray over me, so


cold- so deadly cold, with the chill that will never leave those


waters, until Death be drowned in his own river- that, with a shiver


and a heart-quake, I awoke. Thank heaven, it was a Dream!








                        THE END


.




                                      1834


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                          MR. HIGGINBOTHAM'S CASTROPHE


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   A YOUNG FELLOW, a tobacco pedlar by trade, was on his way from


Morristown, where he had dealt largely with the Deacon of the Shaker


settlement, to the village of Parker's Falls, on Salmon River. He


had a neat little cart, painted green, with a box of cigars depicted


on each side panel, and an Indian chief, holding a pipe and a golden


tobacco stalk, on the rear. The pedlar drove a smart little mare,


and was a young man of excellent character, keen at a bargain, but


none the worse liked by the Yankees: who, as I have heard them say,


would rather be shaved with a sharp razor than a dull one.


Especially was he beloved by the pretty girls along the Connecticut,


whose favor he used to court by presents of the best smoking tobacco


in his stock; knowing well that the country lasses of New England


are generally great performers on pipes. Moreover, as will be seen


in the course of my story, the pedlar was inquisitive, and something


of a tattler, always itching to hear the news and anxious to tell it


again.


   After an early breakfast at Morristown, the tobacco pedlar, whose


name was Dominicus Pike, had travelled seven miles through a


solitary piece of woods, without speaking a word to anybody but


himself and his little gray mare. It being nearly seven o'clock, he


was as eager to hold a morning gossip as a city shopkeeper to read the


morning paper. An opportunity seemed at hand when, after lighting a


cigar with a sun-glass, he looked up, and perceived a man coming


over the brow of the hill, at the foot of which the pedlar had stopped


his green cart. Dominicus watched him as he descended and noticed that


he carried a bundle over his shoulder on the end of a stick, and


travelled with a weary, yet determined pace. He did not look as if


he had started in the freshness of the morning, but had footed it


all night, and meant to do the same all day.


   "Good morning, mister," said Dominicus, when within speaking


distance. "You go a pretty good jog. What's the latest news at


Parker's Falls?"


   The man pulled the broad brim of a gray hat over his eyes, and


answered, rather suddenly, that he did not come from Parker's Falls,


which, as being the limit of his own day's journey, the pedlar had


naturally mentioned in his inquiry.


   "Well then, rejoined Dominicus Pike, "let's have the latest news


where you did come from. I'm not particular about Parker's Falls.


Any place will answer."


   Being thus importuned, the traveller- who was as ill looking a


fellow as one would desire to meet in a solitary piece of woods-


appeared to hesitate a little, as if he was either searching his


memory for news, or weighing the expediency of telling it. At last,


mounting on the step of the cart, he whispered in the ear of


Dominicus, though he might have shouted aloud and no other mortal


would have heard him.


   "I do remember one little trifle of news," said he. "Old Mr.


Higginbotham, of Kimballton, was murdered in his orchard, at eight


o'clock last night, by an Irishman and a nigger. They strung him up to


the branch of a St. Michael's pear-tree, where nobody would find him


till the morning."


   As soon as this horrible intelligence was communicated, the


stranger betook himself to his journey again, with more speed than


ever, not even turning his head when Dominicus invited him to smoke


a Spanish cigar and relate all the particulars. The pedlar whistled to


his mare and went up the hill, pondering on the doleful fate of Mr.


Higginbotham whom he had known in the way of trade, having sold him


many a bunch of long nines, and a great deal of pigtail, lady's twist,


and fig tobacco. He was rather astonished at the rapidity with which


the news had spread. Kimballton was nearly sixty miles distant in a


straight line; the murder had been perpetrated only at eight o'clock


the preceding night; yet Dominicus had heard of it at seven in the


morning, when, in all probability, poor Mr. Higginbotham's own


family had but just discovered his corpse, hanging on the St.


Michael's pear-tree. The stranger on foot must have worn


seven-league boots to travel at such a rate.


   "Ill news flies fast, they say," thought Dominicus Pike; "but


this beats railroads. The fellow ought to be hired to go express


with the President's Message."


   The difficulty was solved by supposing that the narrator had made a


mistake of one day in the date of the occurrence; so that our friend


did not hesitate to introduce the story at every tavern and country


store along the road, expending a whole bunch of Spanish wrappers


among at least twenty horrified audiences. He found himself invariably


the first bearer of the intelligence, and was so pestered with


questions that he could not avoid filling up the outline, till it


became quite a respectable narrative. He met with one piece of


corroborative evidence. Mr. Higginbotham was a trader; and a former


clerk of his, to whom Dominicus related the facts, testified that


the old gentleman was accustomed to return home through the orchard


about nightfall, with the money and valuable papers of the store in


his pocket. The clerk manifested but little grief at Mr.


Higginbotham's catastrophe, hinting, what the pedlar had discovered in


his own dealings with him, that he was a crusty old fellow, as close


as a vice. His property would descend to a pretty niece who was now


keeping school in Kimballton.


   What with telling the news for the public good, and driving


bargains for his own, Dominicus was so much delayed on the road that


he chose to put up at a tavern, about five miles short of Parker's


Falls. After supper, lighting one of his prime cigars, he seated


himself in the bar-room, and went through the story of the murder,


which had grown so fast that it took him half an hour to tell. There


were as many as twenty people in the room, nineteen of whom received


it all for gospel. But the twentieth was an elderly farmer, who had


arrived on horseback a short time before, and was now seated in a


corner smoking his pipe. When the story was concluded, he rose up very


deliberately, brought his chair right in front of Dominicus, and


stared him full in the face, puffing out the vilest tobacco smoke


the pedlar had ever smelt.


   "Will you make affidavit," demanded he, in the tone of a country


justice taking an examination, "that old Squire Higginbotham of


Kimballton was murdered in his orchard the night before last, and


found hanging on his great pear-tree yesterday morning?"


   "I tell the story as I heard it, mister," answered Dominicus,


dropping his half-burnt cigar; "I don't say that I saw the thing done.


So I can't take my oath that he was murdered exactly in that way."


   "But I can take mine," said the farmer, that if Squire Higginbotham


was murdered night before last, I drank a glass of bitters with his


ghost this morning. Being a neighbor of mine, he called me into his


store, as I was riding by, and treated me, and then asked me to do a


little business for him on the road. He didn't seem to know any more


about his own murder than I did."


   "Why, then, it can't be a fact!" exclaimed Dominicus Pike.


   "I guess he'd have mentioned, if it was," said the old farmer;


and he removed his chair back to the corner, leaving Dominicus quite


down in the mouth.


   Here was a sad resurrection of old Mr. Higginbotham! The pedlar had


no heart to mingle in the conversation any more, but comforted himself


with a glass of gin and water, and went to bed where, all night


long, he dreamed of hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree. To avoid


the old farmer (whom he so detested that his suspension would have


pleased him better than Mr. Higginbotham's), Dominicus rose in the


gray of the morning, put the little mare into the green cart, and


trotted swiftly away towards Parker's Falls. The fresh breeze, the


dewy road, and the pleasant summer dawn, revived his spirits, and


might have encouraged him to repeat the old story had there been


anybody awake to hear it. But he met neither ox team, light wagon


chaise, horseman, nor foot traveller, till, just as he crossed


Salmon River, a man came trudging down to the bridge with a bundle


over his shoulder, on the end of a stick.


   "Good morning, mister," said the pedlar, reining in his mare. "If


you come from Kimballton or that neighborhood, may be you can tell


me the real fact about this affair of old Mr. Higginbotham. Was the


old fellow actually murdered two or three nights ago, by an Irishman


and a nigger?"


   Dominicus had spoken in too great a hurry to observe, at first,


that the stranger himself had a deep tinge of Negro blood. On


hearing this sudden question, the Ethiopian appeared to change his


skin, its yellow hue becoming a ghastly white, while, shaking and


stammering, he thus replied: "No! no! There was no colored man! It was


an Irishman that hanged him last night, at eight o'clock. I came


away at seven! His folks can't have looked for him in the orchard


yet."


   Scarcely had the yellow man spoken, when he interrupted himself,


and though he seemed weary enough before, continued his journey at a


pace which would have kept the pedlar's mare on a smart trot.


Dominicus started after him in great perplexity. If the murder had not


been committed till Tuesday night, who was the prophet that had


foretold it, in all its circumstances, on Tuesday morning? If Mr.


Higginbotham's corpse were not yet discovered by his own family, how


came the mulatto, at above thirty miles' distance, to know that he was


hanging in the orchard, especially as he had left Kimballton before


the unfortunate man was hanged at all? These ambiguous


circumstances, with the stranger's surprise and terror, made Dominicus


think of raising a hue and cry after him, as an accomplice in the


murder; since a murder, it seemed, had really been perpetrated.


   "But let the poor devil go," thought the pedlar. "I don't want


his black blood on my head; and hanging the nigger wouldn't unhang Mr.


Higginbotham. Unhang the old gentleman! It's a sin, I know; but I


should hate to have him come to life a second time, and give me the


lie!"


   With these meditations, Dominicus Pike drove into the street of


Parker's Falls, which, as everybody knows, is as thriving a village as


three cotton factories and a slitting mill can make it. The


machinery was not in motion, and but a few of the shop doors unbarred,


when he alighted in the stable yard of the tavern, and made it his


first business to order the mare four quarts of oats. His second duty,


of course, was to impart Mr. Higginbotham's catastrophe to the


hostler. He deemed it advisable, however, not to be too positive as to


the date of the direful fact, and also to be uncertain whether it were


perpetrated by an Irishman and a mulatto, or by the son of Erin alone.


Neither did he profess to relate it on his own authority, or that of


any one person; but mentioned it as a report generally diffused.


   The story ran through the town like fire among girdled trees, and


became so much the universal talk that nobody could tell whence it had


originated. Mr. Higginbotham was as well known at Parker's Falls as


any citizen of the place, being part owner of the slitting mill, and a


considerable stockholder in the cotton factories. The inhabitants felt


their own prosperity interested in his fate. Such was the


excitement, that the Parker's Falls Gazette anticipated its regular


day of publication, and came out with half a form of blank paper and a


column of double pica emphasized with capitals, and headed HORRID


MURDER OF MR. HIGGINBOTHAM! Among other dreadful details, the


printed account described the mark of the cord round the dead man's


neck, and stated the number of thousand dollars of which he had been


robbed; there was much pathos also about the affliction of his


niece, who had gone from one fainting fit to another, ever since her


uncle was found hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree with his


pockets inside out. The village poet likewise commemorated the young


lady's grief in seventeen stanzas of a ballad. The selectmen held a


meeting, and, in consideration of Mr. Higginbotham's claims on the


town, determined to issue handbills, offering a reward of five hundred


dollars for the apprehension of his murderers, and the recovery of the


stolen property.


   Meanwhile the whole population of Parker's Falls, consisting of


shopkeepers, mistresses of boarding-houses, factory girls, millmen,


and school boys, rushed into the street and kept up such a terrible


loquacity as more than compensated for the silence of the cotton


machines, which refrained from their usual din out of respect to the


deceased. Had Mr. Higginbotham cared about posthumous renown, his


untimely ghost would have exulted in this tumult. Our friend


Dominicus, in his vanity of heart, forgot his intended precautions,


and mounting on the town pump, announced himself as the bearer of


the authentic intelligence which had caused so wonderful a


sensation. He immediately became the great man of the moment, and


had just begun a new edition of the narrative, with a voice like a


field preacher, when the mail stage drove into the village street.


It had travelled all night, and must have shifted horses at


Kimballton, at three in the morning.


   "Now we shall hear all the particulars," shouted the crowd.


   The coach rumbled up to the piazza of the tavern, followed by a


thousand people; for if any man had been minding his own business till


then, he now left it at sixes and sevens, to hear the news. The


pedlar, foremost in the race, discovered two passengers, both of


whom had been startled from a comfortable nap to find themselves in


the centre of a mob. Every man assailing them with separate questions,


all propounded at once, the couple were struck speechless, though


one was a lawyer and the other a young lady.


   "Mr. Higginbotham! Mr. Higginbotham! Tell us the particulars


about old Mr. Higginbotham!" bawled the mob. "What is the coroner's


verdict? Are the murderers apprehended? Is Mr. Higginbotham's niece


come out of her fainting fits? Mr. Higginbotham! Mr. Higginbotham!!"


   The coachman said not a word, except to swear awfully at the


hostler for not bringing him a fresh team of horses. The lawyer inside


had generally his wits about him even when asleep; the first thing


he did, after learning the cause of the excitement, was to produce a


large red pocket-book. Meantime Dominicus Pike, being an extremely


polite young man, and also suspecting that a female tongue would


tell the story as glibly as a lawyer's, had handed the lady out of the


coach. She was a fine, smart girl, now wide awake and bright as a


button, and had such a sweet pretty mouth, that Dominicus would almost


as lief have heard a love tale from it as a tale of murder.


   "Gentlemen and ladies, said the lawyer to the shopkeepers, the


millmen, and the factory girls, "I can assure you that some


unaccountable mistake, or, more probably, a wilful falsehood,


maliciously contrived to injure Mr. Higginbotham's credit, has excited


this singular uproar. We passed through Kimballton at three o'clock


this morning, and most certainly should have been informed of the


murder had any been perpetrated. But I have proof nearly as strong


as Mr. Higginbotham's own oral testimony, in the negative. Here is a


note relating to a suit of his in the Connecticut courts, which was


delivered me from that gentleman himself. I find it dated at ten


o'clock last evening."


   So saying, the lawyer exhibited the date and signature of the note,


which irrefragably proved, either that this perverse Mr.


Higginbotham was alive when he wrote it, or- as some deemed the more


probable case, of two doubtful ones- that he was so absorbed in


worldly business as to continue to transact it even after his death.


But unexpected evidence was forthcoming. The young lady, after


listening to the pedlar's explanation, merely seized a moment to


smooth her gown and put her curls in order, and then appeared at the


tavern door, making a modest signal to be heard.


   "Good people," said she, "I am Mr. Higginbotham's niece."


   A wondering murmur passed through the crowd on beholding her so


rosy and bright; that same unhappy niece, whom they had supposed, on


the authority of the Parker's Falls Gazette, to be lying at death's


door in a fainting fit. But some shrewd fellows had doubted all along,


whether a young lady would be quite so desperate at the hanging of a


rich old uncle.


   "You see," continued Miss Higginbotham, with a smile, "that this


strange story is quite unfounded as to myself; and I believe I may


affirm it to be equally so in regard to my dear uncle Higginbotham. He


has the kindness to give me a home in his house, though I contribute


to my own support by teaching a school. I left Kimballton this morning


to spend the vacation of commencement week with a friend, about five


miles from Parker's Falls. My generous uncle, when he heard me on


the stairs, called me to his bedside, and gave me two dollars and


fifty cents to pay my stage fare, and another dollar for my extra


expenses. He then laid his pocket-book under his pillow, shook hands


with me, and advised me to take some biscuit in my bag, instead of


breakfasting on the road. I feel confident, therefore, that I left


my beloved relative alive, and trust that I shall find him so on my


return."


   The young lady courtesied at the close of her speech, which was


so sensible and well worded, and delivered with such grace and


propriety, that everybody thought her fit to be preceptress of the


best academy in the State. But a stranger would have supposed that Mr.


Higginbotham was an object of abhorrence at Parker's Falls, and that a


thanksgiving had been proclaimed for his murder; so excessive was


the wrath of the inhabitants on learning their mistake. The millmen


resolved to bestow public honors on Dominicus Pike, only hesitating


whether to tar and feather him, ride him on a rail, or refresh him


with an ablution at the town pump, on the top of which he had declared


himself the bearer of the news. The selectmen, by advice of the


lawyer, spoke of prosecuting him for a misdemeanor, in circulating


unfounded reports, to the great disturbance of the peace of the


Commonwealth. Nothing saved Dominicus, either from mob law or a


court of justice, but an eloquent appeal made by the young lady in his


behalf. Addressing a few words of heartfelt gratitude to his


benefactress, he mounted the green cart and rode out of town, under


a discharge of artillery from the schoolboys, who found plenty of


ammunition in the neighboring clay-pits and mud-holes. As he turned


his head to exchange a farewell glance with Mr. Higginbotham's


niece, a ball, of the consistence of hasty pudding, hit him slap in


the mouth, giving him a most grim aspect. His whole person was so


bespattered with the like filthy missiles, that he had almost a mind


to ride back, and supplicate for the threatened ablution at the town


pump; for, though not meant in kindness, it would now have been a deed


of charity.


   However, the sun shone bright on poor Dominicus, and the mud, an


emblem of all stains of undeserved opprobrium, was easily brushed


off when dry. Being a funny rogue, his heart soon cheered up; nor


could he refrain from a hearty laugh at the uproar which his story had


excited. The handbills of the selectmen would cause the commitment


of all the vagabonds in the State; the paragraph in the Parker's Falls


Gazette would be reprinted from Maine to Florida, and perhaps form


an item in the London newspapers; and many a miser would tremble for


his money bags and life, on learning the catastrophe of Mr.


Higginbotham. The pedlar meditated with much fervor on the charms of


the young schoolmistress, and swore that Daniel Webster never spoke


nor looked so like an angel as Miss Higginbotham, while defending


him from the wrathful populace at Parker's Falls.


   Dominicus was now on the Kimballton turnpike, having all along


determined to visit that place, though business had drawn him out of


the most direct road from Morristown. As he approached the scene of


the supposed murder, he continued to revolve the circumstances in


his mind, and was astonished at the aspect which the whole case


assumed. Had nothing occurred to corroborate the story of the first


traveller, it might now have been considered as a hoax; but the yellow


man was evidently acquainted either with the report or the fact; and


there was a mystery in his dismayed and guilty look on being


abruptly questioned. When, to this singular combination of


incidents, it was added that the rumor tallied exactly with Mr.


Higginbotham's character and habits of life; and that he had an


orchard, and a St. Michael's pear-tree, near which he always passed at


nightfall: the circumstantial evidence appeared so strong that


Dominicus doubted whether the autograph produced by the lawyer, or


even the niece's direct testimony, ought to be equivalent. Making


cautious inquiries along the road, the pedlar further learned that Mr.


Higginbotham had in his service an Irishman of doubtful character,


whom he had hired without a recommendation, on the score of economy.


   "May I be hanged myself," exclaimed Dominicus Pike aloud, on


reaching the top of a lonely hill, "if I'll believe old Higginbotham


is unhanged till I see him with my own eyes, and hear it from his


own mouth! And as he's a real shaver, I'll have the minister or some


other responsible man for an indorser."


   It was growing dusk when he reached the toll-house on Kimballton


turnpike, about a quarter of a mile from the village of this name. His


little mare was fast bringing him up with a man on horseback, who


trotted through the gate a few rods in advance of him, nodded to the


toll-gatherer, and kept on towards the village. Dominicus was


acquainted with the tollman, and, while making change, the usual


remarks on the weather passed between them.


   "I suppose," said the pedlar, throwing back his whiplash, to


bring it down like a feather on the mare's flank, "you have not seen


anything of old Mr. Higginbotham within a day or two?"


   "Yes, answered the toll-gatherer. "He passed the gate just before


you drove up, and yonder he rides now, if you can see him through


the dusk. He's been to Woodfield this afternoon, attending a sheriff's


sale there. The old man generally shakes hands and has a little chat


with me; but tonight, he nodded- as if to say, 'Charge my toll,' and


jogged on; for wherever he goes, he must always be at home by eight


o'clock."


   "So they tell me," said Dominicus.


   "I never saw a man look so yellow and thin as the squire does,"


continued the toll-gatherer. "Says I to myself, tonight, he's more


like a ghost or an old mummy than good flesh and blood."


   The pedlar strained his eyes through the twilight, and could just


discern the horseman now far ahead on the village road. He seemed to


recognize the rear of Mr. Higginbotham; but through the evening


shadows, and amid the dust from the horse's feet, the figure


appeared dim and unsubstantial; as if the shape of the mysterious


old man were faintly moulded of darkness and gray light. Dominicus


shivered.


   "Mr. Higginbotham has come back from the other world, by way of the


Kimballton turnpike," thought he.


   He shook the reins and rode forward, keeping about the same


distance in the rear of the gray old shadow, till the latter was


concealed by a bend of the road. On reaching this point, the pedlar no


longer saw the man on horseback, but found himself at the head of


the village street, not far from a number of stores and two taverns,


clustered round the meeting-house steeple. On his left were a stone


wall and a gate, the boundary of a wood-lot, beyond which lay an


orchard, farther still, a mowing field, and last of all, a house.


These were the premises of Mr. Higginbotham, whose dwelling stood


beside the old highway, but had been left in the background by the


Kimballton turnpike. Dominicus knew the place; and the little mare


stopped short by instinct; for he was not conscious of tightening


the reins.


   "For the soul of me, I cannot get by this gate!" said he,


trembling. "I never shall be my own man again, till I see whether


Mr. Higginbotham is hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree!"


   He leaped from the cart, gave the rein a turn round the gate


post, and ran along the green path of the wood-lot as if Old Nick were


chasing behind. Just then the village clock tolled eight, and as


each deep stroke fell, Dominicus gave a fresh bound and flew faster


than before, till, dim in the solitary centre of the orchard, he saw


the fated pear-tree. One great branch stretched from the old contorted


trunk across the path, and threw the darkest shadow on that one


spot. But something seemed to struggle beneath the branch!


   The pedlar had never pretended to more courage than befits a man of


peaceable occupation, nor could he account for his valor on this awful


emergency. Certain it is, however, that he rushed forward,


prostrated a sturdy Irishman with the butt end of his whip, and found-


not indeed hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree, but trembling


beneath it, with a halter round his neck- the old, identical Mr.


Higginbotham!


   "Mr. Higginbotham," said Dominicus tremulously, "you're an honest


man, and I'll take your word for it. Have you been hanged or not?"


   If the riddle be not already guessed, a few words will explain


the simple machinery by which this "coming event" was made to "cast


its shadow before." Three men had plotted the robbery and murder of


Mr. Higginbotham; two of them, successively, lost courage and fled,


each delaying the crime one night by their disappearance; the third


was in the act of perpetration, when a champion, blindly obeying the


call of fate, like the heroes of old romance, appeared in the person


of Dominicus Pike.


   It only remains to say, that Mr. Higginbotham took the pedlar


into high favor, sanctioned his addresses to the pretty


schoolmistress, and settled his whole property on their children,


allowing themselves the interest. In due time, the old gentleman


capped the climax of his favors, by dying a Christian death, in bed,


since which melancholy event Dominicus Pike has removed from


Kimballton, and established a large tobacco manufactory in my native


village.





                        THE END


.




                                      1836


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                           THE MAYPOLE OF MERRY MOUNT


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   BRIGHT WERE THE DAYS at Merry Mount, when the Maypole was the


banner staff of that gay colony! They who reared it, should their


banner be triumphant, were to pour sunshine over New England's


rugged hills, and scatter flower seeds throughout the soil. Jollity


and gloom were contending for an empire. Midsummer eve had come,


bringing deep verdure to the forest, and roses in her lap, of a more


vivid hue than the tender buds of Spring. But May, or her mirthful


spirit, dwelt all the year round at Merry Mount, sporting with the


Summer months, and revelling with Autumn, and basking in the glow of


Winter's fireside. Through a world of toil and care she flitted with a


dreamlike smile, and came hither to find a home among the lightsome


hearts of Merry Mount.


   Never had the Maypole been so gayly decked as at sunset on


midsummer eve. This venerated emblem was a pine-tree, which had


preserved the slender grace of youth, while it equalled the loftiest


height of the old wood monarchs. From its top streamed a silken


banner, colored like the rainbow. Down nearly to the ground the pole


was dressed with birchen boughs, and others of the liveliest green,


and some with silvery leaves, fastened by ribbons that fluttered in


fantastic knots of twenty different colors, but no sad ones. Garden


flowers, and blossoms of the wilderness, laughed gladly forth amid the


verdure, so fresh and dewy that they must have grown by magic on


that happy pine-tree. Where this green and flowery splendor


terminated, the shaft of the Maypole was stained with the seven


brilliant hues of the banner at its top. On the lowest green bough


hung an abundant wreath of roses, some that had been gathered in the


sunniest spots of the forest, and others, of still richer blush, which


the colonists had reared from English seed. O, people of the Golden


Age, the chief of your husbandry was to raise flowers!


   But what was the wild throng that stood hand in hand about the


Maypole? It could not be that the fauns and nymphs, when driven from


their classic groves and homes of ancient fable, had sought refuge, as


all the persecuted did, in the fresh woods of the West. These were


Gothic monsters, though perhaps of Grecian ancestry. On the


shoulders of a comely youth uprose the head and branching antlers of a


stag; a second, human in all other points, had the grim visage of a


wolf; a third, still with the trunk and limbs of a mortal man,


showed the beard and horns of a venerable he-goat. There was the


likeness of a bear erect, brute in all but his hind legs, which were


adorned with pink silk stockings. And here again, almost as


wondrous, stood a real bear of the dark forest, lending each of his


fore paws to the grasp of a human hand, and as ready for the dance


as any in that circle. His inferior nature rose half way, to meet


his companions as they stooped. Other faces wore the similitude of man


or woman, but distorted or extravagant, with red noses pendulous


before their mouths, which seemed of awful depth, and stretched from


ear to ear in an eternal fit of laughter. Here might be seen the


Salvage Man, well known in heraldry, hairy as a baboon, and girdled


with green leaves. By his side, a noble figure, but still a


counterfeit, appeared an Indian hunter, with feathery crest and wampum


belt. Many of this strange company wore foolscaps, and had little


bells appended to their garments, tinkling with a silvery sound,


responsive to the inaudible music of their gleesome spirits. Some


youths and maidens were of soberer garb, yet well maintained their


places in the irregular throng by the expression of wild revelry


upon their features. Such were the colonists of Merry Mount, as they


stood in the broad smile of sunset round their venerated Maypole.


   Had a wanderer, bewildered in the melancholy forest, heard their


mirth, and stolen a half-affrighted glance, he might have fancied them


the crew of Comus, some already transformed to brutes, some midway


between man and beast, and the others rioting in the flow of tipsy


jollity that foreran the change. But a band of Puritans, who watched


the scene, invisible themselves, compared the masques to those


devils and ruined souls with whom their superstition peopled the black


wilderness.


   Within the ring of monsters appeared the two airiest forms that had


ever trodden on any more solid footing than a purple and golden cloud.


One was a youth in glistening apparel, with a scarf of the rainbow


pattern crosswise on his breast. His right hand held a gilded staff,


the ensign of high dignity among the revellers, and his left grasped


the slender fingers of a fair maiden, not less gayly decorated than


himself. Bright roses glowed in contrast with the dark and glossy


curls of each, and were scattered round their feet, or had sprung up


spontaneously there. Behind this lightsome couple, so close to the


Maypole that its boughs shaded his jovial face, stood the figure of an


English priest, canonically dressed, yet decked with flowers, in


heathen fashion, and wearing a chaplet of the native vine leaves. By


the riot of his rolling eye, and the pagan decorations of his holy


garb, he seemed the wildest monster there, and the very Comus of the


crew.


   "Votaries of the Maypole," cried the flower-decked priest,


"merrily, all day long, have the woods echoed to your mirth. But be


this your merriest hour, my hearts! Lo, here stand the Lord and Lady


of the May, whom I, a clerk of Oxford, and high priest of Merry Mount,


am presently to join in holy matrimony. Up with your nimble spirits,


ye morris-dancers, green men, and glee maidens, bears and wolves,


and horned gentlemen! Come; a chorus now, rich with the old mirth of


Merry England, and the wilder glee of this fresh forest; and then a


dance, to show the youthful pair what life is made of, and how


airily they should go through it! All ye that love the Maypole, lend


your voices to the nuptial song of the Lord and Lady of the May!"


   This wedlock was more serious than most affairs of Merry Mount,


where jest and delusion, trick and fantasy, kept up a continual


carnival. The Lord and Lady of the May, though their titles must be


laid down at sunset, were really and truly to be partners for the


dance of life, beginning the measure that same bright eve. The


wreath of roses, that hung from the lowest green bough of the Maypole,


had been twined for them, and would be thrown over both their heads,


in symbol of their flowery union. When the priest had spoken,


therefore, a riotous uproar burst from the rout of monstrous figures.


   "Begin you the stave, reverend Sir," cried they all; "and never did


the woods ring to such a merry peal as we of the Maypole shall send


up!"


   Immediately a prelude of pipe, cithern, and viol, touched with


practised minstrelsy, began to play from a neighboring thicket, in


such a mirthful cadence that the boughs of the Maypole quivered to the


sound. But the May Lord, he of the gilded staff, chancing to look into


his Lady's eyes, was wonder struck at the almost pensive glance that


met his own.


   "Edith, sweet Lady of the May," whispered he reproachfully, "is yon


wreath of roses a garland to hang above our graves, that you look so


sad? O, Edith, this is our golden time! Tarnish it not by any


pensive shadow of the mind; for it may be that nothing of futurity


will be brighter than the mere remembrance of what is now passing."


   "That was the very thought that saddened me! How came it in your


mind too?" said Edith, in a still lower tone than he, for it was


high treason to be sad at Merry Mount. "Therefore do I sigh amid


this festive music. And besides, dear Edgar, I struggle as with a


dream, and fancy that these shapes of our jovial friends are


visionary, and their mirth unreal, and that we are no true Lord and


Lady of the May. What is the mystery in my heart?"


   Just then, as if a spell had loosened them, down came a little


shower of withering rose leaves from the Maypole. Alas, for the


young lovers! No sooner had their hearts glowed with real passion than


they were sensible of something vague and unsubstantial in their


former pleasures, and felt a dreary presentiment of inevitable change.


From the moment that they truly loved, they had subjected themselves


to earth's doom of care and sorrow, and troubled joy, and had no


more a home at Merry Mount. That was Edith's mystery. Now leave we the


priest to marry them, and the masquers to sport round the Maypole,


till the last sunbeam be withdrawn from its summit, and the shadows of


the forest mingle gloomily in the dance. Meanwhile, we may discover


who these gay people were.


   Two hundred years ago, and more, the old world and its


inhabitants became mutually weary of each other. Men voyaged by


thousands to the West: some to barter glass beads, and such like


jewels, for the furs of the Indian hunter; some to conquer virgin


empires; and one stern band to pray. But none of these motives had


much weight with the colonists of Merry Mount. Their leaders were


men who had sported so long with life, that when Thought and Wisdom


came, even these unwelcome guests were led astray by the crowd of


vanities which they should have put to flight. Erring Thought and


perverted Wisdom were made to put on masques, and play the fool. The


men of whom we speak, after losing the heart's fresh gayety,


imagined a wild philosophy of pleasure, and came hither to act out


their latest day-dream. They gathered followers from all that giddy


tribe whose whole life is like the festal days of soberer men. In


their train were minstrels, not unknown in London streets: wandering


players, whose theatres had been the halls of noblemen; mummers,


rope-dancers, and mountebanks, who would long be missed at wakes,


church ales, and fairs; in a word, mirth makers of every sort, such as


abounded in that age, but now began to be discountenanced by the rapid


growth of Puritanism. Light had their footsteps been on land, and as


lightly they came across the sea. Many had been maddened by their


previous troubles into a gay despair; others were as madly gay in


the flush of youth, like the May Lord and his Lady; but whatever might


be the quality of their mirth, old and young were gay at Merry


Mount. The young deemed themselves happy. The elder spirits, if they


knew that mirth was but the counterfeit of happiness, yet followed the


false shadow wilfully, because at least her garments glittered


brightest. Sworn triflers of a lifetime, they would not venture


among the sober truths of life not even to be truly blest.


   All the hereditary pastimes of Old England were transplanted


hither. The King of Christmas was duly crowned, and the Lord of


Misrule bore potent sway. On the Eve of St. John, they felled whole


acres of the forest to make bonfires, and danced by the blaze all


night, crowned with garlands, and throwing flowers into the flame.


At harvest time, though their crop was of the smallest, they made an


image with the sheaves of Indian corn, and wreathed it with autumnal


garlands, and bore it home triumphantly. But what chiefly


characterized the colonists of Merry Mount was their veneration for


the Maypole. It has made their true history a poet's tale. Spring


decked the hallowed emblem with young blossoms and fresh green boughs;


Summer brought roses of the deepest blush, and the perfected foliage


of the forest; Autumn enriched it with that red and yellow


gorgeousness which converts each wildwood leaf into a painted


flower; and Winter silvered it with sleet, and hung it round with


icicles, till it flashed in the cold sunshine, itself a frozen


sunbeam. Thus each alternate season did homage to the Maypole, and


paid it a tribute of its own richest splendor. Its votaries danced


round it, once, at least, in every month; sometimes they called it


their religion, or their altar; but always, it was the banner staff of


Merry Mount.


   Unfortunately, there were men in the new world of a sterner faith


than these Maypole worshippers. Not far from Merry Mount was a


settlement of Puritans, most dismal wretches, who said their prayers


before daylight, and then wrought in the forest or the corn-field till


evening made it prayer time again. Their weapons were always at hand


to shoot down the straggling savage. When they met in conclave, it was


never to keep up the old English mirth, but to hear sermons three


hours long, or to proclaim bounties on the heads of wolves and the


scalps of Indians. Their festivals were fast days, and their chief


pastime the singing of psalms. Wo to the youth or maiden who did but


dream of a dance! The selectman nodded to the constable; and there sat


the light-heeled reprobate in the stocks; or if he danced, it was


round the whipping-post, which might be termed the Puritan Maypole.


   A party of these grim Puritans, toiling through the difficult


woods, each with a horseload of iron armor to burden his footsteps,


would sometimes draw near the sunny precincts of Merry Mount. There


were the silken colonists, sporting round their Maypole; perhaps


teaching a bear to dance, or striving to communicate their mirth to


the grave Indian; or masquerading in the skins of deer and wolves,


which they had hunted for that especial purpose. Often, the whole


colony were playing at blindman's buff, magistrates and all, with


their eyes bandaged, except a single scapegoat, whom the blinded


sinners pursued by the tinkling of the bells at his garments. Once, it


is said, they were seen following a flower-decked corpse, with


merriment and festive music, to his grave. But did the dead man laugh?


In their quietest times, they sang ballads and told tales, for the


edification of their pious visitors; or perplexed them with juggling


tricks; or grinned at them through horse collars; and when sport


itself grew wearisome, they made game of their own stupidity, and


began a yawning match. At the very least of these enormities, the


men of iron shook their heads and frowned so darkly that the revellers


looked up, imagining that a momentary cloud had overcast the sunshine,


which was to be perpetual there. On the other hand, the Puritans


affirmed that, when a psalm was pealing from their place of worship,


the echo which the forest sent them back seemed often like the


chorus of a jolly catch, closing with a roar of laughter. Who but


the fiend, and his bond slaves, the crew of Merry Mount, had thus


disturbed them? In due time, a feud arose, stern and bitter on one


side, and as serious on the other as anything could be among such


light spirits as had sworn allegiance to the Maypole. The future


complexion of New England was involved in this important quarrel.


Should the grizzly saints establish their jurisdiction over the gay


sinners, then would their spirits darken all the clime, and make it


a land of clouded visages, of hard toil, of sermon and psalm


forever. But should the banner staff of Merry Mount be fortunate,


sunshine would break upon the hills, and flowers would beautify the


forest, and late posterity do homage to the Maypole.


   After these authentic passages from history, we return to the


nuptials of the Lord and Lady of the May. Alas! we have delayed too


long, and must darken our tale too suddenly. As we glance again at the


Maypole, a solitary sunbeam is fading from the summit, and leaves only


a faint, golden tinge blended with the hues of the rainbow banner.


Even that dim light is now withdrawn, relinquishing the whole domain


of Merry Mount to the evening gloom, which has rushed so


instantaneously from the black surrounding woods. But some of these


black shadows have rushed forth in human shape.


   Yes, with the setting sun, the last day of mirth had passed from


Merry Mount. The ring of gay masquers was disordered and broken; the


stag lowered his antlers in dismay; the wolf grew weaker than a


lamb; the bells of the morris-dancers tinkled with tremulous affright.


The Puritans had played a characteristic part in the Maypole


mummeries. Their darksome figures were intermixed with the wild shapes


of their foes, and made the scene a picture of the moment, when waking


thoughts start up amid the scattered fantasies of a dream. The


leader of the hostile party stood in the centre of the circle, while


the rout of monsters cowered around him, like evil spirits in the


presence of a dread magician. No fantastic foolery could look him in


the face. So stern was the energy of his aspect, that the whole man,


visage, frame, and soul, seemed wrought of iron, gifted with life


and thought, yet all of one substance with his headpiece and


breastplate. It was the Puritan of Puritans; it was Endicott himself!


   "Stand off, priest of Baal!" said he, with a grim frown, and laying


no reverent hand upon the surplice. "I know thee, Blackstone! Thou art


the man who couldst not abide the rule even of thine own corrupted


church, and hast come hither to preach iniquity, and to give example


of it in thy life. But now shall it be seen that the Lord hath


sanctified this wilderness for his peculiar people. Wo unto them


that would defile it! And first, for this flower-decked abomination,


the altar of thy worship!"


   And with his keen sword Endicott assaulted the hallowed Maypole.


Nor long did it resist his arm. It groaned with a dismal sound; it


showered leaves and rosebuds upon the remorseless enthusiast; and


finally, with all its green boughs and ribbons and flowers, symbolic


of departed pleasures, down fell the banner staff of Merry Mount. As


it sank, tradition says, the evening sky grew darker, and the woods


threw forth a more sombre shadow.


   "There," cried Endicott, looking triumphantly on his work, "there


lies the only Maypole in New England! The thought is strong within


me that, by its fall, is shadowed forth the fate of light and idle


mirth makers, amongst us and our posterity. Amen, saith John


Endicott."





   *Did Governor Endicott speak less positively, we should suspect a


mistake here. The Rev. Mr. Blackstone, though an eccentric, is not


known to have been an immoral man. We rather doubt his identity with


the priest of Merry Mount.





   "Amen!" echoed his followers.


   But the votaries of the Maypole gave one groan for their idol. At


the sound, the Puritan leader glanced at the crew of Comus, each a


figure of broad mirth, yet, at this moment, strangely expressive of


sorrow and dismay.


   "Valiant captain," quoth Peter Palfrey, the Ancient of the band,


"what order shall be taken with the prisoners?"


   "I thought not to repent me of cutting down a Maypole," replied


Endicott, "yet now I could find in my heart to plant it again, and


give each of these bestial pagans one other dance round their idol. It


would have served rarely for a whipping-post!"


   "But there are pine-trees enow," suggested the lieutenant.


   "True, good Ancient," said the leader. "Wherefore, bind the heathen


crew, and bestow on them a small matter of stripes apiece, as


earnest of our future justice. Set some of the rogues in the stocks to


rest themselves, so soon as Providence shall bring us to one of our


own well-ordered settlements, where such accommodations may be


found. Further penalties, such as branding and cropping of ears, shall


be thought of hereafter."


   "How many stripes for the priest?" inquired Ancient Palfrey.


   "None as yet," answered Endicott, bending his iron frown upon the


culprit. "It must be for the Great and General Court to determine,


whether stripes and long imprisonment, and other grievous penalty, may


atone for his transgressions. Let him look to himself! For such as


violate our civil order, it may be permitted us to show mercy. But


wo to the wretch that troubleth our religion!"


   "And this dancing bear," resumed the officer. "Must he share the


stripes of his fellows?"


   "Shoot him through the head!" said the energetic Puritan. "I


suspect witchcraft in the beast."


   "Here be a couple of shining ones," continued Peter Palfrey,


pointing his weapon at the Lord and Lady of the May. "They seem to


be of high station among these misdoers. Methinks their dignity will


not be fitted with less than a double share of stripes."


   Endicott rested on his sword, and closely surveyed the dress and


aspect of the hapless pair. There they stood, pale, downcast, and


apprehensive. Yet there was an air of mutual support, and of pure


affection, seeking aid and giving it, that showed them to be man and


wife, with the sanction of a priest upon their love. The youth, in the


peril of the moment, had dropped his gilded staff, and thrown his


arm about the Lady of the May, who leaned against his breast, too


lightly to burden him, but with weight enough to express that their


destinies were linked together, for good or evil. They looked first at


each other, and then into the grim captain's face. There they stood,


in the first hour of wedlock, while the idle pleasures, of which their


companions were the emblems, had given place to the sternest cares


of life, personified by the dark Puritans. But never had their


youthful beauty seemed so pure and high as when its glow was chastened


by adversity.


   "Youth," said Endicott, "ye stand in an evil case, thou and thy


maiden wife. Make ready presently, for I am minded that ye shall


both have a token to remember your wedding day!"


   "Stern man," cried the May Lord, "how can I move thee? Were the


means at hand, I would resist to the death. Being powerless, I


entreat! Do with me as thou wilt, but let Edith go untouched!"


   "Not so," replied the immitigable zealot. "We are not wont to


show an idle courtesy to that sex, which requireth the stricter


discipline. What sayest thou, maid? Shall thy silken bridegroom suffer


thy share of the penalty, besides his own?"


   "Be it death," said Edith, "and lay it all on me!"


   Truly, as Endicott had said, the poor lovers stood in a woful case.


Their foes were triumphant, their friends captive and abased, their


home desolate, the benighted wilderness around them, and a rigorous


destiny, in the shape of the Puritan leader, their only guide. Yet the


deepening twilight could not altogether conceal that the iron man


was softened; he smiled at the fair spectacle of early love; he almost


sighed for the inevitable blight of early hopes.


   "The troubles of life have come hastily on this young couple,"


observed Endicott. "We will see how they comport themselves under


their present trials ere we burden them with greater. If, among the


spoil, there be any garments of a more decent fashion, let them be put


upon this May Lord and his Lady, instead of their glistening vanities.


Look to it, some of you."


   "And shall not the youth's hair be cut?" asked Peter Palfrey,


looking with abhorrence at the love-lock and long glossy curls of


the young man.


   "Crop it forthwith, and that in the true pumpkin-shell fashion,"


answered the captain. "Then bring them along with us, but more


gently than their fellows. There be qualities in the youth, which


may make him valiant to fight, and sober to toil, and pious to pray;


and in the maiden, that may fit her to become a mother in our


Israel, bringing up babes in better nurture than her own hath been.


Nor think ye, young ones, that they are the happiest, even in our


lifetime of a moment, who mis-spend it in dancing round a Maypole!"


   And Endicott, the severest Puritan of all who laid the rock


foundation of New England, lifted the wreath of roses from the ruin of


the Maypole, and threw it, with his own gauntleted hand, over the


heads of the Lord and Lady of the May. It was a deed of prophecy. As


the moral gloom of the world overpowers all systematic gayety, even so


was their home of wild mirth made desolate amid the sad forest. They


returned to it no more. But as their flowery garland was wreathed of


the brightest roses that had grown there, so, in the tie that united


them, were intertwined all the purest and best of their early joys.


They went heavenward, supporting each other along the difficult path


which it was their lot to tread, and never wasted one regretful


thought on the vanities of Merry Mount.





   NOTE. There is an admirable foundation for a philosophic romance in


the curious history of the early settlement of Mount Wollaston, or


Merry Mount. In the slight sketch here attempted, the facts,


recorded on the grave pages of our New England annalists, have wrought


themselves, almost spontaneously, into a sort of allegory. The


masques, mummeries, and festive customs, described in the text, are in


accordance with the manners of the age. Authority on these points


may be found in Strutt's Book of English Sports and Pastimes.








                        THE END


.




                                      1843


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                         EGOTISM, OR, THE BOSOM SERPENT


                 FROM THE UNPUBLISHED "ALLEGORIES OF THE HEART"


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   HERE HE COMES!" shouted the boys along the street. "Here comes


the man with a snake in his bosom!"


   This outcry, saluting Herkimer's ears, as he was about to enter the


iron gate of the Elliston mansion, made him pause. It was not


without a shudder that he found himself on the point of meeting his


former acquaintance, whom he had known in the glory of youth, and whom


now, after an interval of five years, he was to find the victim either


of a diseased fancy, or a horrible physical misfortune.


   "A snake in his bosom!" repeated the young sculptor to himself. "It


must be he. No second man on earth has such a bosom-friend! And now,


my poor Rosina, Heaven grant me wisdom to discharge my errand


aright! Woman's faith must be strong indeed, since thine has not yet


failed."


   Thus musing, he took his stand at the entrance of the gate, and


waited until the personage, so singularly announced, should make his


appearance. After an instant or two, he beheld the figure of a lean


man, of unwholesome look, with glittering eyes and long black hair,


who seemed to imitate the motion of a snake; for, instead of walking


straight forward with open front, he undulated along the pavement in a


curved line. It may be too fanciful to say, that something, either


in his moral or material aspect, suggested the idea that a miracle had


been wrought, by transforming a serpent into a man; but so


imperfectly, that the snaky nature was yet hidden, and scarcely


hidden, under the mere outward guise of humanity. Herkimer remarked


that his complexion had a greenish tinge over its sickly white,


reminding him of a species of marble out of which he had once


wrought a head of Envy, with her snaky locks.


   The wretched being approached the gate, but, instead of entering,


stopt short, and fixed the glitter of his eye full upon the


compassionate, yet steady countenance of the sculptor.


   "It gnaws me! It gnaws me!" he exclaimed.


   And then there was an audible hiss, but whether it came from the


apparent lunatic's own lips, or was the real hiss of a serpent,


might admit of discussion. At all events, it made Herkimer shudder


to his heart's core.


   "Do you know me, George Herkimer?" asked the snake-possessed.


   Herkimer did know him. But it demanded all the intimate and


practical acquaintance with the human face, acquired by modelling


actual likenesses in clay, to recognize the features of Roderick


Elliston in the visage that now met the sculptor's gaze. Yet it was


he. It added nothing to the wonder, to reflect that the once brilliant


young man had undergone this odious and fearful change, during the


no more than five brief years of Herkimer's abode at Florence. The


possibility of such a transformation being granted, it was as easy


to conceive it effected in a moment as in an age. Inexpressibly


shocked and startled, it was still the keenest pang, when Herkimer


remembered that the fate of his cousin Rosina, the ideal of gentle


womanhood, was indissolubly interwoven with that of a being whom


Providence seemed to have unhumanized.


   "Elliston! Roderick!" cried he, "I had heard of this; but my


conception came far short of the truth. What has befallen you? Why


do I find you thus?"


   "Oh, 'tis a mere nothing! A snake! A snake! The commonest thing


in the world. A snake in the bosom- that's all," answered Roderick


Elliston. "But how is your own breast?" continued he, looking the


sculptor in the eye, with the most acute and penetrating glance that


it had ever been his fortune to encounter. "All pure and wholesome? No


reptile there? By my faith and conscience, and by the devil within me,


here is a wonder! A man without a serpent in his bosom!"


   "Be calm, Elliston," whispered George Herkimer, laying his hand


upon the shoulder of the snake-possessed. "I have crossed the ocean to


meet you. Listen- let us be private- I bring a message from Rosina!


from your wife!"


   "It gnaws me! It gnaws me!" muttered Roderick.


   With this exclamation, the most frequent in his mouth, the


unfortunate man clutched both hands upon his breast, as if an


intolerable sting or torture impelled him to rend it open, and let out


the living mischief, even where it intertwined with his own life. He


then freed himself from Herkimer's grasp, by a subtle motion, and


gliding through the gate, took refuge in his antiquated family


residence. The sculptor did not pursue him. He saw that no available


intercourse could be expected at such a moment, and was desirous,


before another meeting, to inquire closely into the nature of


Roderick's disease, and the circumstances that had reduced him to so


lamentable a condition. He succeeded in obtaining the necessary


information from an eminent medical gentleman.


   Shortly after Elliston's separation from his wife- now nearly


four years ago- his associates had observed a singular gloom spreading


over his daily life, like those chill, gray mists that sometimes steal


away the sunshine from a summer's morning. The symptoms caused them


endless perplexity. They knew not whether ill health were robbing


his spirits of elasticity; or whether a canker of the mind was


gradually eating, as such cankers do, from his moral system into the


physical frame, which is but the shadow of the former. They looked for


the root of this trouble in his shattered schemes of domestic bliss-


wilfully shattered by himself-but could not be satisfied of its


existence there. Some thought that their once brilliant friend was


in an incipient stage of insanity, of which his passionate impulses


had perhaps been the forerunners; others prognosticated a general


blight and gradual decline. From Roderick's own lips, they could learn


nothing. More than once, it is true, he had been heard to say,


clutching his hands convulsively upon his breast- "It gnaws me! It


gnaws me!"- but, by different auditors, a great diversity of


explanation was assigned to this ominous expression. What could it be,


that gnawed the breast of Roderick Elliston? Was it sorrow? Was it


merely the tooth of physical disease? Or, in his reckless course,


often verging upon profligacy, if not plunging into its depths, had he


been guilty of some deed, which made his bosom a prey to the


deadlier fangs of remorse? There was plausible ground for each of


these conjectures; but it must not be concealed that more than one


elderly gentleman, the victim of good cheer and slothful habits,


magisterially pronounced the secret of the whole matter to be


Dyspepsia!


   Meanwhile, Roderick seemed aware how generally he had become the


subject of curiosity and conjecture, and, with a morbid repugnance


to such notice, or to any notice whatsoever, estranged himself from


all companionship. Not merely the eye of man was a horror to him;


not merely the light of a friend's countenance; but even the blessed


sunshine, likewise, which, in its universal beneficence, typifies


the radiance of the Creator's face, expressing his love for all the


creatures of his hand. The dusky twilight was now too transparent


for Roderick Elliston; the blackest midnight was his chosen hour to


steal abroad; and if ever he were seen, it was when the watchman's


lantern gleamed upon his figure, gliding along the street with his


hands clutched upon his bosom, still muttering: "It gnaws me! It gnaws


me!" What could it be that gnawed him?


   After a time, it became known that Elliston was in the habit of


resorting to all the noted quacks that infested the city, or whom


money would tempt to journey thither from a distance. By one of


these persons, in the exultation of a supposed cure, it was proclaimed


far and wide, by dint of hand-bills and little pamphlets on dingy


paper, that a distinguished gentleman, Roderick Elliston, Esq., had


been relieved of a SNAKE in his stomach! So here was the monstrous


secret, ejected from its lurking-place into public view, in all its


horrible deformity. The mystery was out; but not so the bosom serpent.


He, if it were anything but a delusion, still lay coiled in his living


den. The empiric's cure had been a sham, the effect it was supposed,


of some stupefying drug, which more nearly caused the death of the


patient than of the odious reptile that possessed him. When Roderick


Elliston regained entire sensibility, it was to find his misfortune


the town talk- the more than nine days' wonder and horror- while, at


his bosom, he felt the sickening motion of a thing alive, and the


gnawing of that restless fang, which seemed to gratify at once a


physical appetite and a fiendish spite.


   He summoned the old black servant, who had been bred up in his


father's house, and was a middle-aged man while Roderick lay in his


cradle.


   "Scipio!" he began; and then paused, with his arms folded over


his heart. "What do people say of me, Scipio?"


   "Sir! my poor master! that you had a serpent in your bosom,"


answered the servant, with hesitation.


   "And what else?" asked Roderick, with a ghastly look at the man.


   "Nothing else, dear master," replied Scipio; "only that the


Doctor gave you a powder, and that the snake leapt out upon the


floor."


   "No, no!" muttered Roderick to himself, as he shook his head, and


pressed his hands with a more convulsive force upon his breast- "I


feel him still. It gnaws me! It gnaws me!"


   From this time, the miserable sufferer ceased to shun the world,


but rather solicited and forced himself upon the notice of


acquaintances and strangers. It was partly the result of


desperation, on finding that the cavern of his own bosom had not


proved deep and dark enough to hide the secret, even while it was so


secure a fortress for the loathsome fiend that had crept into it.


But still more, this craving for notoriety was a symptom of the


intense morbidness which now pervaded his nature. All persons,


chronically diseased, are egotists, whether the disease be of the mind


or body; whether sin, sorrow, or merely the more tolerable calamity of


some endless pain, or mischief among the cords of mortal life. Such


individuals are made acutely conscious of a self, by the torture in


which it dwells. Self, therefore, grows to be so prominent an object


with them, that they cannot but present it to the face of every casual


passer-by. There is a pleasure- perhaps the greatest of which the


sufferer is susceptible- in displaying the wasted or ulcerated limb,


or the cancer in the breast; and the fouler the crime, with so much


the more difficulty does the perpetrator prevent it from thrusting


up its snake-like head to frighten the world; for it is that cancer,


or that crime, which constitutes their respective individuality.


Roderick Elliston, who, a little while before had held himself so


scornfully above the common lot of men, now paid full allegiance to


this humiliating law. The snake in his bosom seemed the symbol of a


monstrous egotism, to which everything was referred, and which he


pampered, night and day, with a continual and exclusive sacrifice of


devil-worship.


   He soon exhibited what most people considered indubitable tokens of


insanity. In some of his moods, strange to say, he prided and


gloried himself on being marked out from the ordinary experience of


mankind, by the possession of a double nature, and a life within a


life. He appeared to imagine that the snake was a divinity- not


celestial, it is true, but darkly infernal- and that he thence derived


an eminence and a sanctity, horrid, indeed, yet more desirable than


whatever ambition aims at. Thus he drew his misery around him like a


regal mantle, and looked down triumphantly upon those whose vitals


nourished no deadly monster. Oftener, however, his human nature


asserted its empire over him, in the shape of a yearning for


fellowship. It grew to be his custom to spend the whole day in


wandering about the streets, aimlessly, unless it might be called an


aim to establish a species of brotherhood between himself and the


world. With cankered ingenuity, he sought out his own disease in every


breast. Whether insane or not, he showed so keen a perception of


frailty, error, and vice, that many persons gave him credit for


being possessed not merely with a serpent, but with an actual fiend,


who imparted this evil faculty of recognizing whatever was ugliest


in man's heart.


   For instance, he met an individual, who, for thirty years, had


cherished a hatred against his own brother. Roderick, amidst the


throng of the street, laid his hand on this man's chest, and looking


full into his forbidding face,


   "How is the snake today?"- he inquired, with a mock expression of


sympathy.


   "The snake!" exclaimed the brother-hater- "What do you mean?"


   "The snake! The snake! Does he gnaw you?" persisted Roderick.


"Did you take counsel with him this morning, when you should have been


saying your prayers? Did he sting, when you thought of your


brother's health, wealth, and good repute? Did he caper for joy,


when you remembered the profligacy of his only son? And whether he


stung, or whether he frolicked, did you feel his poison throughout


your body and soul, converting everything to sourness and


bitterness? That is the way of such serpents. I have learned the whole


nature of them from my own!"


   "Where is the police?" roared the object of Roderick's persecution,


at the same time giving an instinctive clutch to his breast. "Why is


this lunatic allowed to go at large?"


   "Ha, ha!" chuckled Roderick, releasing his grasp of the man. "His


bosom serpent has stung him then!"


   Often, it pleased the unfortunate young man to vex people with a


lighter satire, yet still characterized by somewhat of snake-like


virulence. One day he encountered an ambitious statesman, and


gravely inquired after the welfare of his boa-constrictor; for of that


species, Roderick affirmed, this gentleman's serpent must needs be,


since its appetite was enormous enough to devour the whole country and


constitution. At another time, he stopped a close-fisted old fellow,


of great wealth, but who skulked about the city in the guise of a


scare-crow, with a patched blue surtout, brown hat, and mouldy


boots, scraping pence together, and picking up rusty nails. Pretending


to look earnestly at this respectable person's stomach, Roderick


assured him that his snake was a copper-head, and had been generated


by the immense quantities of that base metal, with which he daily


defiled his fingers. Again, he assaulted a man of rubicund visage, and


told him that few bosom serpents had more of the devil in them, than


those that breed in the vats of a distillery. The next whom Roderick


honored with his attention was a distinguished clergyman, who happened


just then to be engaged in a theological controversy, where human


wrath was more perceptible than divine inspiration.


   "You have swallowed a snake, in a cup of sacramental wine," quoth


he.


   "Profane wretch!" exclaimed the divine; but, nevertheless, his hand


stole to his breast.


   He met a person of sickly sensibility, who, on some early


disappointment, had retired from the world, and thereafter held no


intercourse with his fellow-men, but brooded sullenly or


passionately over the irrevocable past. This man's very heart, if


Roderick might be believed, had been changed into a serpent, which


would finally torment both him and itself to death. Observing a


married couple, whose domestic troubles were matter of notoriety, he


condoled with both on having mutually taken a house-adder to their


bosoms. To an envious author, who deprecated works which he could


never equal, he said that his snake was the slimiest and filthiest


of all the reptile tribe, but was fortunately without a sting. A man


of impure life, and a brazen face, asking Roderick if there were any


serpent in his breast, he told him that there was, and of the same


species that once tortured Don Rodrigo, the Goth. He took a fair young


girl by the hand, and gazing sadly into her eyes, warned her that


she cherished a serpent of the deadliest kind within her gentle


breast; and the world found the truth of those ominous words, when,


a few months afterwards, the poor girl died of love and shame. Two


ladies, rivals in fashionable life, who tormented one another with a


thousand little stings of womanish spite, were given to understand,


that each of their hearts was a nest of diminutive snakes, which did


quite as much mischief as one great one.


   But nothing seemed to please Roderick better than to lay hold of


a person infected with jealousy, which he represented as an enormous


green reptile, with an ice-cold length of body, and the sharpest sting


of any snake save one.


   "And what one is that?" asked a bystander, overhearing him.


   It was a dark-browed man, who put the question; he had an evasive


eye, which, in the course of a dozen years, had looked no mortal


directly in the face. There was an ambiguity about this person's


character- a stain upon his reputation- yet none could tell


precisely of what nature; although the city-gossips, male and


female, whispered the most atrocious surmises. Until a recent period


he had followed the sea, and was, in fact, the very ship-master whom


George Herkimer had encountered, under such singular circumstances, in


the Grecian Archipelago.


   "What bosom-serpent has the sharpest sting?" repeated this man: but


he put the question as if by a reluctant necessity, and grew pale


while he was uttering it.


   "Why need you ask?" replied Roderick, with a look of dark


intelligence. "Look into your own breast! Hark, my serpent bestirs


himself! He acknowledges the presence of a master-fiend!"


   And then, as the bystanders afterwards affirmed, a hissing sound


was heard, apparently in Roderick Elliston's breast. It was said, too,


that an answering hiss came from the vitals of the shipmaster, as if a


snake were actually lurking there, and had been aroused by the call of


its brother-reptile. If there were in fact any such sound, it might


have been caused by a malicious exercise of ventriloquism, on the part


of Roderick.


   Thus, making his own actual serpent- if a serpent there actually


was in his bosom- the type of each man's fatal error, or hoarded


sin, or unquiet conscience, and striking his sting so unremorsefully


into the sorest spot, we may well imagine that Roderick became the


pest of the city. Nobody could elude him; none could withstand him. He


grappled with the ugliest truth that he could lay his hand on, and


compelled his adversary to do the same. Strange spectacle in human


life, where it is the instinctive effort of one and all to hide


those sad realities, and leave them undisturbed beneath a heap of


superficial topics, which constitute the materials of intercourse


between man and man! It was not to be tolerated that Roderick Elliston


should break through the tacit compact, by which the world has done


its best to secure repose, without relinquishing evil. The victims


of his malicious remarks, it is true, had brothers enough to keep them


in countenance; for, by Roderick's theory, every mortal bosom harbored


either a brood of small serpents, or one overgrown monster, that had


devoured all the rest. Still, the city could not bear this new


apostle. It was demanded by nearly all, and particularly by the most


respectable inhabitants, that Roderick should no longer be permitted


to violate the received rules of decorum, by obtruding his own


bosom-serpent to the public gaze, and dragging those of decent


people from their lurking-places.


   Accordingly, his relatives interfered, and placed him in a


private asylum for the insane. When the news was noised abroad, it was


observed that many persons walked the streets with freer countenances,


and covered their breasts less carefully with their hands.


   His confinement, however, although it contributed not a little to


the peace of the town, operated unfavorably upon Roderick himself.


In solitude, his melancholy grew more black and sullen. He spent whole


days- indeed, it was his sole occupation- in communing with the


serpent. A conversation was sustained, in which, as it seemed, the


hidden monster bore a part, though unintelligibly to the listeners,


and inaudible, except in a hiss. Singular as it may appear, the


sufferer had now contracted a sort of affection for his tormentor;


mingled, however, with the intensest loathing and horror. Nor were


such discordant emotions incompatible; each, on the contrary, imparted


strength and poignancy to its opposite. Horrible love- horrible


antipathy- embracing one another in his bosom, and both


concentrating themselves upon a being that had crept into his


vitals, or been engendered there, and which was nourished with his


food, and lived upon his life, and was as intimate with him as his own


heart, and yet was the foulest of all created things! But not the less


was it the true type of a morbid nature.


   Sometimes, in his moments of rage and bitter hatred against the


snake and himself, Roderick determined to be the death of him, even at


the expense of his own life. Once he attempted it by starvation.


But, while the wretched man was on the point of famishing, the monster


seemed to feed upon his heart, and to thrive and wax gamesome, as if


it were his sweetest and most congenial diet. Then he privily took a


dose of active poison, imagining that it would not fail to kill either


himself, or the devil that possessed him, or both together. Another


mistake; for if Roderick had not yet been destroyed by his own


poisoned heart, nor the snake by gnawing it, they had little to fear


from arsenic or corrosive sublimate. Indeed, the venomous pest


appeared to operate as an antidote against all other poisons. The


physicians tried to suffocate the fiend with tobacco-smoke. He


breathed it as freely as if it were his native atmosphere. Again, they


drugged their patient with opium, and drenched him with intoxicating


liquors, hoping that the snake might thus be reduced to stupor, and


perhaps be ejected from the stomach. They succeeded in rendering


Roderick insensible; but, placing their hands upon his breast, they


were inexpressibly horror-stricken to feel the monster wriggling,


twining, and darting to and fro, within his narrow limits, evidently


enlivened by the opium or alcohol, and incited to unusual feats of


activity. Thenceforth, they gave up all attempts at cure or


palliation. The doomed sufferer submitted to his fate, resumed his


former loathsome affection for the bosom-fiend, and spent whole


miserable days before a looking-glass, with his mouth wide open,


watching, in hope and horror, to catch a glimpse of the snake's


head, far down within his throat. It is supposed that he succeeded;


for the attendants once heard a frenzied shout, and rushing into the


room, found Roderick lifeless upon the floor.


   He was kept but little longer under restraint. After minute


investigation, the medical directors of the asylum decided that his


mental disease did not amount to insanity, nor would warrant his


confinement; especially as its influence upon his spirits was


unfavorable, and might produce the evil which it was meant to


remedy. His eccentricities were doubtless great- he had habitually


violated many of the customs and prejudices of society; but the


world was not, without surer ground, entitled to treat him as a


madman. On this decision of such competent authority, Roderick was


released, and had returned to his native city, the very day before his


encounter with George Herkimer.


   As soon as possible after learning these particulars, the sculptor,


together with a sad and tremulous companion, sought Elliston at his


own house. It was a large, sombre edifice of wood, with pilasters


and a balcony, and was divided from one of the principal streets by


a terrace of three elevations, which was ascended by successive


flights of stone steps. Some immense old elms almost concealed the


front of the mansion. This spacious and once magnificent


family-residence was built by a grandee of the race, early in the past


century; at which epoch, land being of small comparative value, the


garden and other grounds had formed quite an extensive domain.


Although a portion of the ancestral heritage had been alienated, there


was still a shadowy enclosure in the rear of the mansion, where a


student, or a dreamer, or a man of stricken heart, might lie all day


upon the grass, amid the solitude of murmuring boughs, and forget that


a city had grown up around him.


   Into this retirement, the sculptor and his companion were ushered


by Scipio, the old black servant, whose wrinkled visage grew almost


sunny with intelligence and joy, as he paid his humble greetings to


one of the two visitors.


   "Remain in the arbor, whispered the sculptor to the figure that


leaned upon his arm, "you will know whether, and when, to make your


appearance."


   "God will teach me," was the reply. "May he support me too!"


   Roderick was reclining on the margin of a fountain, which gushed


into the fleckered sunshine with the same clear sparkle, and the


same voice of airy quietude, as when trees of primeval growth flung


their shadows across its bosom. How strange is the life of a fountain,


born at every moment, yet of an age coeval with the rocks, and far


surpassing the venerable antiquity of a forest!


   "You are come! I have expected you," said Elliston, when he


became aware of the sculptor's presence.


   His manner was very different from that of the preceding day-


quiet, courteous, and, as Herkimer thought, watchful both over his


guest and himself. This unnatural restraint was almost the only


trait that betokened anything amiss. He had just thrown a book upon


the grass, where it lay half opened, thus disclosing itself to be a


natural history of the serpent-tribe, illustrated by life-like plates.


Near it lay that bulky volume, the Ductor Dubitantium of Jeremy


Taylor, full of cases of conscience, and in which most men,


possessed of a conscience, may find something applicable to their


purpose.


   "You see," observed Elliston, pointing to the book of serpents,


while a smile gleamed upon his lips, "I am making an effort to


become better acquainted with my bosom-friend. But I find nothing


satisfactory in this volume. If I mistake not, he will prove to be sui


generis, and akin to no other reptile in creation."


   "Whence came this strange calamity?" inquired the sculptor.


   "My sable friend, Scipio, has a story," replied Roderick, "of a


snake that had lurked in this fountain- pure and innocent as it


looks - ever since it was known to the first settlers. This


insinuating personage once crept into the vitals of my


great-grandfather, and dwelt there many years, tormenting the old


gentleman beyond mortal endurance. In short, it is a family


peculiarity. But, to tell you the truth, I have no faith in this


idea of the snake's being an heir-loom. He is my own snake, and no


man's else."


   "But what was his origin?" demanded Herkimer.


   "Oh! there is poisonous stuff in any man's heart, sufficient to


generate a brood of serpents," said Elliston, with a hollow laugh.


"You should have heard my homilies to the good townspeople.


Positively, I deem myself fortunate in having bred but a single


serpent. You, however, have none in your bosom, and therefore cannot


sympathize with the rest of the world. It gnaws me! It gnaws me!"


   With this exclamation, Roderick lost his self-control and threw


himself upon the grass, testifying his agony by intricate writhings,


in which Herkimer could not but fancy a resemblance to the motions


of a snake. Then, likewise, was heard that frightful hiss, which often


ran through the sufferer's speech, and crept between the words and


syllables, without interrupting their succession.


   "This is awful indeed!" exclaimed the sculptor- "an awful


infliction, whether it be actual or imaginary! Tell me, Roderick


Elliston, is there any remedy for this loathsome evil?"


   "Yes, but an impossible one," muttered Roderick, as he lay


wallowing with his face in the grass. "Could I, for one instant,


forget myself, the serpent might not abide within me. It is my


diseased self-contemplation that has engendered and nourished him!"


   "Then forget yourself, my husband," said a gentle voice above


him- "forget yourself in the idea of another!"


   Rosina had emerged from the arbor, and was bending over him, with


the shadow of his anguish reflected in her countenance, yet so mingled


with hope and unselfish love, that all anguish seemed but an earthly


shadow and a dream. She touched Roderick with her hand. A tremor


shivered through his frame. At that moment, if report be


trustworthy, the sculptor beheld a waving motion through the grass,


and heard a tinkling sound, as if something had plunged into the


fountain. Be the truth as it might, it is certain that Roderick


Elliston sat up, like a man renewed, restored to his right mind, and


rescued from the fiend, which had so miserably overcome him in the


battlefield of his own breast.


   "Rosina!" cried he, in broken and passionate tones, but with


nothing of the wild wail that had haunted his voice so long. "Forgive!


Forgive!"


   Her happy tears bedewed his face.


   "The punishment has been severe," observed the sculptor. "Even


justice might now forgive- how much more a woman's tenderness!


Roderick Elliston, whether the serpent was a physical reptile, or


whether the morbidness of your nature suggested that symbol to your


fancy, the moral of the story is not the less true and strong. A


tremendous Egotism- manifesting itself, in your case, in the form of


jealousy- is as fearful a fiend as ever stole into the human heart.


Can a breast, where it has dwelt so long, be purified?"


   "Oh, yes!" said Rosina, with a heavenly smile. "The serpent was but


a dark fantasy, and what it typified was as shadowy as itself. The


past, dismal as it seems, shall fling no gloom upon the future. To


give it its due importance, we must think of it but as an anecdote


in our Eternity!"








                        THE END


.




                                      1843


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                                 THE BIRTHMARK


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   IN THE LATTER PART of the last century, there lived a man of


science- an eminent proficient in every branch of natural


philosophy- who, not long before our story opens, had made


experience of a spiritual affinity, more attractive than any


chemical one. He had left his laboratory to the care of an


assistant, cleared his fine countenance from the furnace-smoke, washed


the stain of acids from his fingers, and persuaded a beautiful woman


to become his wife. In those days, when the comparatively recent


discovery of electricity, and other kindred mysteries of nature,


seemed to open paths into the region of miracle, it was not unusual


for the love of science to rival the love of woman, in its depth and


absorbing energy. The higher intellect, the imagination, the spirit,


and even the heart, might all find their congenial aliment in pursuits


which, as some of their ardent votaries believed, would ascend from


one step of powerful intelligence to another, until the philosopher


should lay his hand on the secret of creative force, and perhaps


make new worlds for himself. We know not whether Aylmer possessed this


degree of faith in man's ultimate control over nature. He had


devoted himself, however, too unreservedly to scientific studies, ever


to be weaned from them by any second passion. His love for his young


wife might prove the stronger of the two; but it could only be by


intertwining itself with his love of science, and uniting the strength


of the latter to its own.


   Such an union accordingly took place, and was attended with truly


remarkable consequences, and a deeply impressive moral. One day,


very soon after their marriage, Aylmer sat gazing at his wife, with


a trouble in his countenance that grew stronger, until he spoke.


   "Georgiana," said he, "has it never occurred to you that the mark


upon your cheek might be removed?"


   "No, indeed, said she, smiling; but perceiving the seriousness of


his manner, she blushed deeply. "To tell you the truth, it has been so


often called a charm, that I was simple enough to imagine it might


be so."


   "Ah, upon another face, perhaps it might," replied her husband.


"But never on yours! No, dearest Georgiana, you came so nearly perfect


from the hand of Nature, that this slightest possible defect- which we


hesitate whether to term a defect or a beauty- shocks me, as being the


visible mark of earthly imperfection."


   "Shocks you, my husband!" cried Georgiana, deeply hurt; at first


reddening with momentary anger, but then bursting into tears. "Then


why did you take me from my mother's side? You cannot love what shocks


you!"


   To explain this conversation, it must be mentioned, that, in the


centre of Georgiana's left cheek, there was a singular mark, deeply


interwoven, as it were, with the texture and substance of her face. In


the usual state of her complexion- a healthy, though delicate bloom-


the mark wore a tint of deeper crimson, which imperfectly defined


its shape amid the surrounding rosiness. When she blushed, it


gradually became more indistinct, and finally vanished amid the


triumphant rush of blood, that bathed the whole cheek with its


brilliant glow. But, if any shifting emotion caused her to turn


pale, there was the mark again, a crimson stain upon the snow, in what


Aylmer sometimes deemed an almost fearful distinctness. Its shape bore


not a little similarity to the human hand, though of the smallest


pigmy size. Georgiana's lovers were wont to say, that some fairy, at


her birth-hour, had laid her tiny hand upon the infant's cheek, and


left this impress there, in token of the magic endowments that were to


give her such sway over all hearts. Many a desperate swain would


have risked life for the privilege of pressing his lips to the


mysterious hand. It must not be concealed, however, that the


impression wrought by this fairy sign-manual varied exceedingly,


according to the difference of temperament in the beholders. Some


fastidious persons- but they were exclusively of her own sex- affirmed


that the Bloody Hand, as they chose to call it, quite destroyed the


effect of Georgiana's beauty, and rendered her countenance even


hideous. But it would be as reasonable to say, that one of those small


blue stains, which sometimes occur in the purest statuary marble,


would convert the Eve of Powers to a monster. Masculine observers,


if the birthmark did not heighten their admiration, contented


themselves with wishing it away, that the world might possess one


living specimen of ideal loveliness, without the semblance of a


flaw. After his marriage- for he thought little or nothing of the


matter before- Aylmer discovered that this was the case with himself.


   Had she been less beautiful- if Envy's self could have found


aught else to sneer at- he might have felt his affection heightened by


the prettiness of this mimic hand, now vaguely portrayed, now lost,


now stealing forth again, and glimmering to and fro with every pulse


of emotion that throbbed within her heart. But, seeing her otherwise


so perfect, he found this one defect grow more and more intolerable,


with every moment of their united lives. It was the fatal flaw of


humanity, which Nature, in one shape or another, stamps ineffaceably


on all her productions, either to imply that they are temporary and


finite, or that their perfection must be wrought by toil and pain. The


Crimson Hand expressed the ineludible gripe, in which mortality


clutches the highest and purest of earthly mould, degrading them


into kindred with the lowest, and even with the very brutes, like whom


their visible frames return to dust. In this manner, selecting it as


the symbol of his wife's liability to sin, sorrow, decay, and death,


Aylmer's sombre imagination was not long in rendering the birthmark


a frightful object, causing him more trouble and horror than ever


Georgiana's beauty, whether of soul or sense, had given him delight.


   At all the seasons which should have been their happiest, he


invariably, and without intending it- nay, in spite of a purpose to


the contrary- reverted to this one disastrous topic. Trifling as it at


first appeared, it so connected itself with innumerable trains of


thought, and modes of feeling, that it became the central point of


all. With the morning twilight, Aylmer opened his eyes upon his wife's


face, and recognized the symbol of imperfection; and when they sat


together at the evening hearth, his eyes wandered stealthily to her


cheek, and beheld, flickering with the blaze of the wood fire, the


spectral Hand that wrote mortality where he would fain have


worshipped. Georgiana soon learned to shudder at his gaze. It needed


but a glance, with the peculiar expression that his face often wore,


to change the roses of her cheek into a death-like paleness, amid


which the Crimson Hand was brought strongly out, like a bas-relief


of ruby on the whitest marble.


   Late, one night, when the lights were growing dim, so as hardly


to betray the stain on the poor wife's cheek, she herself, for the


first time, voluntarily took up the subject.


   "Do you remember, my dear Aylmer," said she, with a feeble


attempt at a smile- "have you any recollection of a dream, last night,


about this odious Hand?"


   "None! none whatever!" replied Aylmer, starting; but then he


added in a dry, cold tone, affected for the sake of concealing the


real depth of his emotion: "I might well dream of it; for, before I


fell asleep, it had taken a pretty firm hold of my fancy."


   "And you did dream of it," continued Georgiana, hastily; for she


dreaded lest a gush of tears should interrupt what she had to say-


"A terrible dream! I wonder that you can forget it. Is it possible


to forget this one expression? 'It is in her heart now- we must have


it out!' Reflect, my husband; for by all means I would have you recall


that dream."


   The mind is in a sad state, when Sleep, the all-involving, cannot


confine her spectres within the dim region of her sway, but suffers


them to break forth, affrighting this actual life with secrets that


perchance belong to a deeper one. Aylmer now remembered his dream.


He had fancied himself, with his servant Aminadab, attempting an


operation for the removal of the birthmark. But the deeper went the


knife, the deeper sank the Hand, until at length its tiny grasp


appeared to have caught hold of Georgiana's heart; whence, however,


her husband was inexorably resolved to cut or wrench it away.


   When the dream had shaped itself perfectly in his memory, Aylmer


sat in his wife's presence with a guilty feeling. Truth often finds


its way to the mind close-muffled in robes of sleep, and then speaks


with uncompromising directness of matters in regard to which we


practise an unconscious self-deception, during our waking moments.


Until now, he had not been aware of the tyrannizing influence acquired


by one idea over his mind, and of the lengths which he might find in


his heart to go, for the sake of giving himself peace.


   "Aylmer," resumed Georgiana, solemnly, "I know not what may be


the cost to both of us, to rid me of this fatal birthmark. Perhaps its


removal may cause cureless deformity. Or, it may be, the stain goes as


deep as life itself. Again, do we know that there is a possibility, on


any terms, of unclasping the firm gripe of this little Hand, which was


laid upon me before I came into the world?"


   "Dearest Georgiana, I have spent much thought upon the subject,"


hastily interrupted Aylmer- "I am convinced of the perfect


practicability of its removal."


   "If there be the remotest possibility of it," continued


Georgiana, "let the attempt be made, at whatever risk. Danger is


nothing to me; for life- while this hateful mark makes me the object


of your horror and disgust- life is a burthen which I would fling down


with joy. Either remove this dreadful Hand, or take my wretched


life! You have deep science! All the world bears witness of it. You


have achieved great wonders! Cannot you remove this little, little


mark, which I cover with the tips of two small fingers! Is this beyond


your power, for the sake of your own peace, and to save your poor wife


from madness?"


   "Noblest- dearest- tenderest wife!" cried Aylmer, rapturously.


"Doubt not my power. I have already given this matter the deepest


thought- thought which might almost have enlightened me to create a


being less perfect than yourself. Georgiana, you have led me deeper


than ever into the heart of science. I feel myself fully competent


to render this dear cheek as faultless as its fellow; and then, most


beloved, what will be my triumph, when I shall have corrected what


Nature left imperfect, in her fairest work! Even Pygmalion, when his


sculptured woman assumed life, felt not greater ecstasy than mine will


be."


   "It is resolved, then," said Georgiana, faintly smiling- "And,


Aylmer, spare me not, though you should find the birthmark take refuge


in my heart at last."


   Her husband tenderly kissed her cheek- her right cheek- not that


which bore the impress of the Crimson Hand.


   The next day, Aylmer apprised his wife of a plan that he had


formed, whereby he might have opportunity for the intense thought


and constant watchfulness which the proposed operation would


require; while Georgiana, likewise, would enjoy the perfect repose


essential to its success. They were to seclude themselves in the


extensive apartments occupied by Aylmer as a laboratory, and where,


during his toilsome youth, he had made discoveries in the elemental


powers of Nature, that had roused the admiration of all the learned


societies in Europe. Seated calmly in this laboratory, the pale


philosopher had investigated the secrets of the highest


cloud-region, and of the profoundest mines; he had satisfied himself


of the causes that kindled and kept alive the fires of the volcano;


and had explained the mystery of fountains, and how it is that they


gush forth, some so bright and pure, and others with such rich


medicinal virtues, from the dark bosom of the earth. Here, too, at


an earlier period, he had studied the wonders of the human frame,


and attempted to fathom the very process by which Nature assimilates


all her precious influences from earth and air, and from the spiritual


world, to create and foster Man, her masterpiece. The latter


pursuit, however, Aylmer had long laid aside, in unwilling recognition


of the truth, against which all seekers sooner or later stumble,


that our great creative Mother, while she amuses us with apparently


working in the broadest sunshine, is yet severely careful to keep


her own secrets, and, in spite of her pretended openness, shows us


nothing but results. She permits us indeed to mar, but seldom to mend,


and, like a jealous patentee, on no account to make. Now, however,


Aylmer resumed these half-forgotten investigations; not, of course,


with such hopes or wishes as first suggested them; but because they


involved much physiological truth, and lay in the path of his proposed


scheme for the treatment of Georgiana.


   As he led her over the threshold of the laboratory, Georgiana was


cold and tremulous. Aylmer looked cheerfully into her face, with


intent to reassure her, but was so startled with the intense glow of


the birthmark upon the whiteness of her cheek, that he could not


restrain a strong convulsive shudder. His wife fainted.


   "Aminadab! Aminadab!" shouted Aylmer, stamping violently on the


floor.


   Forthwith, there issued from an inner apartment a man of low


stature, but bulky frame, with shaggy hair hanging about his visage,


which was grimed with the vapors of the furnace. This personage had


been Aylmer's under-worker during his whole scientific career, and was


admirably fitted for that office by his great mechanical readiness,


and the skill with which, while incapable of comprehending a single


principle, he executed all the practical details of his master's


experiments. With his vast strength, his shaggy hair, his smoky


aspect, and the indescribable earthiness that encrusted him, he seemed


to represent man's physical nature; while Aylmer's slender figure, and


pale, intellectual face, were no less apt a type of the spiritual


element.


   "Throw open the door of the boudoir, Aminadab," said Aylmer, "and


burn a pastille."


   "Yes, master," answered Aminadab, looking intently at the


lifeless form of Georgiana; and then he muttered to himself: "If she


were my wife, I'd never part with that birthmark."


   When Georgiana recovered consciousness, she found herself breathing


an atmosphere of penetrating fragrance, the gentle potency of which


had recalled her from her death-like faintness. The scene around her


looked like enchantment. Aylmer had converted those smoky, dingy,


sombre rooms, where he had spent his brightest years in recondite


pursuits, into a series of beautiful apartments, not unfit to be the


secluded abode of a lovely woman. The walls were hung with gorgeous


curtains, which imparted the combination of grandeur and grace, that


no other species of adornment can achieve; and as they fell from the


ceiling to the floor, their rich and ponderous folds, concealing all


angles and straight lines, appeared to shut in the scene from infinite


space. For aught Georgiana knew, it might be a pavilion among the


clouds. And Aylmer, excluding the sunshine, which would have


interfered with his chemical processes, had supplied its place with


perfumed lamps, emitting flames of various hue, but all uniting in a


soft, empurpled radiance. He now knelt by his wife's side, watching


her earnestly, but without alarm; for he was confident in his science,


and felt that he could draw a magic circle round her, within which


no evil might intrude.


   "Where am I? Ah, I remember!" said Georgiana, faintly; and she


placed her hand over her cheek, to hide the terrible mark from her


husband's eyes.


   "Fear not, dearest!" exclaimed he. "Do not shrink from me!


Believe me, Georgiana, I even rejoice in this single imperfection,


since it will be such a rapture to remove it."


   "Oh, spare me!" sadly replied his wife. "Pray do not look at it


again. I never can forget that convulsive shudder."


   In order to soothe Georgiana, and, as it were, to release her


mind from the burthen of actual things, Aylmer now put in practice


some of the light and playful secrets which science had taught him


among its profounder lore. Airy figures, absolutely bodiless ideas,


and forms of unsubstantial beauty, came and danced before her,


imprinting their momentary footsteps on beams of light. Though she had


some indistinct idea of the method of these optical phenomena, still


the illusion was almost perfect enough to warrant the belief that


her husband possessed sway over the spiritual world. Then again,


when she felt a wish to look forth from her seclusion, immediately, as


if her thoughts were answered, the procession of external existence


flitted across a screen. The scenery and the figures of actual life


were perfectly represented, but with that bewitching, yet


indescribable difference, which always makes a picture, an image, or a


shadow, so much more attractive than the original. When wearied of


this, Aylmer bade her cast her eyes upon a vessel, containing a


quantity of earth. She did so, with little interest at first, but


was soon startled, to perceive the germ of a plant, shooting upward


from the soil. Then came the slender stalk- the leaves gradually


unfolded themselves- and amid them was a perfect and lovely flower.


   "It is magical!" cried Georgiana, "I dare not touch it."


   "Nay, pluck it," answered Aylmer, "pluck it, and inhale its brief


perfume while you may. The flower will wither in a few moments, and


leave nothing save its brown seed-vessels- but thence may be


perpetuated a race as ephemeral as itself."


   But Georgiana had no sooner touched the flower than the whole plant


suffered a blight, its leaves turning coal-black, as if by the


agency of fire.


   "There was too powerful a stimulus," said Aylmer thoughtfully.


   To make up for this abortive experiment, he proposed to take her


portrait by a scientific process of his own invention. It was to be


effected by rays of light striking upon a polished plate of metal.


Georgiana assented- but, on looking at the result, was affrighted to


find the features of the portrait blurred and indefinable; while the


minute figure of a hand appeared where the cheek should have been.


Aylmer snatched the metallic plate, and threw it into a jar of


corrosive acid.


   Soon, however, he forgot these mortifying failures. In the


intervals of study and chemical experiment, he came to her, flushed


and exhausted, but seemed invigorated by her presence, and spoke in


glowing language of the resources of his art. He gave a history of the


long dynasty of the Alchemists, who spent so many ages in quest of the


universal solvent, by which the Golden Principle might be elicited


from all things vile and base. Aylmer appeared to believe, that, by


the plainest scientific logic, it was altogether within the limits


of possibility to discover this long-sought medium; but, he added, a


philosopher who should go deep enough to acquire the power, would


attain too lofty a wisdom to stoop to the exercise of it. Not less


singular were his opinions in regard to the Elixir Vitae. He more than


intimated, that it was at his option to concoct a liquid that should


prolong life for years- perhaps interminably- but that it would


produce a discord in nature, which all the world, and chiefly the


quaffer of the immortal nostrum, would find cause to curse.


   "Aylmer, are you in earnest?" asked Georgiana, looking at him


with amazement and fear; "it is terrible to possess such power, or


even to dream of possessing it.


   "Oh, do not tremble, my love!" said her husband, "I would not wrong


either you or myself, by working such inharmonious effects upon our


lives. But I would have you consider how trifling, in comparison, is


the skill requisite to remove this little Hand."


   At the mention of the birthmark, Georgiana, as usual, shrank, as if


a red-hot iron had touched her cheek.


   Again Aylmer applied himself to his labors. She could hear his


voice in the distant furnace-room, giving directions to Aminadab,


whose harsh, uncouth, mis-shapen tones were audible in response,


more like the grunt or growl of a brute than human speech. After hours


of absence, Aylmer reappeared, and proposed that she should now


examine his cabinet of chemical products, and natural treasures of the


earth. Among the former he showed her a small vial, in which, he


remarked, was contained a gentle yet most powerful fragrance,


capable of impregnating all the breezes that blow across a kingdom.


They were of inestimable value, the contents of that little vial; and,


as he said so, he threw some of the perfume into the air, and filled


the room with piercing and invigorating delight.


   "And what is this?" asked Georgiana, pointing to a small crystal


globe, containing a gold-colored liquid. "It is so beautiful to the


eye, that I could imagine it the Elixir of Life."


   "In one sense it is," replied Aylmer, "or rather the Elixir of


Immortality. It is the most precious poison that ever was concocted in


this world. By its aid, I could apportion the life-time of any


mortal at whom you might point your finger. The strength of the dose


would determine whether he were to linger out years, or drop dead in


the midst of a breath. No king, on his guarded throne, could keep


his life, if I, in my private station, should deem that the welfare of


millions justified me in depriving him of it."


   "Why do you keep such a terrific drug?" inquired Georgiana in


horror.


   "Do not mistrust me, dearest!" said her husband, smiling; "its


virtuous potency is yet greater than its harmful one. But, see! here


is a powerful cosmetic. With a few drops of this, in a vase of


water, freckles may be washed away as easily as the hands are


cleansed. A stronger infusion would take the blood out of the cheek,


and leave the rosiest beauty a pale ghost."


   "Is it with this lotion that you intend to bathe my cheek?" asked


Georgiana, anxiously.


   "Oh, no!" hastily replied her husband- "this is merely superficial.


Your case demands a remedy that shall go deeper."


   In his interviews with Georgiana, Aylmer generally made minute


inquiries as to her sensations, and whether the confinement of the


rooms, and the temperature of the atmosphere, agreed with her. These


questions had such a particular drift, that Georgiana began to


conjecture that she was already subjected to certain physical


influences, either breathed in with the fragrant air, or taken with


her food. She fancied, likewise- but it might be altogether fancy-


that there was a stirring up of her system: a strange, indefinite


sensation creeping through her veins, and tingling, half-painfully,


half-pleasurably, at her heart. Still, whenever she dared to look into


the mirror, there she beheld herself, pale as a white rose, and with


the crimson birthmark stamped upon her cheek. Not even Aylmer now


hated it so much as she.


   To dispel the tedium of the hours which her husband found it


necessary to devote to the processes of combination and analysis,


Georgiana turned over the volumes of his scientific library. In many


dark old tomes, she met with chapters full of romance and poetry. They


were the works of the philosophers of the middle ages, such as


Albertus Magnus, Cornelius Agrippa, Paracelsus, and the famous friar


who created the prophetic Brazen Head. All these antique naturalists


stood in advance of their centuries, yet were imbued with some of


their credulity, and therefore were believed, and perhaps imagined


themselves, to have acquired from the investigation of nature a


power above nature, and from physics a sway over the spiritual


world. Hardly less curious and imaginative were the early volumes of


the Transactions of the Royal Society, in which the members, knowing


little of the limits of natural possibility, were continually


recording wonders, or proposing methods whereby wonders might be


wrought.


   But, to Georgiana, the most engrossing volume was a large folio


from her husband's own hand, in which he had recorded every experiment


of his scientific career, with its original aim, the methods adopted


for its development, and its final success or failure, with the


circumstances to which either event was attributable. The book, in


truth, was both the history and emblem of his ardent, ambitious,


imaginative, yet practical and laborious, life. He handled physical


details, as if there were nothing beyond them; yet spiritualized


them all, and redeemed himself from materialism, by his strong and


eager aspiration towards the infinite. In his grasp, the veriest


clod of earth assumed a soul. Georgiana, as she read, reverenced


Aylmer, and loved him more profoundly than ever, but with a less


entire dependence on his judgment than heretofore. Much as he had


accomplished, she could not but observe that his most splendid


successes were almost invariably failures, if compared with the


ideal at which he aimed. His brightest diamonds were the merest


pebbles, and felt to be so by himself, in comparison with the


inestimable gems which lay hidden beyond his reach. The volume, rich


with achievements that had won renown for its author, was yet as


melancholy a record as ever mortal hand had penned. It was the sad


confession, and continual exemplification, of the short-comings of the


composite man- the spirit burthened with clay and working in matter;


and of the despair that assails the higher nature, at finding itself


so miserably thwarted by the earthly part. Perhaps every man of


genius, in whatever sphere, might recognize the image of his own


experience in Aylmer's journal.


   So deeply did these reflections affect Georgiana, that she laid her


face upon the open volume, and burst into tears. In this situation she


was found by her husband.


   "It is dangerous to read in a sorcerer's books," said he, with a


smile, though his countenance was uneasy and displeased. "Georgiana,


there are pages in that volume, which I can scarcely glance over and


keep my senses. Take heed lest it prove as detrimental to you!"


   It has made me worship you more than ever," said she.


   "Ah! wait for this one success," rejoined he, "then worship me if


you will. I shall deem myself hardly unworthy of it. But, come! I have


sought you for the luxury of your voice. Sing to me, dearest!"


   So she poured out the liquid music of her voice to quench the


thirst of his spirit. He then took his leave, with a boyish exuberance


of gaiety, assuring her that her seclusion would endure but a little


longer, and that the result was already certain. Scarcely had he


departed, when Georgiana felt irresistibly impelled to follow him. She


had forgotten to inform Aylmer of a symptom, which, for two or three


hours past, had begun to excite her attention. It was a sensation in


the fatal birthmark, not painful, but which induced a restlessness


throughout her system. Hastening after her husband, she intruded,


for the first time, into the laboratory.


   The first thing that struck her eye was the furnace, that hot and


feverish worker, with the intense glow of its fire, which, by the


quantities of soot clustered above it, seemed to have been burning for


ages. There was a distilling apparatus in full operation. Around the


room were retorts, tubes, cylinders, crucibles, and other apparatus of


chemical research. An electrical machine stood ready for immediate


use. The atmosphere felt oppressively close, and was tainted with


gaseous odors, which had been tormented forth by the processes of


science. The severe and homely simplicity of the apartment, with its


naked walls and brick pavement, looked strange, accustomed as


Georgiana had become to the fantastic elegance of her boudoir. But


what chiefly, indeed almost solely, drew her attention, was the aspect


of Aylmer himself.


   He was pale as death, anxious, and absorbed, and hung over the


furnace as if it depended upon his utmost watchfulness whether the


liquid, which it was distilling, should be the draught of immortal


happiness or misery. How different from the sanguine and joyous mien


that he had assumed for Georgiana's encouragement!


   "Carefully now, Aminadab! Carefully, thou human machine! Carefully,


thou man of clay!" muttered Aylmer, more to himself than his


assistant. "Now, if there be a thought too much or too little, it is


all over!"


   "Hoh! hoh!" mumbled Aminadab- "look, master, look!"


   Aylmer raised his eyes hastily, and at first reddened, then grew


paler than ever, on beholding Georgiana. He rushed towards her, and


seized her arm with a gripe that left the print of his fingers upon


it.


   "Why do you come hither? Have you no trust in your husband?"


cried he impetuously. "Would you throw the blight of that fatal


birthmark over my labors? It is not well done. Go, prying woman, go!"


   Nay, Aylmer," said Georgiana, with the firmness of which she


possessed no stinted endowment, "it is not you that have a right to


complain. You mistrust your wife! You have concealed the anxiety


with which you watch the development of this experiment. Think not


so unworthily of me, my husband! Tell me all the risk we run; and fear


not that I shall shrink, for my share in it is far less than your


own!"


   "No, no, Georgiana!" said Aylmer impatiently, "it must not be."


   "I submit," replied she calmly. "And, Aylmer, I shall quaff


whatever draught you bring me; but it will be on the same principle


that would induce me to take a dose of poison, if offered by your


hand."


   "My noble wife," said Aylmer, deeply moved, "I knew not the height


and depth of your nature, until now. Nothing shall be concealed.


Know, then, that this Crimson Hand, superficial as it seems, has


clutched its grasp into your being, with a strength of which I had no


previous conception. I have already administered agents powerful


enough to do aught except to change your entire physical system. Only


one thing remains to be tried. If that fail us, we are ruined!"


   "Why did you hesitate to tell me this?" asked she.


   "Because, Georgiana," said Aylmer, in a low voice, "there is


danger!"


   "Danger? There is but one danger- that this horrible stigma shall


be left upon my cheek!" cried Georgiana. "Remove it! remove it!-


whatever be the cost- or we shall both go mad!"


   "Heaven knows, your words are too true," said Aylmer, sadly. "And


now, dearest, return to your boudoir. In a little while, all will be


tested."


   He conducted her back, and took leave of her with a solemn


tenderness, which spoke far more than his words how much was now at


stake. After his departure, Georgiana became wrapt in musings. She


considered the character of Aylmer, and did it completer justice


than at any previous moment. Her heart exulted, while it trembled,


at his honorable love, so pure and lofty that it would accept


nothing less than perfection, nor miserably make itself contented with


an earthlier nature than he had dreamed of. She felt how much more


precious was such a sentiment, than that meaner kind which would


have borne with the imperfection for her sake, and have been guilty of


treason to holy love, by degrading its perfect idea to the level of


the actual. And, with her whole spirit, she prayed, that, for a single


moment, she might satisfy his highest and deepest conception. Longer


than one moment, she well knew, it could not be; for his spirit was


ever on the march- ever ascending- and each instant required something


that was beyond the scope of the instant before.


   The sound of her husband's footsteps aroused her. He bore a crystal


goblet, containing a liquor colorless as water, but bright enough to


be the draught of immortality. Aylmer was pale; but it seemed rather


the consequence of a highly wrought state of mind, and tension of


spirit, than of fear or doubt.


   "The concoction of the draught has been perfect," said he, in


answer to Georgiana's look. "Unless all my science have deceived me,


it cannot fail."


   "Save on your account, my dearest Aylmer," observed his wife, "I


might wish to put off this birthmark of mortality by relinquishing


mortality itself, in preference to any other mode. Life is but a sad


possession to those who have attained precisely the degree of moral


advancement at which I stand. Were I weaker and blinder, it might be


happiness. Were I stronger, it might be endured hopefully. But, being


what I find myself, methinks I am of all mortals the most fit to die."


   "You are fit for heaven without tasting death!" replied her


husband. "But why do we speak of dying? The draught cannot fail.


Behold its effect upon this plant!"


   On the window-seat there stood a geranium, diseased with yellow


blotches, which had overspread all its leaves. Aylmer poured a small


quantity of the liquid upon the soil in which it grew. In a little


time, when the roots of the plant had taken up the moisture, the


unsightly blotches began to be extinguished in a living verdure.


   "There needed no proof," said Georgiana, quietly. "Give me the


goblet. I joyfully stake all upon your word."


   "Drink, then, thou lofty creature!" exclaimed Aylmer, with fervid


admiration. "There is no taint of imperfection on thy spirit. Thy


sensible frame, too, shall soon be all perfect!"


   She quaffed the liquid, and returned the goblet to his hand.


   "It is grateful," said she, with a placid smile. "Methinks it is


like water from a heavenly fountain; for it contains I know not what


of unobtrusive fragrance and deliciousness. It allays a feverish


thirst, that had parched me for many days. Now, dearest, let me sleep.


My earthly senses are closing over my spirit, like the leaves around


the heart of a rose, at sunset."


   She spoke the last words with a gentle reluctance, as if it


required almost more energy than she could command to pronounce the


faint and lingering syllables. Scarcely had they loitered through


her lips, ere she was lost in slumber. Aylmer sat by her side,


watching her aspect with the emotions proper to a man, the whole value


of whose existence was involved in the process now to be tested.


Mingled with this mood, however, was the philosophic investigation,


characteristic of the man of science. Not the minutest symptom escaped


him. A heightened flush of the cheek- a slight irregularity of breath-


a quiver of the eyelid- a hardly perceptible tremor through the frame-


such were the details which, as the moments passed, he wrote down in


his folio volume. Intense thought had set its stamp upon every


previous page of that volume; but the thoughts of years were all


concentrated upon the last.


   While thus employed, he failed not to gaze often at the fatal Hand,


and not without a shudder. Yet once, by a strange and unaccountable


impulse, he pressed it with his lips. His spirit recoiled, however, in


the very act, and Georgiana, out of the midst of her deep sleep, moved


uneasily and murmured, as if in remonstrance. Again, Aylmer resumed


his watch. Nor was it without avail. The Crimson Hand, which at


first had been strongly visible upon the marble paleness of


Georgiana's cheek now grew more faintly outlined. She remained not


less pale than ever; but the birthmark, with every breath that came


and went, lost somewhat of its former distinctness. Its presence had


been awful; its departure was more awful still. Watch the stain of the


rainbow fading out of the sky; and you will know how that mysterious


symbol passed away.


   "By Heaven, it is well-nigh gone!" said Aylmer to himself, in


almost irrepressible ecstasy. "I can scarcely trace it now. Success!


Success! And now it is like the faintest rose-color. The slightest


flush of blood across her cheek would overcome it. But she is so


pale!"


   He drew aside the window-curtain, and suffered the light of natural


day to fall into the room, and rest upon her cheek. At the same


time, he heard a gross, hoarse chuckle, which he had long known as his


servant Aminadab's expression of delight.


   "Ah, clod! Ah, earthly mass!" cried Aylmer, laughing in a sort of


frenzy. "You have served me well! Master and Spirit- Earth and Heaven-


have both done their part in this! Laugh, thing of the senses! You


have earned the right to laugh."


   These exclamations broke Georgiana's sleep. She slowly unclosed her


eyes, and gazed into the mirror, which her husband had arranged for


that purpose. A faint smile flitted over her lips, when she recognized


how barely perceptible was now that Crimson Hand, which had once


blazed forth with such disastrous brilliancy as to scare away all


their happiness. But then her eyes sought Aylmer's face, with a


trouble and anxiety that he could by no means account for.


   "My poor Aylmer!" murmured she.


   "Poor? Nay, richest! Happiest! Most favored!" exclaimed he. "My


peerless bride, it is successful! You are perfect!"


   "My poor Aylmer!" she repeated, with a more than human


tenderness. "You have aimed loftily! you have done nobly! Do not


repent, that, with so high and pure a feeling, you have rejected the


best the earth could offer. Aylmer- dearest Aylmer, I am dying!"


   Alas, it was too true! The fatal Hand had grappled with the mystery


of life, and was the bond by which an angelic spirit kept itself in


union with a mortal frame. As the last crimson tint of the birthmark-


that sole token of human imperfection- faded from her cheek, the


parting breath of the now perfect woman passed into the atmosphere,


and her soul, lingering a moment near her husband, took its heavenward


flight. Then a hoarse, chuckling laugh was heard again! Thus ever does


the gross Fatality of Earth exult in its invariable triumph over the


immortal essence, which, in this dim sphere of half-development,


demands the completeness of a higher state. Yet, had Aylmer reached a


profounder wisdom, he need not thus have flung away the happiness,


which would have woven his mortal life of the self-same texture with


the celestial. The momentary circumstance was too strong for him; he


failed to look beyond the shadowy scope of Time, and living once for


all in Eternity, to find the perfect Future in the present.





                        THE END


.




                                      1835


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                              ALICE DOANE'S APPEAL


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   ON A PLEASANT AFTERNOON of June, it was my good fortune to be the


companion of two young ladies in a walk. The direction of our course


being left to me, I led them neither to Legge's Hill, nor to the


Cold Spring, nor to the rude shores and old batteries of the Neck, nor


yet to Paradise; though if the latter place were rightly named, my


fair friends would have been at home there. We reached the outskirts


of the town, and turning aside from a street of tanners and


curriers, began to ascend a hill, which at a distance, by its dark


slope and the even line of its summit, resembled a green rampart along


the road. It was less steep than its aspect threatened. The eminence


formed part of an extensive tract of pasture land, and was traversed


by cow paths in various directions; but, strange to tell, though the


whole slope and summit were of a peculiarly deep green, scarce a blade


of grass was visible from the base upward. This deceitful verdure


was occasioned by a plentiful crop of "woodwax," which wears the


same dark and glossy green throughout the summer, except at one


short period, when it puts forth a profusion of yellow blossoms. At


that season, to a distant spectator, the hill appears absolutely


overlaid with gold, or covered with a glory of sunshine, even


beneath a clouded sky. But the curious wanderer on the hill will


perceive that all the grass, and everything that should nourish man or


beast, has been destroyed by this vile and ineradicable weed: its


tufted roots make the soil their own, and permit nothing else to


vegetate among them; so that a physical curse may be said to have


blasted the spot, where guilt and frenzy consummated the most


execrable scene that our history blushes to record. For this was the


field where superstition won her darkest triumph; the high place where


our fathers set up their shame, to the mournful gaze of generations


far remote. The dust of martyrs was beneath our feet. We stood on


Gallows Hill.


   For my own part, I have often courted the historic influence of the


spot. But it is singular how few come on pilgrimage to this famous


hill; how many spend their lives almost at its base, and never once


obey the summons of the shadowy past, as it beckons them to the


summit. Till a year or two since, this portion of our history had been


very imperfectly written, and, as we are not a people of legend or


tradition, it was not every citizen of our ancient town that could


tell, within half a century, so much as the date of the witchcraft


delusion. Recently, indeed, an historian has treated the subject in


a manner that will keep his name alive, in the only desirable


connection with the errors of our ancestry, by converting the hill


of their disgrace into an honorable monument of his own antiquarian


lore, and of that better wisdom, which draws the moral while it


tells the tale. But we are a people of the present, and have no


heartfelt interest in the olden time. Every fifth of November, in


commemoration of they know not what, or rather without an idea


beyond the momentary blaze, the young men scare the town with bonfires


on this haunted height, but never dream of paying funeral honors to


those who died so wrongfully, and, without a coffin or a prayer,


were buried here.


   Though with feminine susceptibility, my companions caught all the


melancholy associations of the scene, yet these could but


imperfectly overcome the gayety of girlish spirits. Their emotions


came and went with quick vicissitude, and sometimes combined to form a


peculiar and delicious excitement, the mirth brightening the gloom


into a sunny shower of feeling, and a rainbow in the mind. My own more


sombre mood was tinged by theirs. With now a merry word and next a sad


one, we trod among the tangled weeds, and almost hoped that our feet


would sink into the hollow of a witch's grave. Such vestiges were to


be found within the memory of man, but have vanished now, and with


them, I believe, all traces of the precise spot of the executions.


On the long and broad ridge of the eminence, there is no very


decided elevation of any one point, nor other prominent marks,


except the decayed stumps of two trees, standing near each other,


and here and there the rocky substance of the hill, peeping just above


the woodwax.


   There are few such prospects of town and village, woodland and


cultivated field, steeples and country seats, as we beheld from this


unhappy spot. No blight had fallen on old Essex; all was prosperity


and riches, healthfully distributed. Before us lay our native town,


extending from the foot of the hill to the harbor, level as a chess


board embraced by two arms of the sea, and filling the whole peninsula


with a close assemblage of wooden roofs, overtopped by many a spire,


and intermixed with frequent heaps of verdure, where trees threw up


their shade from unseen trunks. Beyond was the bay and its islands,


almost the only objects, in a country unmarked by strong natural


features, on which time and human toil had produced no change.


Retaining these portions of the scene, and also the peaceful glory and


tender gloom of the declining sun, we threw, in imagination, a veil of


deep forest over the land, and pictured a few scattered villages,


and this old town itself a village, as when the prince of hell bore


sway there. The idea thus gained of its former aspect, its quaint


edifices standing far apart, with peaked roofs and projecting stories,


and its single meeting-house pointing up a tall spire in the midst;


the vision, in short, of the town in 1692, served to introduce a


wondrous tale of those old times.


   I had brought the manuscript in my pocket. It was one of a series


written years ago, when my pen, now sluggish and perhaps feeble,


because I have not much to hope or fear, was driven by stronger


external motives, and a more passionate impulse within, than I am


fated to feel again. Three or four of these tales had appeared in


the "Token," after a long time and various adventures, but had


encumbered me with no troublesome notoriety, even in my birthplace.


One great heap had met a brighter destiny: they had fed the flames;


thoughts meant to delight the world and endure for ages had perished


in a moment, and stirred not a single heart but mine. The story now to


be introduced, and another, chanced to be in kinder custody at the


time, and thus, by no conspicuous merits of their own, escaped


destruction.


   The ladies, in consideration that I had never before intruded my


performances on them, by any but the legitimate medium, through the


press, consented to hear me read. I made them sit down on a moss-grown


rock, close by the spot where we chose to believe that the death


tree had stood. After a little hesitation on my part, caused by a


dread of renewing my acquaintance with fantasies that had lost their


charm in the ceaseless flux of mind, I began the tale, which opened


darkly with the discovery of a murder.


   A hundred years, and nearly half that time, have elapsed since


the body of a murdered man was found, at about the distance of three


miles, on the old road to Boston. He lay in a solitary spot, on the


bank of a small lake, which the severe frost of December had covered


with a sheet of ice. Beneath this, it seemed to have been the


intention of the murderer to conceal his victim in a chill and


watery grave, the ice being deeply hacked, perhaps with the weapon


that had slain him, though its solidity was too stubborn for the


patience of a man with blood upon his hand. The corpse therefore


reclined on the earth, but was separated from the road by a thick


growth of dwarf pines. There had been a slight fall of snow during the


night, and as if nature were shocked at the deed, and strove to hide


it with her frozen tears, a little drifted heap had partly buried


the body, and lay deepest over the pale dead face. An early traveller,


whose dog had led him to the spot, ventured to uncover the features,


but was affrighted by their expression. A look of evil and scornful


triumph had hardened on them, and made death so life-like and so


terrible, that the beholder at once took flight, as swiftly as if


the stiffened corpse would rise up and follow.


   I read on, and identified the body as that of a young man, a


stranger in the country, but resident during several preceding


months in the town which lay at our feet. The story described, at some


length, the excitement caused by the murder, the unavailing quest


after the perpetrator, the funeral ceremonies, and other commonplace


matters, in the course of which, I brought forward the personages


who were to move among the succeeding events. They were but three. A


young man and his sister; the former characterized by a diseased


imagination and morbid feelings; the latter, beautiful and virtuous,


and instilling something of her own excellence into the wild heart


of her brother, but not enough to cure the deep taint of his nature.


The third person was a wizard; a small, gray, withered man, with


fiendish ingenuity in devising evil, and superhuman power to execute


it, but senseless as an idiot and feebler than a child to all better


purposes. The central scene of the story was an interview between this


wretch and Leonard Doane, in the wizard's hut, situated beneath a


range of rocks at some distance from the town. They sat beside a


smouldering fire, while a tempest of wintry rain was beating on the


roof. The young man spoke of the closeness of the tie which united him


and Alice, the consecrated fervor of their affection from childhood


upwards, their sense of lonely sufficiency to each other, because they


only of their race had escaped death, in a night attack by the


Indians. He related his discovery or suspicion of a secret sympathy


between his sister and Walter Brome, and told how a distempered


jealousy had maddened him. In the following passage, I threw a


glimmering light on the mystery of the tale.


   "Searching," continued Leonard, "into the breast of Walter Brome, I


at length found a cause why Alice must inevitably love him. For he was


my very counterpart! I compared his mind by each individual portion,


and as a whole, with mine. There was a resemblance from which I shrunk


with sickness, and loathing, and horror, as if my own features had


come and stared upon me in a solitary place, or had met me in


struggling through a crowd. Nay! the very same thoughts would often


express themselves in the same words from our lips, proving a


hateful sympathy in our secret souls. His education, indeed, in the


cities of the old world, and mine in this rude wilderness, had wrought


a superficial difference. The evil of his character, also, had been


strengthened and rendered prominent by a reckless and ungoverned life,


while mine had been softened and purified by the gentle and holy


nature of Alice. But my soul had been conscious of the germ of all the


fierce and deep passions, and of all the many varieties of wickedness,


which accident had brought to their full maturity in him. Nor will I


deny that, in the accursed one, I could see the withered blossom of


every virtue, which, by a happier culture, had been made to bring


forth fruit in me. Now, here was a man whom Alice might love with


all the strength of sisterly affection, added to that impure passion


which alone engrosses all the heart. The stranger would have more than


the love which had been gathered to me from the many graves of our


household- and I be desolate!"


   Leonard Doane went on to describe the insane hatred that had


kindled his heart into a volume of hellish flame. It appeared, indeed,


that his jealousy had grounds, so far as that Walter Brome had


actually sought the love of Alice, who also had betrayed an


undefinable, but powerful interest in the unknown youth. The latter,


in spite of his passion for Alice, seemed to return the loathful


antipathy of her brother; the similarity of their dispositions made


them like joint possessors of an individual nature, which could not


become wholly the property of one, unless by the extinction of the


other. At last, with the same devil in each bosom, they chanced to


meet, they two on a lonely road. While Leonard spoke, the wizard had


sat listening to what he already knew, yet with tokens of


pleasurable interest, manifested by flashes of expression across his


vacant features, by grisly smiles and by a word here and there,


mysteriously filling up some void in the narrative. But when the young


man told how Walter Brome had taunted him with indubitable proofs of


the shame of Alice, and, before the triumphant sneer could vanish from


his face, had died by her brother's hand, the wizard laughed aloud.


Leonard started, but just then a gust of wind came down the chimney,


forming itself into a close resemblance of the slow, unvaried


laughter, by which he had been interrupted. "I was deceived,"


thought he; and thus pursued his fearful story.


   "I trod out his accursed soul, and knew that he was dead; for my


spirit bounded as if a chain had fallen from it and left me free.


But the burst of exulting certainty soon fled, and was succeeded by


a torpor over my brain and a dimness before my eyes, with the


sensation of one who struggles through a dream. So I bent down over


the body of Walter Brome, gazing into his face, and striving to make


my soul glad with the thought, that he, in very truth, lay dead before


me. I know not what space of time I had thus stood, nor how the vision


came. But it seemed to me that the irrevocable years since childhood


had rolled back, and a scene, that had long been confused and broken


in my memory, arrayed itself with all its first distinctness.


Methought I stood a weeping infant by my father's hearth; by the


cold and blood-stained hearth where he lay dead. I heard the


childish wail of Alice, and my own cry arose with hers, as we beheld


the features of our parent, fierce with the strife and distorted


with the pain, in which his spirit had passed away. As I gazed, a cold


wind whistled by, and waved my father's hair. Immediately I stood


again in the lonesome 91 road, no more a sinless child, but a man of


blood, whose tears were falling fast over the face of his dead


enemy. But the delusion was not wholly gone; that face still wore a


likeness of my father; and because my soul shrank from the fixed glare


of the eyes, I bore the body to the lake, and would have buried it


there. But before his icy sepulchre was hewn, I heard the voice of two


travellers and fled."


   Such was the dreadful confession of Leonard Doane. And now tortured


by the idea of his sister's guilt, yet sometimes yielding to a


conviction of her purity; stung with remorse for the death of Walter


Brome, and shuddering with a deeper sense of some unutterable crime,


perpetrated, as he imagined, in madness or a dream; moved also by dark


impulses, as if a fiend were whispering him to meditate violence


against the life of Alice; he had sought this interview with the


wizard, who, on certain conditions, had no power to withhold his aid


in unravelling the mystery. The tale drew near its close.


   The moon was bright on high; the blue firmament appeared to glow


with an inherent brightness; the greater stars were burning in their


spheres; the northern lights threw their mysterious glare far over the


horizon; the few small clouds aloft were burdened with radiance; but


the sky, with all its variety of light, was scarcely so brilliant as


the earth. The rain of the preceding night had frozen as it fell, and,


by that simple magic, had wrought wonders. The trees were hung with


diamonds and many-colored gems; the houses were overlaid with


silver, and the streets paved with slippery brightness; a frigid glory


was flung over all familiar things, from the cottage chimney to the


steeple of the meetinghouse, that gleamed upward to the sky. This


living world, where we sit by our firesides, or go forth to meet


beings like ourselves, seemed rather the creation of wizard power,


with so much of the resemblance to known objects that a man might


shudder at the ghostly shape of his old beloved dwelling, and the


shadow of a ghostly tree before his door. One looked to behold


inhabitants suited to such a town, glittering in icy garments, with


the motionless features, cold, sparkling eyes, and just sensation


enough in their frozen hearts to shiver at each other's presence.


   By this fantastic piece of description, and more in the same style,


I intended to throw a ghostly glimmer round the reader, so that his


imagination might view the town through a medium that should take


off its every-day aspect, and make it a proper theatre for so wild a


scene as the final one. Amid this unearthly show, the wretched brother


and sister were represented as setting forth, at midnight, through the


gleaming streets, and directing their steps to a graveyard, where


all the dead had been laid, from the first corpse in that ancient


town, to the murdered man who was buried three days before. As they


went, they seemed to see the wizard gliding by their sides, or walking


dimly on the path before them. But here I paused, and gazed into the


faces of my two fair auditors, to judge whether, even on the hill


where so many had been brought to death by wilder tales than this, I


might venture to proceed. Their bright eyes were fixed on me; their


lips apart. I took courage, and led the fated pair to a new-made


grave, where for a few moments, in the bright and silent midnight,


they stood alone. But suddenly there was a multitude of people among


the graves.


   Each family tomb had given up its inhabitants, who, one by one,


through distant years, had been borne to its dark chamber, but now


came forth and stood in a pale group together. There was the gray


ancestor, the aged mother, and all their descendants, some withered


and full of years, like themselves, and others in their prime;


there, too, were the children who went prattling to the tomb, and


there the maiden who yielded her early beauty to death's embrace,


before passion had polluted it. Husbands and wives arose, who had lain


many years side by side, and young mothers who had forgotten to kiss


their first babes, though pillowed so long on their bosoms. Many had


been buried in the habiliments of life, and still wore their ancient


garb; some were old defenders of the infant colony, and gleamed


forth in their steel-caps and bright breast-plates, as if starting


up at an Indian war-cry; other venerable shapes had been pastors of


the church, famous among the New England clergy, and now leaned with


hands clasped over their gravestones, ready to call the congregation


to prayer. There stood the early settlers, those old illustrious ones,


the heroes of tradition and fireside legends, the men of history whose


features had been so long beneath the sod that few alive could have


remembered them. There, too, were faces of former townspeople, dimly


recollected from childhood, and others, whom Leonard and Alice had


wept in later years, but who now were most terrible of all, by their


ghastly smile of recognition. All, in short, were there; the dead of


other generations, whose moss-grown names could scarce be read upon


their tombstones, and their successors, whose graves were not yet


green; all whom black funerals had followed slowly thither now


reappeared where the mourners left them. Yet none but souls accursed


were there, and fiends counterfeiting the likeness of departed saints.


   The countenances of those venerable men, whose very features had


been hallowed by lives of piety, were contorted now by intolerable


pain or hellish passion, and now by an unearthly and derisive


merriment. Had the pastors prayed, all saintlike as they seemed, it


had been blasphemy. The chaste matrons, too, and the maidens with


untasted lips, who had slept in their virgin graves apart from all


other dust, now wore a look from which the two trembling mortals


shrank, as if the unimaginable sin of twenty worlds were collected


there. The faces of fond lovers, even of such as had pined into the


tomb, because there their treasure was, were bent on one another


with glances of hatred and smiles of bitter scorn, passions that are


to devils what love is to the blest. At times, the features of those


who had passed from a holy life to heaven would vary to and fro,


between their assumed aspect and the fiendish lineaments whence they


had been transformed. The whole miserable multitude, both sinful


souls and false spectres of good men, groaned horribly and gnashed


their teeth, as they looked upward to the calm loveliness of the


midnight sky, and beheld those homes of bliss where they must never


dwell. Such was the apparition, though too shadowy for language to


portray; for here would be the moonbeams on the ice, glittering


through a warrior's breast-plate, and there the letters of a


tombstone, on the form that stood before it; and whenever a breeze


went by, it swept the old men's hoary heads, the women's fearful


beauty, and all the unreal throng, into one indistinguishable cloud


together.


   I dare not give the remainder of the scene, except in a very


brief epitome. This company of devils and condemned souls had come


on a holiday, to revel in the discovery of a complicated crime; as


foul a one as ever imagined in their dreadful abode. In the course


of the tale, the reader had been permitted to discover that all the


incidents were results of the machinations of the wizard, who had


cunningly devised that Walter Brome should tempt his unknown sister


to guilt and shame, and himself perish by the hand of his


twin-brother. I described the glee of the fiends at this hideous


conception, and their eagerness to know if it were consummated. The


story concluded with the Appeal of Alice to the spectre of Walter


Brome, his reply, absolving her from every stain; and the trembling


awe with which ghost and devil fled, as from the sinless presence of


an angel.


   The sun had gone down. While I held my page of wonders in the


fading light, and read how Alice and her brother were left alone


among the graves, my voice mingled with the sigh of a summer wind,


which  passed over the hill-top, with the broad and hollow sound as


of the flight of unseen spirits. Not a word was spoken till I added


that the wizard's grave was close beside us, and that the woodwax had


sprouted originally from his unhallowed bones. The ladies started;


perhaps their cheeks might have grown pale had not the crimson west


been blushing on them; but after a moment they began to laugh, while


the breeze took a livelier motion, as if responsive to their mirth.


I kept an awful solemnity of visage, being, indeed, a little piqued


that a narrative which had good authority in our ancient


superstitions, and would have brought even a church deacon to


Gallows Hill, in old witch times, should now be considered too


grotesque and extravagant for timid maids to tremble at. Though it


was past supper time, I detained them a while longer on the hill, and


made a trial whether truth were more powerful than fiction.


   We looked again towards the town, no longer arrayed in that icy


splendor of earth, tree, and edifice, beneath the glow of a wintry


midnight, which shining afar through the gloom of a century had made


it appear the very home of visions in visionary streets. An


indistinctness had begun to creep over the mass of buildings and


blend them with the intermingled tree-tops, except where the roof of


a statelier mansion, and the steeples and brick towers of churches,


caught the brightness of some cloud that yet floated in the


sunshine. Twilight over the landscape was congenial to the obscurity


of time. With such eloquence as my share of feeling and fancy could


supply, I called back hoar antiquity, and bade my companions imagine


an ancient multitude of people, congregated on the hill-side,


spreading far below, clustering on the steep old roofs, and climbing


the adjacent heights, wherever a glimpse of this spot might be


obtained. I strove to realize and faintly communicate the deep,


unutterable loathing and horror, the indignation, the affrighted


wonder, that wrinkled on every brow, and filled the universal heart.


See! the whole crowd turns pale and shrinks within itself, as the


virtuous emerge from yonder street. Keeping pace with that devoted


company, I described them one by one; here tottered a woman in her


dotage, knowing neither the crime imputed her, nor its punishment;


there another, distracted by the universal madness, till feverish


dreams were remembered as realities, and she almost believed her


guilt. One, a proud man once, was so broken down by the intolerable


hatred heaped upon him, that he seemed to hasten his steps, eager to


hide himself in the grave hastily dug at the foot of the gallows. As


they went slowly on, a mother looked behind, and beheld her peaceful


dwelling; she cast her eyes elsewhere, and groaned inwardly yet with


bitterest anguish, for there was her little son among the accusers.


I watched the face of an ordained pastor, who walked onward to the


same death; his lips moved in prayer; no narrow petition for himself


alone, but embracing all his fellow-sufferers and the frenzied


multitude; he looked to Heaven and trod lightly up the hill.


   Behind their victims came the afflicted, a guilty and miserable


band; villains who had thus avenged themselves on their enemies, and


viler wretches, whose cowardice had destroyed their friends;


lunatics, whose ravings had chimed in with the madness of the land;


and children, who had played a game that the imps of darkness might


have envied them, since it disgraced an age, and dipped a people's


hands in blood. In the rear of the procession rode a figure on


horseback, so darkly conspicuous, so sternly triumphant, that my


hearers mistook him for the visible presence of the fiend himself;


but it was only his good friend, Cotton Mather, proud of his well-won


dignity, as the representative of all the hateful features of his


time; the one blood-thirsty man, in whom were concentrated those


vices of spirit and errors of opinion that sufficed to madden the


whole surrounding multitude. And thus I marshalled them onward, the


innocent who were to die, and the guilty who were to grow old in long


remorse- tracing their every step, by rock, and shrub, and broken


track, till their shadowy visages had circled round the hill-top,


where we stood. I plunged into my imagination for a blacker horror,


and a deeper woe, and pictured the scaffold-


   But here my companions seized an arm on each side; their nerves


were trembling; and, sweeter victory still, I had reached the seldom


trodden places of their hearts, and found the well-spring of their


tears. And now the past had done all it could. We slowly descended,


watching the lights as they twinkled gradually through the town, and


listening to the distant mirth of boys at play, and to the voice of


a young girl warbling somewhere in the dusk, a pleasant sound to


wanderers from old witch times. Yet, ere we left the hill, we could


not but regret that there is nothing on its barren summit, no relic


of old, nor lettered stone of later days, to assist the imagination


in appealing to the heart. We build the memorial column on the height


which our fathers made sacred with their blood, poured out in a holy


cause. And here, in dark, funereal stone, should rise another


monument, sadly commemorative of the errors of an earlier race, and


not to be cast down, while the human heart has one infirmity that


may result in crime.








                        THE END


.




                                      1839


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                               OLD ESTHER DUDLEY


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   THE HOUR HAD COME- the hour of defeat and humiliation- when Sir


William Howe was to pass over the threshold of the Province House, and


embark, with no such triumphal ceremonies as he once promised himself,


on board the British fleet. He bade his servants and military


attendants go before him, and lingered a moment in the loneliness of


the mansion, to quell the fierce emotions that struggled in his


bosom as with a death throb. Preferable, then, would he have deemed


his fate, had a warrior's death left him a claim to the narrow


territory of a grave within the soil which the King had given him to


defend. With an ominous perception that, as his departing footsteps


echoed adown the staircase, the sway of Britain was passing forever


from New England, he smote his clinched hand on his brow, and cursed


the destiny that had flung the shame of a dismembered empire upon him.


   "Would to God," cried he, hardly repressing his tears of rage,


"that the rebels were even now at the doorstep! A blood-stain upon the


floor should then bear testimony that the last British ruler was


faithful to his trust."


   The tremulous voice of a woman replied to his exclamation.


   "Heaven's cause and the King's are one," it said. "Go forth, Sir


William Howe, and trust in Heaven to bring back a Royal Governor in


triumph."


   Subduing, at once, the passion to which he had yielded only in


the faith that it was unwitnessed, Sir William Howe became conscious


that an aged woman, leaning on a gold-headed staff, was standing


betwixt him and the door. It was old Esther Dudley, who had dwelt


almost immemorial years in this mansion, until her presence seemed


as inseparable from it as the recollections of its history. She was


the daughter of an ancient and once eminent family, which had fallen


into poverty and decay, and left its last descendant no resource


save the bounty of the King, nor any shelter except within the walls


of the Province House. An office in the household, with merely nominal


duties, had been assigned to her as a pretext for the payment of a


small pension, the greater part of which she expended in adorning


herself with an antique magnificence of attire. The claims of Esther


Dudley's gentle blood were acknowledged by all the successive


Governors; and they treated her with the punctilious courtesy which it


was her foible to demand, not always with success, from a neglectful


world. The only actual share which she assumed in the business of


the mansion was to glide through its passages and public chambers,


late at night, to see that the servants had dropped no fire from their


flaring torches, nor left embers crackling and blazing on the hearths.


Perhaps it was this invariable custom of walking her rounds in the


hush of midnight that caused the superstition of the times to invest


the old woman with attributes of awe and mystery; fabling that she had


entered the portal of the Province House, none knew whence, in the


train of the first Royal Governor, and that it was her fate to dwell


there till the last should have departed. But Sir William Howe, if


he ever heard this legend, had forgotten it.


   "Mistress Dudley, why are you loitering here?" asked he, with


some severity of tone. "It is my pleasure to be the last in this


mansion of the King."


   "Not so, if it please your Excellency," answered the


time-stricken woman. "This roof has sheltered me long. I will not pass


from it until they bear me to the tomb of my forefathers. What other


shelter is there for old Esther Dudley, save the Province House or the


grave?"


   "Now Heaven forgive me!" said Sir William Howe to himself. "I was


about to leave this wretched old creature to starve or beg. Take this,


good Mistress Dudley," he added, putting a purse into her hands. "King


George's head on these golden guineas is sterling yet, and will


continue so, I warrant you, even should the rebels crown John


Hancock their king. That purse will buy a better shelter than the


Province House can now afford."


   "While the burden of life remains upon me, I will have no other


shelter than this roof," persisted Esther Dudley, striking her staff


upon the floor with a gesture that expressed immovable resolve. "And


when your Excellency returns in triumph, I will totter into the


porch to welcome you."


   "My poor old friend!" answered the British General- and all his


manly and martial pride could no longer restrain a gush of bitter


tears. "This is an evil hour for you and me. The Province which the


King intrusted to my charge is lost. I go hence in misfortune-


perchance in disgrace- to return no more. And you, whose present being


is incorporated with the past- who have seen Governor after


Governor, in stately pageantry, ascend these steps- whose whole life


has been an observance of majestic ceremonies, and a worship of the


King- how will you endure the change? Come with us! Bid farewell to


a land that has shaken off its allegiance, and live still under a


royal government, at Halifax."


   "Never, never!" said the pertinacious old dame. "Here will I abide;


and King George shall still have one true subject in his disloyal


Province."


   "Beshrew the old fool!" muttered Sir William Howe, growing


impatient of her obstinacy, and ashamed of the emotion into which he


had been betrayed. "She is the very moral of old-fashioned


prejudice, and could exist nowhere but in this musty edifice. Well,


then, Mistress Dudley, since you will needs tarry, I give the Province


House in charge to you. Take this key, and keep it safe until


myself, or some other Royal Governor, shall demand it of you."


   Smiling bitterly at himself and her, he took the heavy key of the


Province House, and delivering it into the old lady's hands, drew


his cloak around him for departure. As the General glanced back at


Esther Dudley's antique figure, he deemed her well fitted for such a


charge, as being so perfect a representative of the decayed past- of


an age gone by, with its manners, opinions, faith and feelings, all


fallen into oblivion or scorn- of what had once been a reality, but


was now merely a vision of faded magnificence. Then Sir William Howe


strode forth, smiting his clinched hands together, in the fierce


anguish of his spirit; and old Esther Dudley was left to keep watch in


the lonely Province House, dwelling there with memory; and if Hope


ever seemed to flit around her, still was it Memory in disguise.


   The total change of affairs that ensued on the departure of the


British troops did not drive the venerable lady from her stronghold.


There was not, for many years afterwards, a Governor of Massachusetts;


and the magistrates, who had charge of such matters, saw no


objection to Esther Dudley's residence in the Province House,


especially as they must otherwise have paid a hireling for taking care


of the premises, which with her was a labor of love. And so they


left her the undisturbed mistress of the old historic edifice. Many


and strange were the fables which the gossips whispered about her,


in all the chimney corners of the town. Among the time-worn articles


of furniture that had been left in the mansion there was a tall,


antique mirror, which was well worthy of a tale by itself, and perhaps


may hereafter be the theme of one. The gold of its heavily-wrought


frame was tarnished, and its surface so blurred, that the old


woman's figure, whenever she paused before it, looked indistinct and


ghostlike. But it was the general belief that Esther could cause the


Governors of the overthrown dynasty, with the beautiful ladies who had


once adorned their festivals, the Indian chiefs who had come up to the


Province House to hold council or swear allegiance, the grim


Provincial warriors, the severe clergymen- in short, all the pageantry


of gone days- all the figures that ever swept across the broad plate


of glass in former times- she could cause the whole to reappear, and


people the inner world of the mirror with shadows of old life. Such


legends as these, together with the singularity of her isolated


existence, her age, and the infirmity that each added winter flung


upon her, made Mistress Dudley the object both of fear and pity; and


it was partly the result of either sentiment that, amid all the


angry license of the times, neither wrong nor insult ever fell upon


her unprotected head. Indeed, there was so much haughtiness in her


demeanor towards intruders, among whom she reckoned all persons acting


under the new authorities, that it was really an affair of no small


nerve to look her in the face. And to do the people justice, stern


republicans as they had now become, they were well content that the


old gentlewoman, in her hoop petticoat and faded embroidery, should


still haunt the palace of ruined pride and overthrown power, the


symbol of a departed system, embodying a history in her person. So


Esther Dudley dwelt year after year in the Province House, still


reverencing all that others had flung aside, still faithful to her


King, who, so long as the venerable dame yet held her post, might be


said to retain one true subject in New England, and one spot of the


empire that had been wrested from him.


   And did she dwell there in utter loneliness? Rumor said, not so.


Whenever her chill and withered heart desired warmth, she was wont


to summon a black slave of Governor Shirley's from the blurred mirror,


and send him in search of guests who had long ago been familiar in


those deserted chambers. Forth went the sable messenger, with the


starlight or the moonshine gleaming through him, and did his errand in


the burial ground, knocking at the iron doors of tombs, or upon the


marble slabs that covered them, and whispering to those within: "My


mistress, old Esther Dudley, bids you to the Province House at


midnight." And punctually as the clock of the Old South told twelve


came the shadows of the Olivers, the Hutchinsons, the Dudleys, all the


grandees of a by-gone generation, gliding beneath the portal into


the well-known mansion, where Esther mingled with them as if she


likewise were a shade. Without vouching for the truth of such


traditions, it is certain that Mistress Dudley sometimes assembled a


few of the stanch, though crestfallen, old tories, who had lingered in


the rebel town during those days of wrath and tribulation. Out of a


cobwebbed bottle, containing liquor that a royal Governor might have


smacked his lips over, they quaffed healths to the King, and babbled


treason to the Republic, feeling as if the protecting shadow of the


throne were still flung around them. But, draining the last drops of


their liquor, they stole timorously homeward, and answered not again


if the rude mob reviled them in the street.


   Yet Esther Dudley's most frequent and favored guests were the


children of the town. Towards them she was never stern. A kindly and


loving nature, hindered elsewhere from its free course by a thousand


rocky prejudices, lavished itself upon these little ones. By bribes of


gingerbread of her own making, stamped with a royal crown, she tempted


their sunny sportiveness beneath the gloomy portal of the Province


House, and would often beguile them to spend a whole playday there,


sitting in a circle round the verge of her hoop petticoat, greedily


attentive to her stories of a dead world. And when these little boys


and girls stole forth again from the dark mysterious mansion, they


went bewildered, full of old feelings that graver people had long


ago forgotten, rubbing their eyes at the world around them as if


they had gone astray into ancient times, and become children of the


past. At home, when their parents asked where they had loitered such a


weary while, and with whom they had been at play, the children would


talk of all the departed worthies of the Province, as far back as


Governor Belcher and the haughty dame of Sir William Phipps. It


would seem as though they had been sitting on the knees of these


famous personages, whom the grave had hidden for half a century, and


had toyed with the embroidery of their rich waistcoats, or roguishly


pulled the long curls of their flowing wigs. "But Governor Belcher has


been dead this many a year," would the mother say to her little boy.


"And did you really see him at the Province House?" "Oh yes, dear


mother! yes!" the half-dreaming child would answer. "But when old


Esther had done speaking about him he faded away out of his chair."


Thus, without affrighting her little guests, she led them by the


hand into the chambers of her own desolate heart, and made childhood's


fancy discern the ghosts that haunted there.


   Living so continually in her own circle of ideas, and never


regulating her mind by a proper reference to present things, Esther


Dudley appears to have grown partially crazed. It was found that she


had no right sense of the progress and true state of the Revolutionary


War, but held a constant faith that the armies of Britain were


victorious on every field, and destined to be ultimately triumphant.


Whenever the town rejoiced for a battle won by Washington, or Gates,


or Morgan, or Greene, the news, in passing through the door of the


Province House, as through the ivory gate of dreams, became


metamorphosed into a strange tale of the prowess of Howe, Clinton,


or Cornwallis. Sooner or later it was her invincible belief the


colonies would be prostrate at the footstool of the King. Sometimes


she seemed to take for granted that such was already the case. On


one occasion, she startled the townspeople by a brilliant illumination


of the Province House, with candles at every pane of glass, and a


transparency of the King's initials and a crown of light in the


great balcony window. The figure of the aged woman in the most


gorgeous of her mildewed velvets and brocades was seen passing from


casement to casement, until she paused before the balcony, and


flourished a huge key above her head. Her wrinkled visage actually


gleamed with triumph, as if the soul within her were a festal lamp.


   "What means this blaze of light? What does old Esther's joy


portend?" whispered a spectator. "It is frightful to see her gliding


about the chambers, and rejoicing there without a soul to bear her


company."


   "It is as if she were making merry in a tomb," said another.


   "Pshaw! It is no such mystery," observed an old man, after some


brief exercise of memory. "Mistress Dudley is keeping jubilee for


the King of England's birthday."


   Then the people laughed aloud, and would have thrown mud against


the blazing transparency of the King's crown and initials, only that


they pitied the poor old dame, who was so dismally triumphant amid the


wreck and ruin of the system to which she appertained.


   Oftentimes it was her custom to climb the weary staircase that


wound upward to the cupola, and thence strain her dimmed eyesight


seaward and countryward, watching for a British fleet, or for the


march of a grand procession, with the King's banner floating over


it. The passengers in the street below would discern her anxious


visage, and send up a shout, "When the golden Indian on the Province


House shall shoot his arrow, and when the cock on the Old South


spire shall crow, then look for a Royal Governor again!"- for this had


grown a byword through the town. And at last, after long, long


years, old Esther Dudley knew, or perchance she only dreamed, that a


Royal Governor was on the eve of returning to the Province House to


receive the heavy key which Sir William Howe had committed to her


charge. Now it was the fact that intelligence bearing some faint


analogy to Esther's version of it was current among the townspeople.


She set the mansion in the best order that her means allowed, and,


arraying herself in silks and tarnished gold, stood long before the


blurred mirror to admire her own magnificence. As she gazed, the


gray and withered lady moved her ashen lips, murmuring half aloud,


talking to shapes that she saw within the mirror, to shadows of her


own fantasies, to the household friends of memory, and bidding them


rejoice with her and come forth to meet the Governor. And while


absorbed in this communion, Mistress Dudley heard the tramp of many


footsteps in the street, and, looking out at the window, beheld what


she construed as the Royal Governor's arrival.


   "O happy day! O blessed, blessed hour!" she exclaimed. "Let me


but bid him welcome within the portal, and my task in the Province


House, and on earth, is done!"


   Then with tottering feet, which age and tremulous joy caused to


tread amiss, she hurried down the grand staircase, her silks sweeping


and rustling as she went, so that the sound was as if a train of


spectral courtiers were thronging from the dim mirror. And Esther


Dudley fancied that as soon as the wide door should be flung open, all


the pomp and splendor of by-gone times would pace majestically into


the Province House, and the gilded tapestry of the past would be


brightened by the sunshine of the present. She turned the key-


withdrew it from the lock- unclosed the door- and stepped across the


threshold. Advancing up the court-yard appeared a person of most


dignified mien, with tokens, as Esther interpreted them, of gentle


blood, high rank, and long-accustomed authority, even in his walk and


every gesture. He was richly dressed, but wore a gouty shoe, which,


however, did not lessen the stateliness of his gait. Around and behind


him were people in plain civic dresses, and two or three war-worn


veterans, evidently officers of rank, arrayed in a uniform of blue and


buff. But Esther Dudley, firm in the belief that had fastened its


roots about her heart, beheld only the principal personage, and never


doubted that this was the long-looked-for Governor, to whom she was to


surrender up her charge. As he approached, she involuntarily sank down


on her knees and tremblingly held forth the heavy key.


   "Receive my trust! take it quickly!" cried she; "for methinks Death


is striving to snatch away my triumph. But he comes too late. Thank


Heaven for this blessed hour! God save King George!"


   "That, Madam, is a strange prayer to be offered up at such a


moment," replied the unknown guest of the Province House, and


courteously removing his hat, he offered his arm to raise the aged


woman. "Yet, in reverence for your gray hairs and long-kept faith,


Heaven forbid that any here should say you nay. Over the realms


which still acknowledge his sceptre, God save King George!"


   Esther Dudley started to her feet, and hastily clutching back the


key, gazed with fearful earnestness at the stranger; and dimly and


doubtfully, as if suddenly awakened from a dream, her bewildered


eyes half recognized his face. Years ago she had known him among the


gentry of the province. But the ban of the King had fallen upon him!


How, then, came the doomed victim here? Proscribed, excluded from


mercy, the monarch's most dreaded and hated foe, this New England


merchant had stood triumphantly against a kingdom's strength; and


his foot now trod upon humbled Royalty, as he ascended the steps of


the Province House, the people's chosen Governor of Massachusetts.


   "Wretch, wretch that I am!" muttered the old woman, with such a


heart-broken expression that the tears gushed from the stranger's


eyes. "Have I bidden a traitor welcome? Come, Death! come quickly!"


   "Alas, venerable lady. said Governor Hancock, lending her his


support with all the reverence that a courtier would have shown to a


queen. "Your life has been prolonged until the world has changed


around you. You have treasured up all that time has rendered


worthless- the principles, feelings, manners, modes of being and


acting, which another generation has flung aside- and you are a symbol


of the past. And I, and these around me- we represent a new race of


men- living no longer in the past, scarcely in the present- but


projecting our lives forward into the future. Ceasing to model


ourselves on ancestral superstitions, it is our faith and principle to


press onward, onward! Yet," continued he, turning to his attendants,


"let us reverence, for the last time, the stately and gorgeous


prejudices of the tottering Past!"


   While the Republican Governor spoke, he had continued to support


the helpless form of Esther Dudley; her weight grew heavier against


his arm; but at last, with a sudden effort to free herself, the


ancient woman sank down beside one of the pillars of the portal. The


key of the Province House fell from her grasp, and clanked against the


stone.


   "I have been faithful unto death," murmured she. "God save the


King!"


   "She hath done her office!" said Hancock solemnly. "We will


follow her reverently to the tomb of her ancestors; and then, my


fellow-citizens, onward- onward! We are no longer children of the


Past!


                        THE END


.




                                      1830


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                         THE HOLLOW OF THE THREE HILLS


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   IN THOSE STRANGE OLD TIMES, when fantastic dreams and madmen's


reveries were realized among the actual circumstances of life, two


persons met together at an appointed hour and place. One was a lady,


graceful in form and fair of feature, though pale and troubled, and


smitten with an untimely blight in what should have been the fullest


bloom of her years; the other was an ancient and meanly-dressed woman,


of ill-favored aspect, and so withered, shrunken, and decrepit, that


even the space since she began to decay must have exceeded the


ordinary term of human existence. In the spot where they


encountered, no mortal could observe them. Three little hills stood


near each other, and down in the midst of them sunk a hollow basin,


almost mathematically circular, two or three hundred feet in


breadth, and of such depth that a stately cedar might but just be


visible above the sides. Dwarf pines were numerous upon the hills, and


partly fringed the outer verge of the intermediate hollow, within


which there was nothing but the brown grass of October, and here and


there a tree trunk that had fallen long ago, and lay mouldering with


no green successor from its roots. One of these masses of decaying


wood, formerly a majestic oak, rested close beside a pool of green and


sluggish water at the bottom of the basin. Such scenes as this (so


gray tradition tells) were once the resort of the Power of Evil and


his plighted subjects; and here, at midnight or on the dim verge of


evening, they were said to stand round the mantling pool, disturbing


its putrid waters in the performance of an impious baptismal rite. The


chill beauty of an autumnal sunset was now gilding the three


hill-tops, whence a paler tint stole down their sides into the hollow.


   "Here is our pleasant meeting come to pass," said the aged crone,


"according as thou hast desired. Say quickly what thou wouldst have of


me, for there is but a short hour that we may tarry here."


   As the old withered woman spoke, a smile glimmered on her


countenance, like lamplight on the wall of a sepulchre. The lady


trembled, and cast her eyes upward to the verge of the basin, as if


meditating to return with her purpose unaccomplished. But it was not


so ordained.


   "I am a stranger in this land, as you know," said she at length.


"Whence I come it matters not; but I have left those behind me with


whom my fate was intimately bound, and from whom I am cut off forever.


There is a weight in my bosom that I cannot away with, and I have come


hither to inquire of their welfare."


   "And who is there by this green pool that can bring thee news


from the ends of the earth?" cried the old woman, peering into the


lady's face. "Not from my lips mayst thou hear these tidings; yet,


be thou bold, and the daylight shall not pass away from yonder


hill-top before thy wish be granted."


   "I will do your bidding though I die," replied the lady


desperately.


   The old woman seated herself on the trunk of the fallen tree, threw


aside the hood that shrouded her gray locks, and beckoned her


companion to draw near.


   "Kneel down," she said, and lay your forehead on my knees."


   She hesitated a moment, but the anxiety that had long been kindling


burned fiercely up within her. As she knelt down, the border of her


garment was dipped into the pool; she laid her forehead on the old


woman's knees, and the latter drew a cloak about the lady's face, so


that she was in darkness. Then she heard the muttered words of prayer,


in the midst of which she started, and would have arisen.


   "Let me flee- let me flee and hide myself, that they may not look


upon me!" she cried. But, with returning recollection, she hushed


herself, and was still as death.


   For it seemed as if other voices- familiar in infancy, and


unforgotten through many wanderings, and in all the vicissitudes of


her heart and fortune- were mingling with the accents of the prayer.


At first the words were faint and indistinct, not rendered so by


distance, but rather resembling the dim pages of a book which we


strive to read by an imperfect and gradually brightening light. In


such a manner, as the prayer proceeded, did those voices strengthen


upon the ear; till at length the petition ended, and the


conversation of an aged man, and of a woman broken and decayed like


himself, became distinctly audible to the lady as she knelt. But those


strangers appeared not to stand in the hollow depth between the


three hills. Their voices were encompassed and reechoed by the walls


of a chamber, the windows of which were rattling in the breeze; the


regular vibration of a clock, the crackling of a fire, and the


tinkling of the embers as they fell among the ashes, rendered the


scene almost as vivid as if painted to the eye. By a melancholy hearth


sat these two old people, the man calmly despondent, the woman


querulous and tearfull and their words were all of sorrow. They


spoke of a daughter, a wanderer they knew not where, bearing


dishonor along with her, and leaving shame and affliction to bring


their gray heads to the grave. They alluded also to other and more


recent wo, but in the midst of their talk their voices seemed to


melt into the sound of the wind sweeping mournfully among the autumn


leaves; and when the lady lifted her eyes, there was she kneeling in


the hollow between three hills.


   " A weary and lonesome time yonder old couple have of it," remarked


the old woman, smiling in the lady's face.


   "And did you also hear them?" exclaimed she, a sense of intolerable


humiliation triumphing over her agony and fear.


   "Yea; and we have yet more to hear," replied the old woman.


"Wherefore, cover thy face quickly."


   Again the withered hag poured forth the monotonous words of a


prayer that was not meant to be acceptable in heaven; and soon, in the


pauses of her breath, strange murmurings began to thicken, gradually


increasing so as to drown and overpower the charm by which they


grew. Shrieks pierced through the obscurity of sound, and were


succeeded by the singing of sweet female voices, which, in their turn,


gave way to a wild roar of laughter, broken suddenly by groanings


and sobs, forming altogether a ghastly confusion of terror and


mourning and mirth. Chains were rattling, fierce and stern voices


uttered threats, and the scourge resounded at their command. All these


noises deepened and became substantial to the listener's ear, till she


could distinguish every soft and dreamy accent of the love songs


that died causelessly into funeral hymns. She shuddered at the


unprovoked wrath which blazed up like the spontaneous kindling of


flame, and she grew faint at the fearful merriment raging miserably


around her. In the midst of this wild scene, where unbound passions


jostled each other in a drunken career, there was one solemn voice


of a man, and a manly and melodious voice it might once have been.


He went to and fro continually, and his feet sounded upon the floor.


In each member of that frenzied company, whose own burning thoughts


had become their exclusive world, he sought an auditor for the story


of his individual wrong, and interpreted their laughter and tears as


his reward of scorn or pity. He spoke of woman's perfidy, of a wife


who had broken her holiest vows, of a home and heart made desolate.


Even as he went on, the shout, the laugh, the shriek, the sob, rose up


in unison, till they changed into the hollow, fitful, and uneven sound


of the wind, as it fought among the pine-trees on those three lonely


hills. The lady looked up, and there was the withered woman smiling in


her face.


   "Couldst thou have thought there were such merry times in a


mad-house?" inquired the latter.


   "True, true," said the lady to herself; "there is mirth within


its walls, but misery, misery without."


   "Wouldst thou hear more?" demanded the old woman.


   "There is one other voice I would fain listen to again," replied


the lady faintly.


   "Then, lay down thy head speedily upon my knees, that thou mayst


get thee hence before the hour be past."


   The golden skirts of day were yet lingering upon the hills, but


deep shades obscured the hollow and the pool, as if sombre night


were rising thence to overspread the world. Again that evil woman


began to weave her spell. Long did it proceed unanswered, till the


knolling of a bell stole in among the intervals of her words, like a


clang that had travelled far over valley and rising ground, and was


just ready to die in the air. The lady shook upon her companion's


knees as she heard that boding sound. Stronger it grew and sadder, and


deepened into the tone of a death bell, knolling dolefully from some


ivy-mantled tower, and bearing tidings of mortality and wo to the


cottage, to the hall, and to the solitary wayfarer, that all might


weep for the doom appointed in turn to them. Then came a measured


tread, passing slowly, slowly on, as of mourners with a coffin,


their garments trailing on the ground, so that the ear could measure


the length of their melancholy array. Before them went the priest,


reading the burial service, while the leaves of his book were rustling


in the breeze. And though no voice but his was heard to speak aloud,


still there were revilings and anathemas, whispered but distinct, from


women and from men, breathed against the daughter who had wrung the


aged hearts of her parents- the wife who had betrayed the trusting


fondness of her husband- the mother who had sinned against natural


affection, and left her child to die. The sweeping sound of the


funeral train faded away like a thin vapor, and the wind, that just


before had seemed to shake the coffin pall, moaned sadly round the


verge of the Hollow between three Hills. But when the old woman


stirred the kneeling lady, she lifted not her head.


   "Here has been a sweet hour's sport!" said the withered crone,


chuckling to herself.








                        THE END


.




                                      1832


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                           MY KINSMAN, MAJOR MOLINEUX


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   AFTER THE KINGS of Great Britain had assumed the right of


appointing the colonial governors, the measures of the latter seldom


met with the ready and general approbation which had been paid to


those of their predecessors, under the original charters. The people


looked with most jealous scrutiny to the exercise of power which did


not emanate from themselves, and they usually rewarded their rulers


with slender gratitude for the compliances by which, in softening


their instructions from beyond the sea, they had incurred the


reprehension of those who gave them. The annals of Massachusetts Bay


will inform us, that of six governors in the space of about forty


years from the surrender of the old charter, under James II, two


were imprisoned by a popular insurrection; a third, as Hutchinson


inclines to believe, was driven from the province by the whizzing of a


musketball; a fourth, in the opinion of the same historian, was


hastened to his grave by continual bickerings with the House of


Representatives; and the remaining two, as well as their successors,


till the Revolution, were favored with few and brief intervals of


peaceful sway. The inferior members of the court party, in times of


high political excitement, led scarcely a more desirable life. These


remarks may serve as a preface to the following adventures, which


chanced upon a summer night, not far from a hundred years ago. The


reader, in order to avoid a long and dry detail of colonial affairs,


is requested to dispense with an account of the train of circumstances


that had caused much temporary inflammation of the popular mind.


   It was near nine o'clock of a moonlight evening, when a boat


crossed the ferry with a single passenger, who had obtained his


conveyance at that unusual hour by the promise of an extra fare. While


he stood on the landing place, searching in either pocket for the


means of fulfilling his agreement, the ferryman lifted a lantern, by


the aid of which, and the newly-risen moon, he took a very accurate


survey of the stranger's figure. He was a youth of barely eighteen


years, evidently country-bred, and now, as it should seem, upon his


first visit to town. He was clad in a coarse gray coat, well worn, but


in excellent repair; his under-garments were durably constructed of


leather, and fitted tight to a pair of serviceable and well-shaped


limbs; his stockings of blue yarn were the incontrovertible work of


a mother or a sister; and on his head was a three-cornered hat,


which in its better days had perhaps sheltered the graver brow of


the lad's father. Under his left arm was a heavy cudgel, formed of


an oak sapling, and retaining a part of the hardened root; and his


equipment was completed by a wallet, not so abundantly stocked as to


incommode the vigorous shoulders on which it hung. Brown, curly


hair, well-shaped features, and bright, cheerful eyes, were nature's


gifts, and worth all that art could have done for his adornment.


   The youth, one of whose names was Robin, finally drew from his


pocket the half of a little province bill of five shillings, which, in


the depreciation of that sort of currency, did but satisfy the


ferryman's demand, with the surplus of a sexangular piece of


parchment, valued at three pence. He then walked forward into the


town, with as light a step as if his day's journey had not already


exceeded thirty miles, and with as eager an eye as if he were entering


London city, instead of the little metropolis of a New England colony.


Before Robin had proceeded far, however, it occurred to him that he


knew not whither to direct his steps; so he paused, and looked up


and down the narrow street, scrutinizing the small and mean wooden


buildings that were scattered on either side.


   "This low hovel cannot be my kinsman's dwelling," thought he,


"nor yonder old house, where the moonlight enters at the broken


casement; and truly I see none hereabouts that might be worthy of him.


It would have been wise to inquire my way of the ferryman, and


doubtless he would have gone with me, and earned a shilling from the


major for his pains. But the next man I meet will do as well."


   He resumed his walk, and was glad to perceive that the street now


became wider, and the houses more respectable in their appearance.


He soon discerned a figure moving on moderately in advance, and


hastened his steps to overtake it. As Robin drew nigh, he saw that the


passenger was a man in years, with a full periwig of gray hair, a


wide-skirted coat of dark cloth, and silk stockings rolled above his


knees. He carried a long and polished cane, which he struck down


perpendicularly before him, at every step; and at regular intervals he


uttered two successive hems, of a peculiarly solemn and sepulchral


intonation. Having made these observations, Robin laid hold of the


skirt of the old man's coat, just when the light from the open door


and windows of a barber's shop fell upon both their figures. "Good


evening to you, honored sir," said he, making a low bow, and still


retaining his hold of the skirt. "I pray you tell me whereabouts is


the dwelling of my kinsman, Major Molineux."


   The youth's question was uttered very loudly; and one of the


barbers, whose razor was descending on a well-soaped chin, and another


who was dressing a Ramillies wig, left their occupations, and came


to the door. The citizen, in the meantime, turned a long-favored


countenance upon Robin, and answered him in a tone of excessive


anger and annoyance. His two sepulchral hems, however, broke into


the very centre of his rebuke, with most singular effect, like a


thought of the cold grave obtruding among wrathful passions.


   "Let go my garment, fellow! I tell you, I know not the man you


speak of. What! I have authority, I have- hem, hem- authority; and


if this be the respect you show for your betters, your feet shall be


brought acquainted with the stocks by daylight, tomorrow morning!"


   Robin released the old man's skirt, and hastened away, pursued by


an ill-mannered roar of laughter from the barber's shop. He was at


first considerably surprised by the result of his question, but, being


a shrewd youth, soon thought himself able to account for the mystery.


   This is some country representative," was his conclusion, "who


has never seen the inside of my kinsman's door, and lacks the breeding


to answer a stranger civilly. The man is old, or verily- I might be


tempted to turn back and smite him on the nose. Ah, Robin, Robin! even


the barber's boys laugh at you choosing such a guide! You will be


wiser in time, friend Robin."


   He now became entangled in a succession of crooked and narrow


streets, which crossed each other, and meandered at no great


distance from the water-side. The smell of tar was obvious to his


nostrils, the masts of vessels pierced the moonlight above the tops of


the buildings, and the numerous signs, which Robin paused to read,


informed him that he was near the centre of business. But the


streets were empty, the shops were closed, and lights were visible


only in the second stories of a few dwelling-houses. At length, on the


corner of a narrow lane, through which he was passing, he beheld the


broad countenance of a British hero swinging before the door of an


inn, whence proceeded the voices of many guests. The casement of one


of the lower windows was thrown back, and a very thin curtain


permitted Robin to distinguish a party at supper, round a


well-furnished table. The fragrance of the good cheer steamed forth


into the outer air, and the youth could not fail to recollect that the


last remnant of his travelling stock of provision had yielded to his


morning appetite, and that noon had found, and left him, dinnerless.


   "O, that a parchment three-penny might give me a right to sit


down at yonder table!" said Robin, with a sigh. "But the major will


make me welcome to the best of his victuals; so I will even step


boldly in, and inquire my way to his dwelling."


   He entered the tavern, and was guided by the murmur of voices,


and the fumes of tobacco, to the public room. It was a long and low


apartment, with oaken walls, grown dark in the continual smoke, and


a floor, which was thickly sanded, but of no immaculate purity. A


number of persons- the larger part of whom appeared to be mariners, or


in some way connected with the sea- occupied the wooden benches, or


leather-bottomed chairs, conversing on various matters, and


occasionally lending their attention to some topic of general


interest. Three or four little groups were draining as many bowls of


punch, which the West India trade had long since made a familiar drink


in the colony. Others, who had the appearance of men who lived by


regular and laborious handicraft, preferred the insulated bliss of


an unshared potation, and became more taciturn under its influence.


Nearly all, in short, evinced a predilection for the Good Creature


in some of its various shapes, for this is a vice to which, as


Fast-day sermons of a hundred years ago will testify, we have a long


hereditary claim. The only guests to whom Robin's sympathies


inclined him were two or three sheepish countrymen, who were using the


inn somewhat after the fashion of a Turkish caravansary; they had


gotten themselves into the darkest corner of the room, and, heedless


of the Nicotian atmosphere, were supping on the bread of their own


ovens, and the bacon cured in their own chimney-smoke. But though


Robin felt a sort of brotherhood with these strangers, his eyes were


attracted from them to a person who stood near the door, holding


whispered conversation with a group of ill-dressed associates. His


features were separately striking almost to grotesqueness, and the


whole face left a deep impression on the memory. The forehead bulged


out into a double prominence, with a vale between; the nose came


boldly forth in an irregular curve, and its bridge was of more than


a finger's breadth; the eyebrows were deep and shaggy, and the eyes


glowed beneath them like fire in a cave.


   While Robin deliberated of whom to inquire respecting his kinsman's


dwelling, he was accosted by the innkeeper, a little man in a


stained white apron, who had come to pay his professional welcome to


the stranger. Being in the second generation from a French Protestant,


he seemed to have inherited the courtesy of his parent nation; but


no variety of circumstances was ever known to change his voice from


the one shrill note in which he now addressed Robin.


   "From the country, I presume, sir?" said he, with a profound bow.


"Beg leave to congratulate you on your arrival, and trust you intend a


long stay with us. Fine town here, sir, beautiful buildings, and


much that may interest a stranger. May I hope for the honor of your


commands in respect to supper?"


   "The man sees a family likeness! the rogue has guessed that I am


related to the major!" thought Robin, who had hitherto experienced


little superfluous civility.


   All eyes were now turned on the country lad, standing at the


door, in his worn three-cornered hat, gray coat, leather breeches, and


blue yarn stockings, leaning on an oaken cudgel, and bearing a


wallet on his back.


   Robin replied to the courteous innkeeper, with such an assumption


of confidence as befitted the major's relative. "My honest friend," he


said, "I shall make it a point to patronize your house on some


occasion when"- here he could not help lowering his voice- "when I may


have more than a parchment three-pence in my pocket. My present


business," continued he, speaking with lofty confidence, "is merely to


inquire my way to the dwelling of my kinsman, Major Molineux."


   There was a sudden and general movement in the room, which Robin


interpreted as expressing the eagerness of each individual to become


his guide. But the innkeeper turned his eyes to a written paper on the


wall, which he read, or seemed to read, with occasional recurrences to


the young man's figure.


   "What have we here?" said he, breaking his speech into little dry


fragments. "'Left the house of the subscriber, bounden servant,


Hezekiah Mudge- had on, when he went away, gray coat, leather


breeches, master's third-best hat. One pound currency reward to


whosoever shall lodge him in any jail of the province.' Better trudge,


boy, better trudge!"


   Robin had begun to draw his hand towards the lighter end of the oak


cudgel, but a strange hostility in every countenance induced him to


relinquish his purpose of breaking the courteous innkeeper's head.


As he turned to leave the room, he encountered a sneering glance


from the bold-featured personage whom he had before noticed; and no


sooner was he beyond the door, than he heard a general laugh, in which


the innkeeper's voice might be distinguished, like the dropping of


small stones into a kettle.


   "Now, is it not strange," thought Robin, with his usual shrewdness,


"is it not strange, that the confession of an empty pocket should


outweigh the name of my kinsman, Major Molineux? O, if I had one of


those grinning rascals in the woods, where I and my oak sapling grew


up together, I would teach him that my arm is heavy, though my purse


be light!"


   On turning the corner of the narrow lane, Robin found himself in


a spacious street, with an unbroken line of lofty houses on each side,


and a steepled building at the upper end, whence the ringing of a bell


announced the hour of nine. The light of the moon, and the lamps


from the numerous shop windows, discovered people promenading on the


pavement, and amongst them Robin hoped to recognize his hitherto


inscrutable relative. The result of his former inquiries made him


unwilling to hazard another, in a scene of such publicity, and he


determined to walk slowly and silently up the street, thrusting his


face close to that of every elderly gentleman, in search of the


major's lineaments. In his progress, Robin encountered many gay and


gallant figures. Embroidered garments of showy colors, enormous


periwigs, gold-laced hats, and silver-hilted swords, glided past


him, and dazzled his optics. Travelled youth, imitators of the


European fine gentlemen of the period, trod jauntily along,


half-dancing to the fashionable tunes which they hummed, and making


poor Robin ashamed of his quiet and natural gait. At length, after


many pauses to examine the gorgeous display of goods in the shop


windows, and after suffering some rebukes for the impertinence of


his scrutiny into people's faces, the major's kinsman found himself


near the steepled building, still unsuccessful in his search. As


yet, however, he had seen only one side of the thronged street, so


Robin crossed, and continued the same sort of inquisition down the


opposite pavement, with stronger hopes than the philosopher seeking an


honest man, but with no better fortune. He had arrived about midway


towards the lower end, from which his course began, when he


overheard the approach of someone, who struck down a cane on the


flagstones at every step, uttering, at regular intervals, two


sepulchral hems.


   "Mercy on us!" quoth Robin, recognizing the sound.


   Turning a corner, which chanced to be close at his right hand, he


hastened to pursue his researches in some other part of the town.


His patience now was wearing low, and he seemed to feel more fatigue


from his rambles since he crossed the ferry, than from his journey


of several days on the other side. Hunger also pleaded loudly within


him, and Robin began to balance the propriety of demanding, violently,


and with lifted cudgel, the necessary guidance from the first solitary


passenger whom he should meet. While a resolution to this effect was


gaining strength, he entered a street of mean appearance, on either


side of which a row of ill-built houses was straggling towards the


harbor. The moonlight fell upon no passenger along the whole extent,


but in the third domicile which Robin passed there was a half-opened


door, and his keen glance detected a woman's garment within.


   "My luck may be better here," said he to himself.


   Accordingly, he approached the door, and beheld it shut closer as


he did so; yet an open space remained, sufficing for the fair occupant


to observe the stranger, without a corresponding display on her


part. All that Robin could discern was a strip of scarlet petticoat,


and the occasional sparkle of an eye, as if the moonbeams were


trembling on some bright thing.


   "Pretty mistress," for I may call her so with a good conscience,


thought the shrewd youth, since I know nothing to the contrary- "my


sweet pretty mistress, will you be kind enough to tell me


whereabouts I must seek the dwelling of my kinsman, Major Molineux?"


   Robin's voice was plaintive and winning, and the female, seeing


nothing to be shunned in the handsome country youth, thrust open the


door, and came forth into the moonlight. She was a dainty little


figure, with a white neck, round arms, and a slender waist, at the


extremity of which her scarlet petticoat jutted out over a hoop, as if


she were standing in a balloon. Moreover, her face was oval and


pretty, her hair dark beneath the little cap, and her bright eyes


possessed a sly freedom, which triumphed over those of Robin.


   "Major Molineux dwells here," said this fair woman.


   Now, her voice was the sweetest Robin had heard that night, the


airy counterpart of a stream of melted silver; yet he could not help


doubting whether that sweet voice spoke Gospel truth. He looked up and


down the mean street, and then surveyed the house before which they


stood. It was a small, dark edifice of two stories, the second of


which projected over the lower floor; and the front apartment had


the aspect of a shop for petty commodities.


   "Now truly I am in luck," replied Robin, cunningly, "and so


indeed is my kinsman, the major, in having so pretty a housekeeper.


But I prithee trouble him to step to the door; I will deliver him a


message from his friends in the country, and then go back to my


lodgings at the inn."


   "Nay, the major has been a-bed this hour or more," said the lady of


the scarlet petticoat; "and it would be to little purpose to disturb


him tonight, seeing his evening draught was of the strongest. But he


is a kind-hearted man, and it would be as much as my life's worth to


let a kinsman of his turn away from the door. You are the good old


gentleman's very picture, and I could swear that was his rainy-weather


hat. Also he has garments very much resembling those leather


small-clothes. But come in, I pray, for I bid you hearty welcome in


his name."


   So saying, the fair and hospitable dame took our hero by the


hand; and the touch was light, and the force was gentleness, and


though Robin read in her eyes what he did not hear in her words, yet


the slender-waisted woman in the scarlet petticoat proved stronger


than the athletic country youth. She had drawn his half-willing


footsteps nearly to the threshold, when the opening of a door in the


neighborhood startled the major's housekeeper, and, leaving the


major's kinsman, she vanished speedily into her own domicile. A


heavy yawn preceded the appearance of a man, who, like the Moonshine


of Pyramus and Thisbe, carried a lantern, needlessly aiding his sister


luminary in the heavens. As he walked sleepily up the street, he


turned his broad, dull face on Robin, and displayed a long staff,


spiked at the end.


   "Home, vagabond, home!" said the watchman, in accents that seemed


to fall asleep as soon as they were uttered. "Home, or we'll set you


in the stocks, by peep of day!"


   "This is the second hint of the kind," thought Robin. "I wish


they would end my difficulties, by setting me there tonight."


   Nevertheless, the youth felt an instinctive antipathy towards the


guardian of midnight order, which at first prevented him from asking


his usual question. But just when the man was about to vanish behind


the corner, Robin resolved not to lose the opportunity, and shouted


lustily after him- "I say, friend! will you guide me to the house of


my kinsman, Major Molineux?"


   The watchman made no reply, but turned the corner and was gone; yet


Robin seemed to hear the sound of drowsy laughter stealing along the


solitary street. At that moment, also, a pleasant titter saluted him


from the open window above his head; he looked up, and caught the


sparkle of a saucy eye; a round arm beckoned to him, and next he heard


light footsteps descending the staircase within. But Robin, being of


the household of a New England clergyman, was a good youth, as well as


a shrewd one; so he resisted temptation, and fled away.


   He now roamed desperately, and at random, through the town,


almost ready to believe that a spell was on him, like that by which


a wizard of his country had once kept three pursuers wandering, a


whole winter night, within twenty paces of the cottage which they


sought. The streets lay before him, strange and desolate, and the


lights were extinguished in almost every house. Twice, however, little


parties of men, among whom Robin distinguished individuals in


outlandish attire, came hurrying along; but though on both occasions


they paused to address him, such intercourse did not at all


enlighten his perplexity. They did but utter a few words in some


language of which Robin knew nothing, and perceiving his inability


to answer, bestowed a curse upon him in plain English, and hastened


away. Finally, the lad determined to knock at the door of every


mansion that might appear worthy to be occupied by his kinsman,


trusting that perseverance would overcome the fatality that had


hitherto thwarted him. Firm in this resolve, he was passing beneath


the walls of a church, which formed the corner of two streets, when,


as he turned into the shade of its steeple, he encountered a bulky


stranger, muffled in a cloak. The man was proceeding with the speed of


earnest business, but Robin planted himself full before him, holding


the oak cudgel with both hands across his body, as a bar to further


passage.


   "Halt, honest man, and answer me a question," said he, very


resolutely. "Tell me, this instant, whereabouts is the dwelling of


my kinsman, Major Molineux?"


   "Keep your tongue between your teeth, fool, and let me pass!"


said a deep, gruff voice, which Robin partly remembered. "Let me pass,


I say, or I'll strike you to the earth!"


   "No, no, neighbor!" cried Robin, flourishing his cudgel, and then


thrusting its larger end close to the man's muffled face. "No, no, I'm


not the fool you take me for, nor do you pass till I have an answer to


my question. Whereabouts is the dwelling of my kinsman, Major


Molineux?"


   The stranger, instead of attempting to force his passage, stepped


back into the moonlight, unmuffled his face, and stared full into that


of Robin.


   "Watch here an hour, and Major Molineux will pass by," said he.


   Robin gazed with dismay and astonishment on the unprecedented


physiognomy of the speaker. The forehead with its double prominence,


the broad hooked nose, the shaggy eyebrows, and fiery eyes, were those


which he had noticed at the inn, but the man's complexion had


undergone a singular, or, more properly, a two-fold change. One side


of the face blazed an intense red, while the other was black as


midnight, the division line being in the broad bridge of the nose; and


a mouth which seemed to extend from ear to ear was black or red, in


contrast to the color of the cheek. The effect was as if two


individual devils, a fiend of fire and a fiend of darkness, had united


themselves to form this infernal visage. The stranger grinned in


Robin's face, muffled his parti-colored features, and was out of sight


in a moment.


   "Strange things we travellers see!" ejaculated Robin.


   He seated himself, however, upon the steps of the church-door,


resolving to wait the appointed time for his kinsman. A few moments


were consumed in philosophical speculations upon the species of man


who had just left him; but having settled this point shrewdly,


rationally, and satisfactorily, he was compelled to look elsewhere for


his amusement. And first he threw his eyes along the street. It was of


more respectable appearance than most of those into which he had


wandered, and the moon, creating, like the imaginative power, a


beautiful strangeness in familiar objects, gave something of romance


to a scene that might not have possessed it in the light of day. The


irregular and often quaint architecture of the houses, some of whose


roofs were broken into numerous little peaks, while others ascended,


steep and narrow, into a single point, and others again were square;


the pure snow-white of some of their complexions, the aged darkness of


others, and the thousand sparklings, reflected from bright


substances in the walls of many; these matters engaged Robin's


attention for a while, and then began to grow wearisome. Next he


endeavored to define the forms of distant objects, starting away, with


almost ghostly indistinctness, just as his eye appeared to grasp them;


and finally he took a minute survey of an edifice which stood on the


opposite side of the street, directly in front of the church-door,


where he was stationed. It was a large, square mansion,


distinguished from its neighbors by a balcony, which rested on tall


pillars, and by an elaborate Gothic window, communicating therewith.


   "Perhaps this is the very house I have been seeking," thought


Robin.


   Then he strove to speed away the time, by listening to a murmur


which swept continually along the street, yet was scarcely audible,


except to an unaccustomed ear like his; it was a low, dull, dreamy


sound, compounded of many noises, each of which was at too great a


distance to be separately heard. Robin marvelled at this snore of a


sleeping town, and marvelled more whenever its continuity was broken


by now and then a distant shout, apparently loud where it


originated. But altogether it was a sleep-inspiring sound, and, to


shake off its drowsy influence, Robin arose, and climbed a


window-frame, that he might view the interior of the church. There the


moonbeams came trembling in, and fell down upon the deserted pews, and


extended along the quiet aisles. A fainter yet more awful radiance was


hovering around the pulpit, and one solitary ray had dared to rest


upon the opened page of the great Bible. Had nature, in that deep


hour, become a worshipper in the house which man had builded? Or was


that heavenly light the visible sanctity of the place- visible because


no earthly and impure feet were within the walls? The scene made


Robin's heart shiver with a sensation of loneliness stronger than he


had ever felt in the remotest depths of his native woods; so he turned


away, and sat down again before the door. There were graves around the


church, and now an uneasy thought obtruded into Robin's breast. What


if the object of his search, which had been so often and so


strangely thwarted, were at the time mouldering in his shroud? What if


his kinsman should glide through yonder gate, and nod and smile to him


in dimly passing by?


   "O that any breathing thing were here with me!" said Robin.


   Recalling his thoughts from this uncomfortable track, he sent


them over forest, hill, and stream, and attempted to imagine how


that evening of ambiguity and weariness had been spent by his father's


household. He pictured them assembled at the door, beneath the tree,


the great old tree, which had been spared for its huge twisted


trunk, and venerable shade, when a thousand leafy brethren fell.


There, at the going down of the summer sun, it was his father's custom


to perform domestic worship, that the neighbors might come and join


with him like brothers of the family, and that the wayfaring man might


pause to drink at that fountain, and keep his heart pure by freshening


the memory of home. Robin distinguished the seat of every individual


of the little audience; he saw the good man in the midst, holding


the Scriptures in the golden light that fell from the western


clouds; he beheld him close the book, and all rise up to pray. He


heard the old thanksgivings for daily mercies, the old supplications


for their continuance, to which he had so often listened in weariness,


but which were now among his dear remembrances. He perceived the


slight inequality of his father's voice when he came to speak of the


absent one; he noted how his mother turned her face to the broad and


knotted trunk; how his elder brother scorned, because the beard was


rough upon his upper lip, to permit his features to be moved; how


the younger sister drew down a low hanging branch before her eyes; and


how the little one of all, whose sports had hitherto broken the


decorum of the scene, understood the prayer for her playmate, and


burst into clamorous grief. Then he saw them go in at the door; and


when Robin would have entered also, the latch tinkled into its


place, and he was excluded from his home.


   "Am I here, or there?" cried Robin, starting; for all at once, when


his thoughts had become visible and audible in a dream, the long,


wide, solitary street shone out before him.


   He aroused himself, and endeavored to fix his attention steadily


upon the large edifice which he had surveyed before. But still his


mind kept vibrating between fancy and reality; by turns, the pillars


of the balcony lengthened into the tall, bare stems of pines, dwindled


down to human figures, settled again into their true shape and size,


and then commenced a new succession of changes. For a single moment,


when he deemed himself awake, he could have sworn that a visage- one


which he seemed to remember, yet could not absolutely name as his


kinsman's- was looking towards him from the Gothic window. A deeper


sleep wrestled with and nearly overcame him, but fled at the sound


of footsteps along the opposite pavement. Robin rubbed his eyes,


discerned a man passing at the foot of the balcony, and addressed


him in a loud, peevish, and lamentable cry.


   "Hallo, friend! must I wait here all night for my kinsman, Major


Molineux?"


   The sleeping echoes awoke, and answered the voice; and the


passenger, barely able to discern a figure sitting in the oblique


shade of the steeple, traversed the street to obtain a nearer view. He


was himself a gentleman in his prime, of open, intelligent,


cheerful, and altogether prepossessing countenance. Perceiving a


country youth, apparently homeless and without friends, he accosted


him in a tone of real kindness, which had become strange to Robin's


ears.


   "Well, my good lad, why are you sitting here?" inquired he. "Can


I be of service to you in any way?"


   "I am afraid not, sir," replied Robin, despondingly; "yet I shall


take it kindly, if you'll answer me a single question. I've been


searching, half the night, for one Major Molineux; now, sir, is


there really such a person in these parts, or am I dreaming?"


   "Major Molineux! The name is not altogether strange to me," said


the gentleman, smiling. "Have you any objection to telling me the


nature of your business with him?"


   Then Robin briefly related that his father was a clergyman, settled


on a small salary, at a long distance back in the country, and that he


and Major Molineux were brothers' children. The major, having


inherited riches, and acquired civil and military rank, had visited


his cousin, in great pomp, a year or two before; had manifested much


interest in Robin and an elder brother, and, being childless


himself, had thrown out hints respecting the future establishment of


one of them in life. The elder brother was destined to succeed to


the farm which his father cultivated in the interval of sacred duties;


it was therefore determined that Robin should profit by his


kinsman's generous intentions, especially as he seemed to be rather


the favorite, and was thought to possess other necessary endowments.


   "For I have the name of being a shrewd youth," observed Robin, in


this part of his story.


   "I doubt not you deserve it," replied his new friend,


good-naturedly; "but pray proceed."


   "Well, sir, being nearly eighteen years old, and well-grown, as you


see," continued Robin, drawing himself up to his full height, "I


thought it high time to begin the world. So my mother and sister put


me in handsome trim, and my father gave me half the remnant of his


last year's salary, and five days ago I started for this place, to pay


the major a visit. But, would you believe it, sir! I crossed the ferry


a little after dark, and have yet found nobody that would show me


the way to his dwelling- only, an hour or two since, I was told to


wait here, and Major Molineux would pass by."


   "Can you describe the man who told you this?" inquired the


gentleman.


   "O, he was a very ill-favored fellow, sir," replied Robin, "with


two great bumps on his forehead, a hook nose, fiery eyes- and, what


struck me as the strangest, his face was of two different colors. Do


you happen to know such a man, sir!"


   "Not intimately," answered the stranger, "but I chanced to meet him


a little time previous to your stopping me. I believe you may trust


his word, and that the major will very shortly pass through this


street. In the meantime, as I have a singular curiosity to witness


your meeting, I will sit down here upon the steps, and bear you


company."


   He seated himself accordingly, and soon engaged his companion in


animated discourse. It was but of brief continuance, however, for a


noise of shouting, which bad long been remotely audible, drew so


much nearer that Robin inquired its cause.


   "What may be the meaning of this uproar?" asked he. "Truly, if your


town be always as noisy, I shall find little sleep, while I am an


inhabitant."


   "Why, indeed, friend Robin, there do appear to be three or four


riotous fellows abroad tonight," replied the gentleman. "You must


not expect all the stillness of your native woods, here in our


streets. But the watch will shortly be at the heels of these lads,


and-"


   "Ay, and set them in the stocks by peep of day," interrupted Robin,


recollecting his own encounter with the drowsy lantern-bearer. "But,


dear sir, if I may trust my ears, an army of watchmen would never make


head against such a multitude of rioters. There were at least a


thousand voices went up to make that one shout."


   "May not a man have several voices, Robin, as well as two


complexions?" said his friend.


   "Perhaps a man may; but Heaven forbid that a woman should!"


responded the shrewd youth, thinking of the seductive tones of the


major's housekeeper.


   The sounds of a trumpet in some neighboring street now became so


evident and continual, that Robin's curiosity was strongly excited. In


addition to the shouts, he heard frequent bursts from many instruments


of discord, and a wild and confused laughter filled up the


intervals. Robin rose from the steps, and looked wistfully towards a


point whither several people seemed to be hastening.


   "Surely some prodigious merry-making is going on," exclaimed he. "I


have laughed very little since I left home, sir, and should be sorry


to lose an opportunity. Shall we step round the corner by that darkish


house, and take our share of the fun?"


   "Sit down again, sit down, good Robin," replied the gentleman,


laying his hand on the skirt of the gray coat. "You forget that we


must wait here for your kinsman; and there is reason to believe that


he will pass by, in the course of a very few moments."


   The near approach of the uproar had now disturbed the neighborhood;


windows flew open on all sides; and many heads, in the attire of the


pillow, and confused by sleep suddenly broken, were protruded to the


gaze of whoever had leisure to observe them. Eager voices hailed


each other from house to house, all demanding the explanation, which


not a soul could give. Half-dressed men hurried towards the unknown


commotion, stumbling as they went over the stone steps, that thrust


themselves into the narrow foot-walk. The shouts, the laughter, and


the tuneless bray, the antipodes of music, came onwards with


increasing din, till scattered individuals, and then denser bodies,


began to appear round a corner at the distance of a hundred yards.


   "Will you recognize your kinsman, if he passes in this crowd?"


inquired the gentleman.


   "Indeed, I can't warrant it, sir; but I'll take my stand here,


and keep a bright look-out," answered Robin, descending to the outer


edge of the pavement.


   A mighty stream of people now emptied into the street, and came


rolling slowly towards the church. A single horseman wheeled the


corner in the midst of them, and close behind him came a band of


fearful wind-instruments, sending forth a fresher discord, now that no


intervening buildings kept it from the ear. Then a redder light


disturbed the moonbeams, and a dense multitude of torches shone


along the street, concealing, by their glare, whatever object they


illuminated. The single horseman, clad in a military dress, and


bearing a drawn sword, rode onward as the leader, and, by his fierce


and variegated countenance, appeared like war personified: the red


of one cheek was an emblem of fire and sword; the blackness of the


other betokened the mourning that attends them. In his train were wild


figures in the Indian dress, and many fantastic shapes without a


model, giving the whole march a visionary air, as if a dream had


broken forth from some feverish brain, and were sweeping visibly


through the midnight streets. A mass of people, inactive, except as


applauding spectators, hemmed the procession in; and several women ran


along the side-walk, piercing the confusion of heavier sounds with


their shrill voices of mirth or terror.


   "The double-faced fellow has his eye upon me," muttered Robin, with


an indefinite but an uncomfortable idea that he was himself to bear


a part in the pageantry.


   The leader turned himself in the saddle, and fixed his glance


full upon the country youth, as the steed went slowly by. When Robin


had freed his eyes from those fiery ones, the musicians were passing


before him, and the torches were close at hand; but the unsteady


brightness of the latter formed a veil which he could not penetrate.


The rattling of wheels over the stones sometimes found its way to


his ear, and confused traces of a human form appeared at intervals,


and then melted into the vivid light. A moment more, and the leader


thundered a command to halt: the trumpets vomited a horrid breath, and


then held their peace; the shouts and laughter of the people died


away, and there remained only a universal hum, allied to silence.


Right before Robin's eyes was an uncovered cart. There the torches


blazed the brightest, there the moon shone out like day, and there, in


tar-and-feathery dignity, sat his kinsman Major Molineux!


   He was an elderly man, of large and majestic person, and strong,


square features, betokening a steady soul; but steady as it was, his


enemies had found means to shake it. His face was pale as death, and


far more ghastly; the broad forehead was contracted in his agony, so


that his eyebrows formed one grizzled line; his eyes were red and


wild, and the foam hung white upon his quivering lip. His whole


frame was agitated by a quick and continual tremor, which his pride


strove to quell, even in those circumstances of overwhelming


humiliation. But perhaps the bitterest pang of all was when his eyes


met those of Robin; for he evidently knew him on the instant, as the


youth stood witnessing the foul disgrace of a head grown gray in


honor. They stared at each other in silence, and Robin's knees


shook, and his hair bristled, with a mixture of pity and terror. Soon,


however, a bewildering excitement began to seize upon his mind; the


preceding adventures of the night, the unexpected appearance of the


crowd, the torches, the confused din and the hush that followed, the


spectre of his kinsman reviled by that great multitude- all this, and,


more than all, a perception of tremendous ridicule in the whole scene,


affected him with a sort of mental inebriety. At that moment a voice


of sluggish merriment saluted Robin's ears; he turned instinctively,


and just behind the corner of the church stood the lantern-bearer,


rubbing his eyes, and drowsily enjoying the lad's amazement. Then he


heard a peal of laughter like the ringing of silvery bells; a woman


twitched his arm, a saucy eye met his, and he saw the lady of the


scarlet petticoat. A sharp, dry cachinnation appealed to his memory,


and, standing on tiptoe in the crowd, with his white apron over his


head, he beheld the courteous little innkeeper. And lastly, there


sailed over the heads of the multitude a great, broad laugh, broken in


the midst by two sepulchral hems; thus, "Haw, haw, haw- hem, hem- haw,


haw, haw, haw!"


   The sound proceeded from the balcony of the opposite edifice, and


thither Robin turned his eyes. In front of the Gothic window stood the


old citizen, wrapped in a wide gown, his gray periwig exchanged for


a night-cap, which was thrust back from his forehead, and his silk


stockings hanging about his legs. He supported himself on his polished


cane in a fit of convulsive merriment, which manifested itself on


his solemn old features like a funny inscription on a tomb-stone. Then


Robin seemed to hear the voices of the barbers, of the guests of the


inn, and of all who had made sport of him that night. The contagion


was spreading among the multitude, when, all at once, it seized upon


Robin, and he sent forth a shout of laughter that echoed through the


street- every man shook his sides, every man emptied his lungs, but


Robin's shout was the loudest there. The cloud-spirits peeped from


their silvery islands, as the congregated mirth went roaring up the


sky! The Man in the Moon heard the far bellow; "Oh," quoth he, "the


old earth is frolicksome tonight!"


   When there was a momentary calm in that tempestuous sea of sound,


the leader gave the sign, the procession resumed its march. On they


went, like fiends that throng in mockery around some dead potentate,


mighty no more, but majestic still in his agony. On they went, in


counterfeited pomp, in senseless uproar, in frenzied merriment,


trampling all on an old man's heart. On swept the tumult, and left a


silent street behind.


                         *          *          *


   "Well, Robin, are you dreaming?" inquired the gentleman, laying his


hand on the youth's shoulder.


   Robin started, and withdrew his arm from the stone post to which


he had instinctively clung, as the living stream rolled by him. His


cheek was somewhat pale and his eye not quite as lively as in the


earlier part of the evening.


   "Will you be kind enough to show me the way to the ferry?" said he,


after a moment's pause.


   "You have, then, adopted a new subject of inquiry?" observed his


companion, with a smile.


   "Why, yes, sir," replied Robin, rather dryly. "Thanks to you, and


to my other friends, I have at last met my kinsman, and he will scarce


desire to see my face again. I begin to grow weary of a town life,


sir. Will you show me the way to the ferry?"


   "No, my good friend Robin- not tonight, at least," said the


gentleman. "Some few days hence, if you wish it, I will speed you on


your journey. Or, if you prefer to remain with us, perhaps, as you are


a shrewd youth, you may rise in the world without the help of your


kinsman, Major Molineux."





                        THE END


.




                                      1844


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                               EARTH'S HOLOCAUST


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   ONCE UPON A TIME- but whether in the time past or time to come,


is a matter of little or no moment- this wide world had become so


overburthened with an accumulation of worn-out trumpery, that the


inhabitants determined to rid themselves of it by a general bonfire.


The site fixed upon, at the representation of the insurance companies,


and as being as central a spot as any other on the globe, was one of


the broadest prairies of the West, where no human habitation would


be endangered by the flames, and where a vast assemblage of spectators


might commodiously admire the show. Having a taste for sights of


this kind, and imagining, likewise, that the illumination of the


bonfire might reveal some profundity or moral truth, heretofore hidden


in mist or darkness, I made it convenient to journey thither and be


present. At my arrival, although the heap of condemned rubbish was


as yet comparatively small, the torch had already been applied. Amid


that boundless plain, in the dusk of the evening, like a far-off


star alone in the firmament, there was merely visible one tremulous


gleam, whence none could have anticipated so fierce a blaze as was


destined to ensue. With every moment, however, there came


foot-travellers, women holding up their aprons, men on horseback,


wheelbarrows, lumbering baggage wagons, and other vehicles, great


and small, and from far and near, laden with articles that were judged


fit for nothing but to be burnt.


   "What materials have been used to kindle the flame?" inquired I


of a bystander, for I was desirous of knowing the whole process of the


affair from beginning to end.


   The person whom I addressed was a grave man, fifty years old, or


thereabout, who had evidently come thither as a looker-on; he struck


me immediately as having weighed for himself the true value of life


and its circumstances, and therefore as feeling little personal


interest in whatever judgment the world might form of them. Before


answering my question, he looked me in the face, by the kindling light


of the fire.


   "Oh, some very dry combustibles," replied he, "and extremely


suitable to the purpose- no other, in fact, than yesterday's


newspapers, last month's magazines, and last year's withered leaves.


Here, now, comes some antiquated trash, that will take fire like a


handful of shavings."


   As he spoke, some rough-looking men advanced to the verge of the


bonfire, and threw in, as it appeared, all the rubbish of the Herald's


office; the blazonry of coat-armor, the crests and devices of


illustrious families; pedigrees that extended back, like lines of


light, into the mist of the dark ages, together with stars, garters,


and embroidered collars, each of which, as paltry a bauble as it might


appear to the uninstructed eye, had once possessed vast


significance, and was still, in truth, reckoned among the most


precious of moral or material facts, by the worshippers of the


gorgeous past. Mingled with this confused heap, which was tossed


into the flames by armfuls at once, were innumerable badges of


knighthood, comprising those of all the European sovereignties, and


Napoleon's decoration of the Legion of Honor, the ribands of which


were entangled with those of the ancient order of St. Louis. There,


too, were the medals of our own society of Cincinnati, by means of


which, as history tells us, an order of hereditary knights came near


being constituted out of the king-quellers of the Revolution. And


besides, there were the patents of nobility of German counts and


barons, Spanish grandees, and English peers, from the worm-eaten


instruments signed by William the Conqueror, down to the bran-new


parchment of the latest lord who has received his honors from the fair


hand of Victoria.


   At sight of these dense volumes of smoke, mingled with vivid jets


of flame that gushed and eddied forth from this immense pile of


earthly distinctions, the multitude of plebeian spectators set up a


joyous shout, and clapt their hands with an emphasis that made the


welkin echo. That was their moment of triumph, achieved, after long


ages, over creatures of the same clay and the same spiritual


infirmities, who had dared to assume the privileges due only to


Heaven's better workmanship. But now there rushed towards the


blazing heap a gray-haired man, of stately presence, wearing a coat


from the breast of which a star, or other badge of rank, seemed to


have been forcibly wrenched away. He had not the tokens of


intellectual power in his face; but still there was the demeanor-


the habitual, and almost native dignity- of one who had been born to


the idea of his own social superiority, and had never felt it


questioned till that moment.


   "People," cried he, gazing at the ruin of what was dearest to his


eyes with grief and wonder, but nevertheless, with a degree of


stateliness; "people, what have you done! This fire is consuming all


that marked your advance from barbarism, or that could have


prevented your relapse thither. We- the men of the privileged


orders- were those who kept alive, from age to age, the old chivalrous


spirit; the gentle and generous thought; the higher, the purer, the


more refined and delicate life! With the nobles, too, you cast off the


poet, the painter, the sculptor- all the beautiful arts; for we were


their patrons and created the atmosphere in which they flourish. In


abolishing the majestic distinctions of rank, society loses not only


its grace, but its steadfastness-"


   More he would doubtless have spoken, but here there arose an


outcry, sportive, contemptuous, and indignant, that altogether drowned


the appeal of the fallen nobleman, insomuch that, casting one look


of despair at his own half-burnt pedigree, he shrunk back into the


crowd, glad to shelter himself under his new-found insignificance.


   "Let him thank his stars that we have not flung him into the same


fire!" shouted a rude figure, spurning the embers with his foot. "And,


henceforth, let no man dare to show a piece of musty parchment as


his warrant for lording it over his fellows! If he have strength of


arm, well and good; it is one species of superiority. If he have


wit, wisdom, courage, force of character, let these attributes do


for him what they may. But, from this day forward, no mortal must hope


for place and consideration by reckoning up the mouldy bones of his


ancestors! That nonsense is done away."


   "And in good time," remarked the grave observer by my side, in a


low voice, however- "if no worse nonsense comes in its place. But,


at all events, this species of nonsense has fairly lived out its


life."


   There was little space to muse or moralize over the embers of


this time-honored rubbish; for, before it was half burnt out, there


came another multitude from beyond the sea, bearing the purple robes


of royalty, and the crowns, globes, and sceptres of emperors and


kings. All these had been condemned as useless baubles, playthings, at


best, fit only for the infancy of the world, or rods to govern and


chastise it in its nonage; but with which universal manhood, at its


full-grown stature, could no longer brook to be insulted. Into such


contempt had these regal insignia now fallen, that the gilded crown


and tinseled robes of the player-king, from Drury-Lane Theatre, had


been thrown in among the rest, doubtless as a mockery of his


brother-monarchs on the great stage of the world. It was a strange


sight to discern the crown-jewels of England, glowing and flashing


in the midst of the fire. Some of them had been delivered down from


the time of the Saxon princes; others were purchased with vast


revenues, or, perchance, ravished from the dead brows of the native


potentates of Hindostan; and the whole now blazed with a dazzling


lustre, as if a star had fallen in that spot, and been shattered


into fragments. The splendor of the ruined monarchy had no reflection,


save in those inestimable precious stones. But enough on this subject.


It were but tedious to describe how the Emperor of Austria's mantle


was converted to tinder, and how the posts and pillars of the French


throne became a heap of coals, which it was impossible to


distinguish from those of any other wood. Let me add, however, that


I noticed one of the exiled Poles stirring up the bonfire with the


Czar of Russia's sceptre, which he afterwards flung into the flames.


   "The smell of singed garments is quite intolerable here,"


observed my new acquaintance, as the breeze enveloped us in the


smoke of a royal wardrobe. "Let us get to windward, and see what


they are doing on the other side of the bonfire."


   We accordingly passed around, and were just in time to witness


the arrival of a vast procession of Washingtonians- as the votaries of


temperance call themselves now-a-days- accompanied by thousands of the


Irish disciples of Father Mathew, with that great apostle at their


head. They brought a rich contribution to the bonfire; being nothing


less than all the hogsheads and barrels of liquor in the world,


which they rolled before them across the prairie.


   "Now, my children," cried Father Mathew, when they reached the


verge of the fire- "one shove more, and the work is done! And now


let us stand off and see Satan deal with his own liquor!"


   Accordingly, having placed their wooden vessels within reach of the


flames, the procession stood off at a safe distance, and soon beheld


them burst into a blaze that reached the clouds, and threatened to set


the sky itself on fire. And well it might. For here was the whole


world's stock of spirituous liquors, which, instead of kindling a


frenzied light in the eyes of individual topers, as of yore, soared


upwards with a bewildering gleam that startled all mankind. It was the


aggregate of that fierce fire which would otherwise have scorched


the hearts of millions. Meantime, numberless bottles of precious


wine were flung into the blaze, which lapped up the contents as if


it loved them, and grew, like other drunkards, the merrier and fiercer


for what it quaffed. Never again will the insatiable thirst of the


fire-fiend be so pampered! Here were the treasures of famous


bon-vivants- liquors that had been tossed on ocean, and mellowed in


the sun, and hoarded long in the recesses of the earth- the pale,


the gold, the ruddy juice of whatever vineyards were most delicate-


the entire vintage of Tokay- all mingling in one stream with the


vile fluids of the common pot-house, and contributing to heighten


the self-same blaze. And while it rose in a gigantic spire, that


seemed to wave against the arch of the firmament, and combine itself


with the light of stars, the multitude gave a shout, as if the broad


earth were exulting in its deliverance from the curse of ages.


   But the joy was not universal. Many deemed that human life would be


gloomier than ever, when that brief illumination should sink down.


While the reformers were at work, I overheard muttered


expostulations from several respectable gentlemen with red noses,


and wearing gouty shoes; and a ragged worthy, whose face looked like a


hearth where the fire is burnt out, now expressed his discontent


more openly and boldly.


   "What is this world good for," said the last toper, "now that we


can never be jolly any more? What is to comfort the poor man in sorrow


and perplexity? how is he to keep his heart warm against the cold


winds of this cheerless earth? and what do you propose to give him


in exchange for the solace that you take away? How are old friends


to sit together by the fireside, without a cheerful glass between


them? A plague upon your reformation! It is a sad world, a cold world,


a selfish world, a low world, not worth an honest fellow's living


in, now that good fellowship is gone for ever!"


   This harangue excited great mirth among the bystanders. But,


preposterous as was the sentiment, I could not help commiserating


the forlorn condition of the last toper, whose boon-companions had


dwindled away from his side, leaving the poor fellow without a soul to


countenance him in sipping his liquor, nor indeed any liquor to sip.


Not that this was quite the true state of the case; for I had observed


him, at a critical moment, filch a bottle of fourth-proof brandy


that fell beside the bonfire, and hide it in his pocket.


   The spirituous and fermented liquors being thus disposed of, the


zeal of the reformers next induced them to replenish the fire with all


the boxes of tea and bags of coffee in the world. And now came the


planters of Virginia, bringing their crops of tobacco. These, being


cast upon the heap of inutility, aggregated it to the size of a


mountain, and incensed the atmosphere with such potent fragrance


that methought we should never draw pure breath again. The present


sacrifice seemed to startle the lovers of the weed more than any


that they had hitherto witnessed.


   "Well, they've put my pipe out," said an old gentleman, flinging it


into the flames in a pet. "What is this world coming to? Everything


rich and racy- all the spice of life- is to be condemned as useless.


Now that they have kindled the bonfire, if these nonsensical reformers


would fling themselves into it, all would be well enough!"


   "Be patient," responded a staunch conservative; "it will come to


that in the end. They will first fling us in, and finally themselves."


   From the general and systematic measures of reform, I now turned to


consider the individual contributions to this memorable bonfire. In


many instances these were of a very amusing character. One poor fellow


threw in his empty purse, and another a bundle of counterfeit or


insolvable bank notes. Fashionable ladies threw in their last season's


bonnets, together with heaps of ribbons, yellow lace, and much other


half-worn milliner's ware; all of which proved even more evanescent in


the fire than it had been in the fashion. A multitude of lovers of


both sexes- discarded maids or bachelors, and couples mutually weary


of one another- tossed in bundles of perfumed letters and enamored


sonnets. A hack politician, being deprived of bread by the loss of


office, threw in his teeth, which happened to be false ones. The


Rev. Sydney Smith- having voyaged across the Atlantic for that sole


purpose- came up to the bonfire with a bitter grin, and threw in


certain repudiated bonds, fortified though they were with the broad


seal of a sovereign state. A little boy of five years old, in the


premature manliness of the present epoch, threw in his playthings; a


college graduate, his diploma; an apothecary, ruined by the spread


of homoeopathy, his whole stock of drugs and medicines; a physician,


his library; a parson, his old sermons; and a fine gentleman of the


old school, his code of manners, which he had formerly written down


for the benefit of the next generation. A widow, resolving on a second


marriage, slily threw in her dead husband's miniature. A young man,


jilted by his mistress, would willingly have flung his own desperate


heart into the flames, but could find no means to wrench it out of his


bosom. An American author, whose works were neglected by the public,


threw his pen and paper into the bonfire, and betook himself to some


less discouraging occupation. It somewhat startled me to overhear a


number of ladies, highly respectable in appearance, proposing to fling


their gowns and petticoats into the flames, and assume the garb,


together with the manners, duties, offices, and responsibilities, of


the opposite sex.


   What favor was accorded to this scheme, I am unable to say; my


attention being suddenly drawn to a poor, deceived, and half-delirious


girl, who, exclaiming that she was the most worthless thing alive or


dead, attempted to cast herself into the fire, amid all that wrecked


and broken trumpery of the world. A good man, however, ran to her


rescue.


   "Patience, my poor girl!" said he, as he drew her back from the


fierce embrace of the destroying angel. "Be patient, and abide


Heaven's will. So long as you possess a living soul, all may be


restored to its first freshness. These things of matter, and creations


of human fantasy, are fit for nothing but to be burnt, when once


they have had their day. But your day is eternity!"


   "Yes," said the wretched girl, whose frenzy seemed now to have sunk


down into deep despondency; "yes, and the sunshine is blotted out of


it!"


   It was now rumored among the spectators that all the weapons and


munitions of war were to be thrown into the bonfire, with the


exception of the world's stock of gunpowder, which, as the safest mode


of disposing of it, had already been drowned in the sea. This


intelligence seemed to awaken great diversity of opinion. The


hopeful philanthropist esteemed it a token that the millennium was


already come; while persons of another stamp, in whose view mankind


was a breed of bull-dogs, prophesied that all the old stoutness,


fervor, nobleness, generosity, and magnanimity of the race would


disappear; these qualities, as they affirmed, requiring blood for


their nourishment. They comforted themselves, however, in the belief


that the proposed abolition of war was impracticable, for any length


of time together.


   Be that as it might, numberless great guns, whose thunder had


long been the voice of battle- the artillery of the Armada, the


battering-trains of Marlborough, and the adverse cannon of Napoleon


and Wellington- were trundled into the midst of the fire. By the


continual addition of dry combustibles, it had now waxed so intense


that neither brass nor iron could withstand it. It was wonderful to


behold how these terrible instruments of slaughter melted away like


playthings of wax. Then the armies of the earth wheeled around the


mighty furnace, with their military music playing triumphant


marches, and flung in their muskets and swords. The


standard-bearers, likewise, cast one look upward at their banners, all


tattered with shot-holes, and inscribed with the names of victorious


fields, and, giving them a last flourish on the breeze, they lowered


them into the flame, which snatched them upward in its rush toward the


clouds. This ceremony being over, the world was left without a


single weapon on in its hands, except, possibly, a few old king's arms


and rusty swords, and other trophies of the Revolution, in some of our


state armories. And now the drums were beaten and the trumpets


brayed all together, as a prelude to the proclamation of universal and


eternal peace, and the announcement that glory was no longer to be won


by blood; but that it would henceforth be the contention of the


human race to work out the greatest mutual good, and that beneficence,


in the future annals of the earth, would claim the praise of valor.


The blessed tidings were accordingly promulgated, and caused


infinite rejoicings among those who had stood aghast at the horror and


absurdity of war.


   But I saw a grim smile pass over the seared visage of a stately old


commander- by his war-worn figure and rich military dress, he might


have been one of Napoleon's famous marshals- who, with the rest of the


world's soldiery, had just flung away the sword that had been familiar


to his right hand for half a century.


   "Aye, aye!" grumbled he. "Let them proclaim what they please;


but, in the end, we shall find that all this foolery has only made


more work for the armorers and cannon-founders."


   "Why, sir," exclaimed I, in astonishment, "do you imagine that


the human race will ever so far return on the steps of its past


madness as to weld another sword, or cast another cannon?"


   "There will be no need," observed, with a sneer, one who neither


felt benevolence, nor had faith in it. "When Cain wished to slay his


brother, he was at no loss for a weapon."


   "We shall see," replied the veteran commander. "If I am mistaken,


so much the better; but in my opinion- without pretending to


philosophize about the matter- the necessity of war lies far deeper


than these honest gentlemen suppose. What! Is there a field for all


the petty disputes of individuals, and shall there be no great


law-court for the settlement of national difficulties? The


battle-field is the only court where such suits can be tried!"


   "You forget, general," rejoined I, "that, in this advanced stage of


civilization, Reason and Philanthropy combined will constitute just


such a tribunal as is requisite."


   "Ah, I had forgotten that, indeed!" said the old warrior, as he


limped away.


   The fire was now to be replenished with materials that had hitherto


been considered of even greater importance to the well-being of


society, than the warlike munitions which we had already seen


consumed. A body of reformers had travelled all over the earth, in


quest of the machinery by which the different nations were


accustomed to inflict the punishment of death. A shudder passed


through the multitude, as these ghastly emblems were dragged


forward. Even the flames seemed at first to shrink away, displaying


the shape and murderous contrivance of each in a full blaze of


light, which, of itself, was sufficient to convince mankind of the


long and deadly error of human law. Those old implements of cruelty-


those horrible monsters of mechanism- those inventions which it seemed


to demand something worse than man's natural heart to contrive, and


which had lurked in the dusky nooks of ancient prisons, the subject of


terror-stricken legend- were now brought forth to view. Headsmen's


axes, with the rust of noble and royal blood upon them, and a vast


collection of halters that had choked the breath of plebeian


victims, were thrown in together. A shout greeted the arrival of the


guillotine, which was thrust forward on the same wheels that had borne


it from one to another of the blood-stained streets of Paris. But


the loudest roar of applause went up, telling the distant sky of the


triumph of the earth's redemption, when the gallows made its


appearance. An ill-looking fellow, however, rushed forward, and,


putting himself in the path of the reformers, bellowed hoarsely, and


fought with brute fury to stay their progress.


   It was little matter of surprise, perhaps, that the executioner


should thus do his best to vindicate and uphold the machinery by which


he himself had his livelihood, and worthier individuals their death.


But it deserved special note, that men of a far different sphere- even


of that class in whose guardianship the world is apt to trust its


benevolence- were found to take the hangman's view of the question.


   "Stay, my brethren!" cried one of them. "You are misled by a


false philanthropy! you know not what you do. The gallows is a


Heaven-ordained instrument! Bear it back, then, reverently, and set it


up in its old place; else the world will fall to speedy ruin and


desolation!"


   "Onward, onward!" shouted a leader in the reform. "Into the


flames with the accursed instrument of man's bloody policy. How can


human law inculcate benevolence and love, while it persists in setting


up the gallows as its chief symbol! One heave more, good friends,


and the world will be redeemed from its greatest error!"


   A thousand hands, that, nevertheless, loathed the touch, now lent


their assistance, and thrust the ominous burthen far, far, into the


centre of the raging furnace. There its fatal and abhorred image was


beheld, first black, then a red coal, then ashes.


   "That was well done!" exclaimed I.


   "Yes, it was well done," replied- but with less enthusiasm than I


expected- the thoughtful observer who was still at my side; "well


done, if the world be good enough for the measure. Death, however,


is an idea that cannot easily be dispensed with, in any condition


between the primal innocence and that other purity and perfection,


which, perchance, we are destined to attain after travelling round the


full circle. But, at all events, it is well that the experiment should


now be tried."


   "Too cold! too cold!" impatiently exclaimed the young and ardent


leader in this triumph. "Let the heart have its voice here, as well as


the intellect. And as for ripeness- and as for progress- let mankind


always do the highest, kindest, noblest thing that, at any given


period, it has attained the perception of; and surely that thing


cannot be wrong, nor wrongly timed."


   I know not whether it were the excitement of the scene, or


whether the good people around the bonfire were really growing more


enlightened every instant; but they now proceeded to measures, in


the full length of which I was hardly prepared to keep them company.


For instance, some threw their marriage certificates into the


flames, and declared themselves candidates for a higher, holier, and


more comprehensive union than that which had subsisted from the


birth of time, under the form of the connubial tie. Others hastened to


the vaults of banks, and to the coffers of the rich- all of which were


open to the first comer, on this fated occasion- and brought entire


bales of paper-money to enliven the blaze, and tons of coin to be


melted down by its intensity. Henceforth, they said, universal


benevolence, uncoined and exhaustless, was to be the golden currency


of the world. At this intelligence, the bankers, and speculators in


the stocks, grew pale; and a pickpocket, who had reaped a rich harvest


among the crowd, fell down in a deadly fainting-fit. A few men of


business burnt their day-books and ledgers, the notes and


obligations of their creditors, and all other evidences of debts due


to themselves; while perhaps a somewhat larger number satisfied


their zeal for reform with the sacrifice of any uncomfortable


recollection of their own indebtment. There was then a cry, that the


period was arrived when the title-deeds of landed property should be


given to the flames, and the whole soil of the earth revert to the


public, from whom it had been wrongfully abstracted, and most


unequally distributed among individuals. Another party demanded that


all written constitutions, set forms of government, legislative


acts, statute-books, and everything else on which human invention


had endeavored to stamp its arbitrary laws, should at once be


destroyed, leaving the consummated world as free as the man first


created.


   Whether any ultimate action was taken with regard to these


propositions, is beyond my knowledge; for, just then, some matters


were in progress that concerned my sympathies more nearly.


   "See! see! what heaps of books and pamphlets!" cried a fellow,


who did not seem to be a lover of literature. "Now we shall have a


glorious blaze!"


   "That's just the thing," said a modern philosopher. "Now we shall


get rid of the weight of dead men's thought, which has hitherto


pressed so heavily on the living intellect that it has been


incompetent to any effectual self-exertion. Well done, my lads! Into


the fire with them! Now you are enlightening the world, indeed!"


   "But what is to become of the Trade?" cried a frantic bookseller.


   "Oh, by all means, let them accompany their merchandise," coolly


observed an author. "It will be a noble funeral pile!"


   The truth was, that the human race had now reached a stage of


progress so far beyond what the wisest and wittiest men of former ages


had ever dreamed of, that it would have been a manifest absurdity to


allow the earth to be any longer encumbered with their poor


achievements in the literary line. Accordingly, a thorough and


searching investigation had swept the booksellers' shops, hawkers'


stands, public and private libraries, and even the little book-shelf


by the country fireside, and had brought the world's entire mass of


printed paper, bound or in sheets, to swell the already


mountain-bulk of our illustrious bonfire. Thick, heavy folios,


containing the labors of lexicographers, commentators, and


encyclopedists, were flung in, and, falling among the embers with a


leaden thump, smouldered away to ashes, like rotten wood. The small,


richly gilt French tomes of the last age, with the hundred volumes


of Voltaire among them, went off in a brilliant shower of sparkles,


and little jets of flame; while the current literature of the same


nation burnt red and blue, and threw an infernal light over the


visages of the spectators, converting them all to the aspect of


parti-colored fiends. A collection of German stories emitted a scent


of brimstone. The English standard authors made excellent fuel,


generally exhibiting the properties of sound oak logs. Milton's works,


in particular, sent up a powerful blaze, gradually reddening into a


coal, which promised to endure longer than almost any other material


of the pile. From Shakspeare there gushed a flame of such marvellous


splendor that men shaded their eyes as against the sun's meridian


glory; nor even when the works of his own elucidators were flung


upon him did he cease to flash forth a dazzling radiance from


beneath the ponderous heap. It is my belief that he is still blazing


as fervidly as ever.


   "Could a poet but light a lamp at that glorious flame," remarked I,


"he might then consume the midnight oil to some good purpose."


   "That is the very thing which modern poets have been too apt to do,


or at least to attempt," answered a critic. "The chief benefit to be


expected from this conflagration of past literature undoubtedly is,


that writers will henceforth be compelled to light their lamps at


the sun or stars."


   "If they can reach so high," said I. "But that task requires a


giant, who may afterward distribute the light among inferior men. It


is not everyone that can steal the fire from heaven, like


Prometheus; but when once he had done the deed, a thousand hearths


were kindled by it."


   It amazed me much to observe how indefinite was the proportion


between the physical mass of any given author, and the property of


brilliant and long-continued combustion. For instance, there was not a


quarto volume of the last century- nor, indeed, of the present- that


could compete, in that particular, with a child's little


gilt-covered book, containing Mother Goose's Melodies. The Life and


Death of Tom Thumb outlasted the biography of Marlborough. An epic-


indeed, a dozen of them- was converted to white ashes, before the


single sheet of an old ballad was half consumed. In more than one


case, too, when volumes of applauded verse proved incapable of


anything better than a stifling smoke, an unregarded ditty of some


nameless bard- perchance in the corner of a newspaper- soared up among


the stars, with a flame as brilliant as their own. Speaking of the


properties of flame, methought Shelley's poetry emitted a purer


light than almost any other productions of his day; contrasting


beautifully with the fitful and lurid gleams, and gushes of black


vapor, that flashed and eddied from the volumes of Lord Byron. As


for Tom Moore, some of his songs diffused an odor like a burning


pastille.


   I felt particular interest in watching the combustion of American


authors, and scrupulously noted, by my watch, the precise number of


moments that changed most of them from shabbily printed books to


indistinguishable ashes. It would be invidious, however, if not


perilous, to betray these awful secrets; so that I shall content


myself with observing, that it was not invariably the writer most


frequent in the public mouth that made the most splendid appearance in


the bonfire. I especially remember, that a great deal of excellent


inflammability was exhibited in a thin volume of poems by Ellery


Channing; although, to speak the truth, there were certain portions


that hissed and spluttered in a very disagreeable fashion. A curious


phenomenon occurred in reference to several writers, native as well as


foreign. Their books, though of highly respectable figure, instead


of bursting into a blaze, or even smouldering out their substance in


smoke, suddenly melted away, in a manner that proved them to be ice.


   If it be no lack of modesty to mention my own works, it must here


be confessed, that I looked for them with fatherly interest, but in


vain. Too probably, they were changed to vapor by the first action


of the heat; at best, I can only hope that, in their quiet way, they


contributed a glimmering spark or two to the splendor of the evening.


   "Alas! and wo is me!" thus bemoaned himself a heavy-looking


gentleman in green spectacles. "The world is utterly ruined, and there


is nothing to live for any longer! The business of my life is snatched


from me. Not a volume to be had for love or money!"


   "This," remarked the sedate observer beside me, "is a book-worm-


one of those men who are born to gnaw dead thoughts. His clothes,


you see, are covered with the dust of libraries. He has no inward


fountain of ideas; and, in good earnest, now that the old stock is


abolished, I do not see what is to become of the poor fellow. Have you


no word of comfort for him?"


   "My dear sir," said I, to the desperate book-worm, "is not Nature


better than a book? is not the human heart deeper than any system of


philosophy? is not life replete with more instruction than past


observers have found it possible to write down in maxims? Be of good


cheer! The great book of Time is still spread wide open before us;


and, if we read it aright, it will be to us a volume of eternal


Truth."


   "Oh, my books, my books, my precious, printed books!" reiterated


the forlorn book-worm. "My only reality was a bound volume; and now


they will not leave me even a shadowy pamphlet!"


   In fact, the last remnant of the literature of all the ages was now


descending upon the blazing heap, in the shape of a cloud of pamphlets


from the press of the New World. These, likewise, were consumed in the


twinkling of an eye, leaving the earth, for the first time since the


days of Cadmus, free from the plague of letters- an enviable field for


the authors of the next generation!


   "Well! and does anything remain to be done?" inquired I, somewhat


anxiously. "Unless we set fire to the earth itself, and then leap


boldly off into infinite space, I know not that we can carry reform to


any further point."


   "You are vastly mistaken, my good friend," said the observer.


"Believe me, the fire will not be allowed to settle down without the


addition of fuel that will startle many persons, who have lent a


willing hand thus far."


   Nevertheless, there appeared to be a relaxation of effort, for a


little time, during which, probably, the leaders of the movement


were considering what should be done next. In the interval, a


philosopher threw his theory into the flames; a sacrifice which, by


those who knew how to estimate it, was pronounced the most


remarkable that had yet been made. The combustion, however, was by


no means brilliant. Some indefatigable people, scorning to take a


moment's ease, now employed themselves in collecting all the


withered leaves and fallen boughs of the forest, and thereby recruited


the bonfire to a greater height than ever. But this was mere by-play.


   "Here comes the fresh fuel that I spoke of," said my companion.


   To my astonishment, the persons who now advanced into the vacant


space around the mountain fire, bore surplices and other priestly


garments, mitres, crosiers, and a confusion of Popish and Protestant


emblems, with which it seemed their purpose to consummate the great


Act of Faith. Crosses, from the spires of old cathedrals, were cast


upon the heap with as little remorse as if the reverence of centuries,


passing in long array beneath the lofty towers, had not looked up to


them as the holiest of symbols. The font, in which infants were


consecrated to God; the sacramental vessels, whence Piety received the


hallowed draught; were given to the same destruction. Perhaps it


most nearly touched my heart to see, among these devoted relics,


fragments of the humble communion-tables and undecorated pulpits,


which I recognized as having been torn from the meeting-houses of


New England. Those simple edifices might have been permitted to retain


all of sacred embellishment that their Puritan founders had


bestowed, even though the mighty structure of St. Peter's had sent its


spoils to the fire of this terrible sacrifice. Yet I felt that these


were but the externals of religion, and might most safely be


relinquished by spirits that best knew their deep significance.


   "All is well," said I cheerfully. "The wood-paths shall be the


aisles of our cathedral- the firmament itself shall be its ceiling!


What needs an earthly roof between the Deity and his worshippers?


Our faith can well afford to lose all the drapery that even the


holiest men have thrown around it, and be only the more sublime in its


simplicity."


   "True," said my companion. "But will they pause here?"


   The doubt implied in his question was well founded. In the


general destruction of books already described, a holy volume- that


stood apart from the catalogue of human literature, and yet, in one


sense, was at its head- had been spared. But the Titan of


innovation- angel or fiend, double in his nature, and capable of deeds


befitting both characters- at first shaking down only the old and


rotten shapes of things, had now, as it appeared, laid his terrible


hand upon the main pillars which supported the whole edifice of our


moral and spiritual state. The inhabitants of the earth had grown


too enlightened to define their faith within a form of words, or to


limit the spiritual by any analogy to our material existence.


Truths, which the heavens trembled at, were now but a fable of the


world's infancy. Therefore, as the final sacrifice of human error,


what else remained to be thrown upon the embers of that awful pile,


except the Book, which, though a celestial revelation to past ages,


was but a voice from a lower sphere, as regarded the present race of


man? It was done! Upon the blazing heap of falsehood and worn-out


truth- things that the earth had never needed, or had ceased to


need, or had grown childishly weary of- fell the ponderous church


Bible, the great old volume, that had lain so long on the cushion of


the pulpit, and whence the pastor's solemn voice had given holy


utterance on so many a Sabbath day. There, likewise, fell the family


Bible, which the long buried patriarch had read to his children- in


prosperity or sorrow, by the fireside and in the summer shade of


trees- and had bequeathed downward, as the heir-loom of generations.


There fell the bosom Bible, the little volume that had been the soul's


friend of some sorely tried child of dust, who thence took courage,


whether his trial were for life or death, steadfastly confronting both


in the strong assurance of immortality.


   All these were flung into the fierce and riotous blaze; and then


a mighty wind came roaring across the plain, with a desolate howl,


as if it were the angry lamentations of the Earth for the loss of


Heaven's sunshine, and it shook the gigantic pyramid of flame, and


scattered the cinders of half-consumed abominations around upon the


spectators.


   "This is terrible!" said I, feeling that my cheek grew pale, and


seeing a like change in the visages about me.


   "Be of good courage yet," answered the man with whom I had so often


spoken. He continued to gaze steadily at the spectacle, with a


singular calmness, as if it concerned him merely as an observer. "Be


of good courage- nor yet exult too much; for there is far less both of


good and evil, in the effect of this bonfire, than the world might


be willing to believe."


   "How can that be?" exclaimed I impatiently. "Has it not consumed


everything? Has it not swallowed up, or melted down, every human or


divine appendage of our mortal state that had substance enough to be


acted on by fire? Will there be anything left us tomorrow morning,


better or worse than a heap of embers and ashes?"


   "Assuredly there will," said my grave friend. "Come hither tomorrow


morning- or whenever the combustible portion of the pile shall be


quite burnt out- and you will find among the ashes everything really


valuable that you have seen cast into the flames. Trust me, the


world of tomorrow will again enrich itself with the gold and


diamonds which have been cast off by the world of today. Not a truth


is destroyed- nor buried so deep among the ashes, but it will be raked


up at last."


   This was a strange assurance. Yet I felt inclined to credit it; the


more especially as I beheld among the wallowing flames a copy of the


Holy Scriptures, the pages of which, instead of being blackened into


tinder, only assumed a more dazzling whiteness as the finger-marks


of human imperfection were purified away. Certain marginal notes and


commentaries, it is true, yielded to the intensity of the fiery


test, but without detriment to the smallest syllable that had flamed


from the pen of inspiration.


   "Yes- there is the proof of what you say," answered I, turning to


the observer. " But if only what is evil can feel the action of the


fire, then, surely, the conflagration has been of inestimable utility.


Yet if I understand aright, you intimate a doubt whether the world's


expectation of benefit would be realized by it."


   "Listen to the talk of these worthies," said he, pointing to a


group in front of the blazing pile. "Possibly they may teach you


something useful, without intending it."


   The persons whom he indicated consisted of that brutal and most


earthy figure who had stood forth so furiously in defence of the


gallows- the hangman, in short- together with the last thief and the


last murderer; all three of whom were clustered about the last


toper. The latter was liberally passing the brandy bottle, which he


had rescued from the general destruction of wines and spirits. The


little convivial party seemed at the lowest pitch of despondency; as


considering that the purified world must needs be utterly unlike the


sphere that they had hitherto known, and therefore but a strange and


desolate abode for gentlemen of their kidney.


   "The best counsel for all of us is," remarked the hangman, "that-


as soon as we have finished the last drop of liqour- I help you, my


three friends, to a comfortable end upon the nearest tree, and then


hang myself on the same bough. This is no world for us any longer."


   "Poh, poh, my good fellows!" said a dark-complexioned personage,


who now joined the group- his complexion was indeed fearfully dark,


and his eyes glowed with a redder light than that of the bonfire-


"Be not so cast down, my dear friends; you shall see good days yet.


There is one thing that these wiseacres have forgotten to throw into


the fire, and without which all the rest of the conflagration is


just nothing at all; yes- though they had burnt the earth itself to


a cinder."


   "And what may that be?" eagerly demanded the last murderer.


   "What but the human heart itself!" said the dark-visaged


stranger, with a portentous grin. "And unless they hit upon some


method of purifying that foul cavern, forth from it will reissue all


the shapes of wrong and misery- the same old shapes, or worse ones-


which they have taken such a vast deal of trouble to consume to ashes.


I have stood by, this live-long night, and laughed in my sleeve at the


whole business. Oh, take my word for it, it will be the old world


yet!"


   This brief conversation supplied me with a theme for lengthened


thought. How sad a truth- if true it were- that Man's age-long


endeavor for perfection had served only to render him the mockery of


the Evil Principle, from the fatal circumstance of an error at the


very root of the matter! The heart- the heart- there was the little


yet boundless sphere, wherein existed the original wrong, of which the


crime and misery of this outward world were merely types. Purify


that inward sphere; and the many shapes of evil that haunt the


outward, and which now seem almost our only realities, will turn to


shadowy phantoms, and vanish of their own accord. But if we go no


deeper than the Intellect, and strive, with merely that feeble


instrument, to discern and rectify what is wrong, our whole


accomplishment will be a dream; so unsubstantial, that it matters


little whether the bonfire, which I have so faithfully described, were


what we choose to call a real event, and a flame that would scorch the


finger- or only a phosphoric radiance, and a parable of my own brain!








                        THE END


.




                                      1838


                                TWICE-TOLD TALES


                          PETER GOLDTHWAITE'S TREASURE


                             by Nathaniel Hawthorne





   AND SO, Peter, you won't even consider of the business?" said Mr.


John Brown, buttoning his surtout over the snug rotundity of his


person, and drawing on his gloves. "You positively refuse to let me


have this crazy old house, and the land under and adjoining, at the


price named?"


   "Neither at that, nor treble the sum," responded the gaunt,


grizzled, and threadbare Peter Goldthwaite. "The fact is, Mr. Brown,


you must find another site for your brick block, and be content to


leave my estate with the present owner. Next summer, I intend to put a


splendid new mansion over the cellar of the old house."


   "Pho, Peter!" cried Mr. Brown, as he opened the kitchen door;


"content yourself with building castles in the air, where house-lots


are cheaper than on earth, to say nothing of the cost of bricks and


mortar. Such foundations are solid enough for your edifices, while


this underneath us is just the thing for mine; and so we may both be


suited. What say you again?"


   "Precisely what I said before, Mr. Brown, answered Peter


Goldthwaite. "And as for castles in the air, mine may not be as


magnificent as that sort of architecture, but perhaps as


substantial, Mr. Brown, as the very respectable brick block with dry


goods stores, tailors' shops, and banking rooms on the lower floor,


and lawyers' offices in the second story, which you are so anxious


to substitute."


   "And the cost, Peter, eh?" said Mr. Brown, as he withdrew, in


something of a pet. "That, I suppose, will be provided for,


off-hand, by drawing a check on Bubble Bank!"


   John Brown and Peter Goldthwaite had been jointly known to the


commercial world between twenty and thirty years before, under the


firm of Goldthwaite & Brown; which co-partnership, however, was


speedily dissolved by the natural incongruity of its constituent


parts. Since that event, John Brown, with exactly the qualities of a


thousand other John Browns, and by just such plodding methods as


they used, had prospered wonderfully, and become one of the wealthiest


John Browns on earth. Peter Goldthwaite, on the contrary, after


innumerable schemes, which ought to have collected all the coin and


paper currency of the country into his coffers, was as needy a


gentleman as ever wore a patch upon his elbow. The contrast between


him and his former partner may be briefly marked; for Brown never


reckoned upon luck yet always had it; while Peter made luck the main


condition of his projects, and always missed it. While the means


held out, his speculations had been magnificent, but were chiefly


confined, of late years, to such small business as adventures in the


lottery. Once he had gone on a gold-gathering expedition somewhere


to the South, and ingeniously contrived to empty his pockets more


thoroughly than ever; while others, doubtless, were filling theirs


with native bullion by the handful. More recently he had expended a


legacy of a thousand or two of dollars in purchasing Mexican scrip,


and thereby became the proprietor of a province; which, however, so


far as Peter could find out, was situated where he might have had an


empire for the same money- in the clouds. From a search after this


valuable real estate Peter returned so gaunt and threadbare that, on


reaching New England, the scarecrows in the cornfields beckoned to


him, as he passed by. "They did but flutter in the wind," quoth


Peter Goldthwaite. No, Peter, they beckoned, for the scarecrows knew


their brother!


   At the period of our story his whole visible income would not


have paid the tax of the old mansion in which we find him. It was


one of those rusty, moss-grown, many-peaked wooden houses, which are


scattered about the streets of our elder towns, with a beetle-browed


second story projecting over the foundation, as if it frowned at the


novelty around it. This old paternal edifice, needy as he was, and


though, being centrally situated on the principal street of the


town, it would have brought him a handsome sum, the sagacious Peter


had his own reasons for never parting with, either by auction or


private sale. There seemed, indeed, to be a fatality that connected


him with his birthplace; for, often as he had stood on the verge of


ruin, and standing there even now, he had not yet taken the step


beyond it which would have compelled him to surrender the house to his


creditors. So here he dwelt with bad luck till good should come.


   Here then in his kitchen, the only room where a spark of fire


took off the chill of a November evening, poor Peter Goldthwaite had


just been visited by his rich old partner. At the close of their


interview, Peter, with rather a mortified look, glanced downwards at


his dress, parts of which appeared as ancient as the days of


Goldthwaite & Brown. His upper garment was a mixed surtout, wofully


faded, and patched with newer stuff on each elbow; beneath this he


wore a threadbare black coat, some of the silk buttons of which had


been replaced with others of a different pattern; and lastly, though


he lacked not a pair of gray pantaloons, they were very shabby ones,


and had been partially turned brown by the frequent toasting of


Peter's shins before a scanty fire. Peter's person was in keeping with


his goodly apparel. Gray-headed, hollow-eyed, pale-cheeked, and


lean-bodied, he was the perfect picture of a man who had fed on


windy schemes and empty hopes, till he could neither live on such


unwholesome trash, nor stomach more substantial food. But, withal,


this Peter Goldthwaite, crack-brained simpleton as, perhaps, he was,


might have cut a very brilliant figure in the world, had he employed


his imagination in the airy business of poetry, instead of making it a


demon of mischief in mercantile pursuits. After all, he was no bad


fellow, but as harmless as a child, and as honest and honorable, and


as much of the gentleman which nature meant him for, as an irregular


life and depressed circumstances will permit any man to be.


   As Peter stood on the uneven bricks of his hearth, looking round at


the disconsolate old kitchen, his eyes began to kindle with the


illumination of an enthusiasm that never long deserted him. He


raised his hand, clinched it, and smote it energetically against the


smoky panel over the fireplace.


   "The time is come!" said he. "With such a treasure at command, it


were folly to be a poor man any longer. Tomorrow morning I will


begin with the garret, nor desist till I have torn the house down!"


   Deep in the chimney-corner, like a witch in a dark cavern, sat a


little old woman, mending one of the two pairs of stockings


wherewith Peter Goldthwaite kept his toes from being frostbitten. As


the feet were ragged past all darning, she had cut pieces out of a


cast-off flannel petticoat, to make new soles. Tabitha Porter was an


old maid, upwards of sixty years of age, fifty-five of which she had


sat in that same chimney-corner, such being the length of time since


Peter's grandfather had taken her from the almshouse. She had no


friend but Peter, nor Peter any friend but Tabitha; so long as Peter


might have a shelter for his own head, Tabitha would know where to


shelter hers; or, being homeless elsewhere, she would take her


master by the hand and bring him to her native home, the almshouse.


Should it ever be necessary, she loved him well enough to feed him


with her last morsel, and clothe him with her under petticoat. But


Tabitha was a queer old woman, and, though never infected with Peter's


flightiness, had become so accustomed to his freaks and follies that


she viewed them all as matters of course. Hearing him threaten to tear


the house down, she looked quietly up from her work.


   "Best leave the kitchen till the last, Mr. Peter," said she.


   "The sooner we have it all down the better," said Peter


Goldthwaite. "I am tired to death of living in this cold, dark, windy,


smoky, creaking, groaning, dismal old house. I shall feel like a


younger man when we get into my splendid brick mansion, as, please


Heaven, we shall by this time next autumn. You shall have a room on


the sunny side, old Tabby, finished and furnished as best may suit


your own notions."


   "I should like it pretty much such a room as this kitchen,"


answered Tabitha. "It will never be like home to me till the


chimney-corner gets as black with smoke as this; and that won't be


these hundred years. How much do you mean to lay out on the house, Mr.


Peter?"


   "What is that to the purpose?" exclaimed Peter, loftily. "Did not


my great-granduncle, Peter Goldthwaite, who died seventy years ago,


and whose namesake I am, leave treasure enough to build twenty such?"


   "I can't say but he did, Mr. Peter," said Tabitha, threading her


needle.


   Tabitha well understood that Peter had reference to an immense


hoard of the precious metals, which was said to exist somewhere in the


cellar or walls, or under the floors, or in some concealed closet,


or other out-of-the-way nook of the house. This wealth, according to


tradition, had been accumulated by a former Peter Goldthwaite, whose


character seems to have borne a remarkable similitude to that of the


Peter of our story. Like him he was a wild projector, seeking to


heap up gold by the bushel and the cartload, instead of scraping it


together, coin by coin. Like Peter the second, too, his projects had


almost invariably failed, and, but for the magnificent success of


the final one, would have left him with hardly a coat and pair of


breeches to his gaunt and grizzled person. Reports were various as


to the nature of his fortunate speculation: one intimating that the


ancient Peter had made the gold by alchemy; another, that he had


conjured it out of people's pockets by the black art; and a third,


still more unaccountable, that the devil had given him free access


to the old provincial treasury. It was affirmed, however, that some


secret impediment had debarred him from the enjoyment of his riches,


and that he had a motive for concealing them from his heir, or at


any rate had died without disclosing the place of deposit. The present


Peter's father had faith enough in the story to cause the cellar to be


dug over. Peter himself chose to consider the legend as an


indisputable truth, and, amid his many troubles, had this one


consolation that, should all other resources fail, he might build up


his fortunes by tearing his house down. Yet, unless he felt a


lurking distrust of the golden tale, it is difficult to account for


his permitting the paternal roof to stand so long, since he had


never yet seen the moment when his predecessor's treasure would not


have found plenty of room in his own strong box. But now was the


crisis. Should he delay the search a little longer, the house would


pass from the lineal heir, and with it the vast heap of gold, to


remain in its burial-place, till the ruin of the aged walls should


discover it to strangers of a future generation.


   "Yes!" said Peter Goldthwaite, again, "tomorrow I will set about


it."


   The deeper he looked at the matter the more certain of success grew


Peter. His spirits were naturally so elastic that even now, in the


blasted autumn of his age, he could often compete with the spring-time


gayety of other people. Enlivened by his brightening prospects, he


began to caper about the kitchen like a hobgoblin, with the queerest


antics of his lean limbs, and gesticulations of his starved


features. Nay, in the exuberance of his feelings, he seized both of


Tabitha's hands, and danced the old lady across the floor, till the


oddity of her rheumatic motions set him into a roar of laughter, which


was echoed back from the rooms and chambers, as if Peter Goldthwaite


were laughing in every one. Finally he bounded upward, almost out of


sight, into the smoke that clouded the roof of the kitchen, and,


alighting safely on the floor again, endeavored to resume his


customary gravity.


   "Tomorrow, at sunrise," he repeated, taking his lamp to retire to


bed, "I'll see whether this treasure be hid in the wall of the


garret."


   "And as we're out of wood, Mr. Peter," said Tabitha, puffing and


panting with her late gymnastics, "as fast as you tear the house down,


I'll make a fire with the pieces."


   Gorgeous that night were the dreams of Peter Goldthwaite! At one


time he was turning a ponderous key in an iron door not unlike the


door of a sepulchre, but which, being opened, disclosed a vault heaped


up with gold coin, as plentifully as golden corn in a granary. There


were chased goblets, also, and tureens, salvers, dinner dishes, and


dish covers of gold, or silver gilt, besides chains and other


jewels, incalculably rich, though tarnished with the damps of the


vault; for, of all the wealth that was irrevocably lost to man,


whether buried in the earth or sunken in the sea, Peter Goldthwaite


had found it in this one treasure-place. Anon, he had returned to


the old house as poor as ever, and was received at the door by the


gaunt and grizzled figure of a man whom he might have mistaken for


himself, only that his garments were of a much elder fashion. But


the house, without losing its former aspect, had been changed into a


palace of the precious metals. The floors, walls, and ceiling were


of burnished silver; the doors, the window-frames, the cornices, the


balustrades, and the steps of the staircase, of pure gold; and silver,


with gold bottoms, were the chairs, and gold, standing on silver legs,


the high chests of drawers, and silver the bedsteads, with blankets of


woven gold, and sheets of silver tissue. The house had evidently


been transmuted by a single touch; for it retained all the marks


that Peter remembered, but in gold or silver instead of wood; and


the initials of his name, which, when a boy, he had cut in the


wooden door-post, remained as deep in the pillar of gold. A happy


man would have been Peter Goldthwaite except for a certain ocular


deception, which, whenever he glanced backwards, caused the house to


darken from its glittering magnificence into the sordid gloom of


yesterday.


   Up, betimes, rose Peter, seized an axe, hammer, and saw, which he


had placed by his bedside, and hied him to the garret. It was but


scantily lighted up, as yet, by the frosty fragments of a sunbeam,


which began to glimmer through the almost opaque bull's-eyes of the


window. A moralizer might find abundant themes for his speculative and


impracticable wisdom in a garret. There is the limbo of departed


fashions, aged trifles of a day, and whatever was valuable only to one


generation of men, and which passed to the garret when that generation


passed to the grave, not for safe keeping, but to be out of the way.


Peter saw piles of yellow and musty account-books, in parchment


covers, wherein creditors, long dead and buried, had written the names


of dead and buried debtors in ink now so faded that their moss-grown


tombstones were more legible. He found old moth-eaten garments all


in rags and tatters, or Peter would have put them on. Here was a naked


and rusty sword, not a sword of service, but a gentleman's small


French rapier, which had never left its scabbard till it lost it. Here


were canes of twenty different sorts, but no gold-headed ones, and


shoe-buckles of various pattern and material, but not silver nor set


with precious stones. Here was a large box full of shoes, with high


heels and peaked toes. Here, on a shelf, were a multitude of phials,


half filled with old apothecaries' stuff, which, when the other half


had done its business on Peter's ancestors, had been brought hither


from the death chamber. Here- not to give a longer inventory of


articles that will never be put up at auction- was the fragment of a


full-length looking-glass, which, by the dust and dimness of its


surface, made the picture of these old things look older than the


reality. When Peter, not knowing that there was a mirror there, caught


the faint traces of his own figure, he partly imagined that the former


Peter Goldthwaite had come back, either to assist or impede his search


for the hidden wealth. And at that moment a strange notion glimmered


through his brain that he was the identical Peter who had concealed


the gold, and ought to know whereabout it lay. This, however, he had


unaccountably forgotten.


   "Well, Mr. Peter!" cried Tabitha, on the garret stairs. "Have you


torn the house down enough to heat the teakettle?"


   "Not yet, old Tabby," answered Peter; "but that's soon done- as you


shall see."


   With the word in his mouth, he uplifted the axe, and laid about him


so vigorously that the dust flew, the boards crashed, and, in a


twinkling, the old woman had an apron full of broken rubbish.


   "We shall get our winter's wood cheap," quoth Tabitha.


   The good work being thus commenced, Peter beat down all before him,


smiting and hewing at the joists and timbers, unclinching spike-nails,


ripping and tearing away boards, with a tremendous racket, from


morning till night. He took care, however, to leave the outside


shell of the house untouched, so that the neighbors might not


suspect what was going on.


   Never, in any of his vagaries, though each had made him happy while


it lasted, had Peter been happier than now. Perhaps, after all,


there was something in Peter Goldthwaite's turn of mind, which brought


him an inward recompense for all the external evil that it caused.


If he were poor, ill-clad, even hungry, and exposed, as it were, to be


utterly annihilated by a precipice of impending ruin, yet only his


body remained in these miserable circumstances, while his aspiring


soul enjoyed the sunshine of a bright futurity. It was his nature to


be always young, and the tendency of his mode of life to keep him


so. Gray hairs were nothing, no, nor wrinkles, nor infirmity; he might


look old, indeed, and be somewhat disagreeably connected with a


gaunt old figure, much the worse for wear; but the true, the essential


Peter was a young man of high hopes, just entering on the world. At


the kindling of each new fire, his burnt-out youth rose afresh from


the old embers and ashes. It rose exulting now. Having lived thus


long- not too long, but just to the right age- a susceptible bachelor,


with warm and tender dreams, he resolved, so soon as the hidden gold


should flash to light, to go a-wooing, and win the love of the fairest


maid in town. What heart could resist him? Happy Peter Goldthwaite!


   Every evening- as Peter had long absented himself from his former


lounging-places, at insurance offices, news-rooms, and book-stores,


and as the honor of his company was seldom requested in private


circles- he and Tabitha used to sit down sociably by the kitchen


hearth. This was always heaped plentifully with the rubbish of his


day's labor. As the foundation of the fire, there would be a


goodly-sized backlog of red oak, which, after being sheltered from


rain or damp above a century, still hissed with the heat, and


distilled streams of water from each end, as if the tree had been


cut down within a week or two. Next these were large sticks, sound,


black, and heavy, which had lost the principle of decay, and were


indestructible except by fire, wherein they glowed like red-hot bars


of iron. On this solid basis, Tabitha would rear a lighter


structure, composed of the splinters of door panels, ornamented


mouldings, and such quick combustibles, which caught like straw, and


threw a brilliant blaze high up the spacious flue, making its sooty


sides visible almost to the chimney top. Meantime, the gleam of the


old kitchen would be chased out of the cobwebbed corners, and away


from the dusky cross-beams over-head, and driven nobody could tell


whither, while Peter smiled like a gladsome man, and Tabitha seemed


a picture of comfortable age. All this, of course, was but an emblem


of the bright fortune which the destruction of the house would shed


upon its occupants.


   While the dry pine was flaming and crackling, like an irregular


discharge of fairy musketry, Peter sat looking and listening, in a


pleasant state of excitement. But, when the brief blaze and uproar


were succeeded by the dark-red glow, the substantial heat, and the


deep singing sound, which were to last throughout the evening, his


humor became talkative. One night, the hundredth time, he teased


Tabitha to tell him something new about his great-granduncle.


   "You have been sitting in that chimney corner fifty-five years, old


Tabby, and must have heard many a tradition about him," said Peter.


"Did not you tell me that, when you first came to the house, there was


an old woman sitting where you sit now, who had been housekeeper to


the famous Peter Goldthwaite?"


   "So there was, Mr. Peter," answered Tabitha, "and she was near


about a hundred years old. She used to say that she and old Peter


Goldthwaite had often spent a sociable evening by the kitchen fire-


pretty much as you and I are doing now, Mr. Peter."


   "The old fellow must have resembled me in more points than one,"


said Peter, complacently, "or he never would have grown so rich.


But, methinks, he might have invested the money better than he did- no


interest! nothing but good security! and the house to be torn down


to come at it! What made him hide it so snug, Tabby?"


   "Because he could not spend it," said Tabitha; "for as often as


he went to unlock the chest, the Old Scratch came behind and caught


his arm. The money, they say, was paid Peter out of his purse; and


he wanted Peter to give him a deed of this house and land, which Peter


swore he would not do."


   "Just as I swore to John Brown, my old partner," remarked Peter.


"But this is all nonsense, Tabby! I don't believe the story."


   "Well, it may not be just the truth," said Tabitha; "for some folks


say that Peter did make over the house to the Old Scratch, and


that's the reason it has always been so unlucky to them that lived


in it. And as soon as Peter had given him the deed, the chest flew


open, and Peter caught up a handful of the gold. But, lo and behold!


there was nothing in his fist but a parcel of old rags."


   "Hold your tongue, you silly old Tabby!" cried Peter in great


wrath. "They were as good golden guincas as ever bore the effigies


of the king of England. It seems as if I could recollect the whole


circumstance, and how I, or old Peter, or whoever it was, thrust in my


hand, or his hand, and drew it out all of a blaze with gold. Old rags,


indeed!"


   But it was not an old woman's legend that would discourage Peter


Goldthwaite. All night long he slept among pleasant dreams, and


awoke at daylight with a joyous throb of the heart, which few are


fortunate enough to feel beyond their boyhood. Day after day he


labored hard without wasting a moment, except at meal times, when


Tabitha summoned him to the pork and cabbage, or such other sustenance


as she had picked up, or Providence had sent them. Being a truly pious


man, Peter never failed to ask a blessing; if the food were none of


the best, then so much the more earnestly, as it was more needed-


nor to return thanks, if the dinner had been scanty, yet for the


good appetite, which was better than a sick stomach at a feast. Then


did he hurry back to his toil, and, in a moment, was lost to sight


in a cloud of dust from the old walls, though sufficiently perceptible


to the ear by the clatter which he raised in the midst of it. How


enviable is the consciousness of being usefully employed! Nothing


troubled Peter; or nothing but those phantoms of the mind which seem


like vague recollections, yet have also the aspect of presentiments.


He often paused, with his axe uplifted in the air, and said to


himself- "Peter Goldthwaite, did you never strike this blow


before?"- or, "Peter, what need of tearing the whole house down? Think


a little while, and you will remember where the gold is hidden."


Days and weeks passed on, however, without any remarkable discovery.


Sometimes, indeed, a lean, gray rat peeped forth at the lean, gray


man, wondering what devil had got into the old house, which had always


been so peaceable till now. And, occasionally, Peter sympathized


with the sorrows of a female mouse, who had brought five or six


pretty, little, soft and delicate young ones into the world just in


time to see them crushed by its ruin. But, as yet, no treasure!


   By this time, Peter, being as determined as Fate and as diligent as


Time, had made an end with the uppermost regions, and got down to


the second story, where he was busy in one of the front chambers. It


had formerly been the state bed-chamber, and was honored by


tradition as the sleeping apartment of Governor Dudley, and many other


eminent guests. The furniture was gone. There were remnants of faded


and tattered paper-hangings, but larger spaces of bare wall ornamented


with charcoal sketches, chiefly of people's heads in profile. These


being specimens of Peter's youthful genius, it went more to his


heart to obliterate them than if they had been pictures on a church


wall by Michael Angelo. One sketch, however, and that the best one,


affected him differently. It represented a ragged man, partly


supporting himself on a spade, and bending his lean body over a hole


in the earth, with one hand extended to grasp something that he had


found. But close behind him, with a fiendish laugh on his features,


appeared a figure with horns, a tufted tail, and a cloven hoof.


   "Avaunt, Satan!" cried Peter. "The man shall have his gold!"


   Uplifting his axe, he hit the horned gentleman such a blow on the


head as not only demolished him, but the treasure-seeker also, and


caused the whole scene to vanish like magic. Moreover, his axe broke


quite through the plaster and laths, and discovered a cavity.


   "Mercy on us, Mr. Peter, are you quarrelling with the Old Scratch?"


said Tabitha, who was seeking some fuel to put under the pot.


   Without answering the old woman, Peter broke down a further space


of the wall, and laid open a small closet or cupboard, on one side


of the fireplace, about breast high from the ground. It contained


nothing but a brass lamp, covered with verdigris, and a dusty piece of


parchment. While Peter inspected the latter, Tabitha seized the


lamp, and began to rub it with her apron.


   "There is no use in rubbing it, Tabitha," said Peter. "It is not


Aladdin's lamp, though I take it to be a token of as much luck. Look


here, Tabby!"


   Tabitha took the parchment and held it close to her nose, which was


saddled with a pair of iron-bound spectacles. But no sooner had she


began to puzzle over it than she burst into a chuckling laugh, holding


both her hands against her sides.


   "You can't make a fool of the old woman!" cried she. "This is


your own handwriting, Mr. Peter! the same as in the letter you sent me


from Mexico."


   "There is certainly a considerable resemblance," said Peter,


again examining the parchment. "But you know yourself, Tabby, that


this closet must have been plastered up before you came to the


house, or I came into the world. No, this is old Peter Goldthwaite's


writing; these columns of pounds, shillings, and pence are his


figures, denoting the amount of the treasure; and this at the bottom


is, doubtless, a reference to the place of concealment. But the ink


has either faded or peeled off, so that it is absolutely illegible.


What a pity!"


   "Well, this lamp is as good as new. That's some comfort," said


Tabitha.


   "A lamp!" thought Peter. "That indicates light on my researches."


   For the present, Peter felt more inclined to ponder on this


discovery than to resume his labors. After Tabitha had gone


downstairs, he stood poring over the parchment, at one of the front


windows, which was so obscured with dust that the sun could barely


throw an uncertain shadow of the casement across the floor. Peter


forced it open, and looked out upon the great street of the town,


while the sun looked in at his old house. The air, though mild, and


even warm, thrilled Peter as with a dash of water.


   It was the first day of the January thaw. The snow lay deep upon


the house-tops, but was rapidly dissolving into millions of


water-drops, which sparkled downwards through the sunshine, with the


noise of a summer shower beneath the eaves. Along the street, the


trodden snow was as hard and solid as a pavement of white marble,


and had not yet grown moist in the spring-like temperature. But when


Peter thrust forth his head, he saw that the inhabitants, if not the


town, were already thawed out by this warm day, after two or three


weeks of winter weather. It gladdened him- a gladness with a sigh


breathing through it- to see the stream of ladies, gliding along the


slippery sidewalks, with their red cheeks set off by quilted hoods,


boas, and sable capes, like roses amidst a new kind of foliage. The


sleigh-bells jingled to and fro continually: sometimes announcing


the arrival of a sleigh from Vermont, laden with the frozen bodies


of porkers, or sheep, and perhaps a deer or two; sometimes of a


regular market-man, with chickens, geese, and turkeys, comprising


the whole colony of a barn-yard; and sometimes of a farmer and his


dame, who had come to town partly for the ride, partly to go


a-shopping, and partly for the sale of some eggs and butter. This


couple rode in an old-fashioned square sleigh, which had served them


twenty winters, and stood twenty summers in the sun beside their door.


Now, a gentleman and lady skimmed the snow in an elegant car, shaped


somewhat like a cockle-shell. Now, a stage-sleigh, with its cloth


curtains thrust aside to admit the sun, dashed rapidly down the


street, whirling in and out among the vehicles that obstructed its


passage. Now came, round a corner, the similitude of Noah's ark on


runners, being an immense open sleigh with seats for fifty people, and


drawn by a dozen horses. This spacious receptacle was populous with


merry maids and merry bachelors, merry girls and boys, and merry old


folks, all alive with fun, and grinning to the full width of their


mouths. They kept up a buzz of babbling voices and low laughter, and


sometimes burst into a deep, joyous shout, which the spectators


answered with three cheers, while a gang of roguish boys let drive


their snowballs right among the pleasure party. The sleigh passed


on, and, when concealed by a bend of the street, was still audible


by a distant cry of merriment.


   Never had Peter beheld a livelier scene than was constituted by all


these accessories: the bright sun, the flashing water-drops, the


gleaming snow, the cheerful multitude, the variety of rapid


vehicles, and the jingle-jangle of merry bells which made the heart


dance to their music. Nothing dismal was to be seen, except that


peaked piece of antiquity, Peter Goldthwaite's house, which might well


look sad externally, since such a terrible consumption was preying


on its in- sides. And Peter's gaunt figure, half visible in the


projecting second story, was worthy of his house.


   "Peter! How goes it, friend Peter?" cried a voice across the


street, as Peter was drawing in his head. "Look out here, Peter!"


   Peter looked, and saw his old partner, Mr. John Brown, on the


opposite sidewalk, portly and comfortable, with his furred cloak


thrown open, disclosing a handsome surtout beneath. His voice had


directed the attention of the whole town to Peter Goldthwaite's


window, and to the dusty scarecrow which appeared at it.


   "I say, Peter," cried Mr. Brown again, "what the devil are you


about there, I hear such a racket whenever I pass by? You are


repairing the old house, I suppose- making a new one of it- eh?"


   "Too late for that, I am afraid, Mr. Brown," replied Peter. "If I


make it new, it will be new inside and out, from the cellar upwards."


   "Had not you better let me take the job?" said Mr. Brown,


significantly.


   "Not yet!" answered Peter, hastily shutting the window; for, ever


since he had been in search of the treasure, he hated to have people


stare at him.


   As he drew back, ashamed of his outward poverty, yet proud of the


secret wealth within his grasp, a haughty smile shone out on Peter's


visage, with precisely the effect of the dim sunbeams in the squalid


chamber. He endeavored to assume such a mien as his ancestor had


probably worn, when he gloried in the building of a strong house for a


home to many generations of his posterity. But the chamber was very


dark to his snow-dazzled eyes, and very dismal too, in contrast with


the living scene that he had just looked upon. His brief glimpse


into the street had given him a forcible impression of the manner in


which the world kept itself cheerful and prosperous, by social


pleasures and an intercourse of business, while he, in seclusion,


was pursuing an object that might possibly be a phantasm, by a


method which most people would call madness. It is one great advantage


of a gregarious mode of life that each person rectifies his mind by


other minds, and squares his conduct to that of his neighbors, so as


seldom to be lost in eccentricity. Peter Goldthwaite had exposed


himself to this influence by merely looking out of the window. For a


while, he doubted whether there were any hidden chest of gold, and, in


that case, whether he was so exceedingly wise to tear the house


down, only to be convinced of its non-existence.


   But this was momentary. Peter, the Destroyer, resumed the task


which fate had assigned him, nor faltered again till it was


accomplished. In the course of his search, he met with many things


that are usually found in the ruins of an old house, and also with


some that are not. What seemed most to the purpose was a rusty key,


which had been thrust into a chink of the wall, with a wooden label


appended to the handle, bearing the initials, P. G. Another singular


discovery was that of a bottle of wine, walled up in an old oven. A


tradition ran in the family, that Peter's grandfather, a jovial


officer in the old French War, had set aside many dozens of the


precious liquor for the benefit of topers then unborn. Peter needed no


cordial to sustain his hopes, and therefore kept the wine to gladden


his success. Many halfpence did he pick up, that had been lost through


the cracks of the floor, and some few Spanish coins, and the half of a


broken sixpence, which had doubtless been a love token. There was


likewise a silver coronation medal of George the Third. But old


Peter Goldthwaite's strong box fled from one dark corner to another,


or otherwise eluded the second Peter's clutches, till, should he


seek much farther, he must burrow into the earth.


   We will not follow him in his triumphant progress, step by step.


Suffice it that Peter worked like a steam-engine, and finished, in


that one winter, the job which all the former inhabitants of the


house, with time and the elements to aid them, had only half done in a


century. Except the kitchen, every room and chamber was now gutted.


The house was nothing but a shell- the apparition of a house- as


unreal as the painted edifices of a theatre. It was like the perfect


rind of a great cheese, in which a mouse had dwelt and nibbled till it


was a cheese no more. And Peter was the mouse.


   What Peter had torn down, Tabitha had burned up; for she wisely


considered that, without a house, they should need no wood to warm it;


and therefore economy was nonsense. Thus the whole house might be said


to have dissolved in smoke, and flown up among the clouds, through the


great black flue of the kitchen chimney. It was an admirable


parallel to the feat of the man who jumped down his own throat.


   On the night between the last day of winter and the first of


spring, every chink and cranny had been ransacked, except within the


precincts of the kitchen. This fated evening was an ugly one. A


snow-storm had set in some hours before, and was still driven and


tossed about the atmosphere by a real hurricane, which fought


against the house as if the prince of the air, in person, were putting


the final stroke to Peter's labors. The framework being so much


weakened, and the inward props removed, it would have been no marvel


if, in some stronger wrestle of the blast, the rotten walls of the


edifice, and all the peaked roofs, had come crushing down upon the


owner's head. He, however, was careless of the peril, but as wild


and restless as the night itself, or as the flame that quivered up the


chimney at each roar of the tempestuous wind.


   "The wine, Tabitha!" he cried. "My grandfather's rich old wine!


We will drink it now!"


   Tabitha arose from her smoke-blackened bench in the chimney-corner,


and placed the bottle before Peter, close beside the old brass lamp,


which had likewise been the prize of his researches. Peter held it


before his eyes, and, looking through the liquid medium, beheld the


kitchen illuminated with a golden glory, which also enveloped


Tabitha and gilded her silver hair, and converted her mean garments


into robes of queenly splendor. It reminded him of his golden dream.


   "Mr. Peter," remarked Tabitha, "must the wine be drunk before the


money is found?"


   "The money is found!" exclaimed Peter, with a sort of fierceness.


"The chest is within my reach. I will not sleep, till I have turned


this key in the rusty lock. But, first of all, let us drink!"


   There being no corkscrew in the house, he smote the neck of the


bottle with old Peter Goldthwaite's rusty key, and decapitated the


sealed cork at a single blow. He then filled two little china teacups,


which Tabitha had brought from the cupboard. So clear and brilliant


was this aged wine that it shone within the cups, and rendered the


sprig of scarlet flowers, at the bottom of each, more distinctly


visible than when there had been no wine there. Its rich and


delicate perfume wasted itself round the kitchen.


   "Drink, Tabitha!" cried Peter. "Blessings on the honest old


fellow who set aside this good liquor for you and me! And here's to


Peter Goldthwaite's memory!"


   "And good cause have we to remember him," quoth Tabitha, as she


drank.


   How many years, and through what changes of fortune and various


calamity, had that bottle hoarded up its effervescent joy, to be


quaffed at last by two such boon companions! A portion of the


happiness of the former age had been kept for them, and was now set


free, in a crowd of rejoicing visions, to sport amid the storm and


desolation of the present time. Until they have finished the bottle,


we must turn our eyes elsewhere.


   It so chanced that, on this stormy night, Mr. John Brown found


himself ill at ease in his wire-cushioned arm-chair, by the glowing


grate of anthracite which heated his handsome parlor. He was naturally


a good sort of a man, and kind and pitiful whenever the misfortunes of


others happened to reach his heart through the padded vest of his


own prosperity. This evening he had thought much about his old


partner, Peter Goldthwaite, his strange vagaries, and continual ill


luck, the poverty of his dwelling, at Mr. Brown's last visit, and


Peter's crazed and haggard aspect when he had talked with him at the


window.


   "Poor fellow!" thought Mr. John Brown. "Poor, crackbrained Peter


Goldthwaite! For old acquaintance' sake, I ought to have taken care


that he was comfortable this rough winter."


   These feelings grew so powerful that, in spite of the inclement


weather, he resolved to visit Peter Goldthwaite immediately. The


strength of the impulse was really singular. Every shriek of the blast


seemed a summons, or would have seemed so, had Mr. Brown been


accustomed to hear the echoes of his own fancy in the wind. Much


amazed at such active benevolence, he huddled himself in his cloak,


muffled his throat and ears in comforters and handkerchiefs, and, thus


fortified, bade defiance to the tempest. But the powers of the air had


rather the best of the battle. Mr. Brown was just weathering the


corner, by Peter Goldthwaite's house, when the hurricane caught him


off his feet, tossed him face downward into a snow bank, and proceeded


to bury his protuberant part beneath fresh drifts. There seemed little


hope of his reappearance earlier than the next thaw. At the same


moment his hat was snatched away, and whirled aloft into some far


distant region, whence no tidings have as yet returned.


   Nevertheless Mr. Brown contrived to burrow a passage through the


snow-drift, and, with his bare head bent against the storm, floundered


onward to Peter's door. There was such a creaking and groaning and


rattling, and such an ominous shaking throughout the crazy edifice,


that the loudest rap would have been inaudible to those within. He


therefore entered, without ceremony, and groped his way to the


kitchen.


   His intrusion, even there, was unnoticed. Peter and Tabitha stood


with their backs to the door, stooping over a large chest, which,


apparently, they had just dragged from a cavity, or concealed


closet, on the left side of the chimney. By the lamp in the old


woman's hand, Mr. Brown saw that the chest was barred and clamped with


iron, strengthened with iron plates and studded with iron nails, so as


to be a fit receptacle in which the wealth of one century might be


hoarded up for the wants of another. Peter Goldthwaite was inserting a


key into the lock.


   "O Tabitha!" cried he, with tremulous rapture, "how shall I


endure the effulgence? The gold! the bright, bright gold! Methinks I


can remember my last glance at it, just as the iron-plated lid fell


down. And ever since, being seventy years, it has been blazing in


secret, and gathering its splendor against this glorious moment! It


will flash upon us like the noonday sun!"


   "Then shade your eyes, Mr. Peter!" said Tabitha, with somewhat less


patience than usual. "But, for mercy's sake, do turn the key!"


   And, with a strong effort of both hands, Peter did force the


rusty key through the intricacies of the rusty lock. Mr. Brown, in the


meantime, had drawn near, and thrust his eager visage between those of


the other two, at the instant that Peter threw up the lid. No sudden


blaze illuminated the kitchen.


   "What's here?" exclaimed Tabitha, adjusting her spectacles, and


holding the lamp over the open chest. "Old Peter Goldthwaite's hoard


of old rags."


   "Pretty much so, Tabby," said Mr. Brown, lifting a handful of the


treasure.


   Oh, what a ghost of dead and buried wealth had Peter Goldthwaite


raised, to scare himself out of his scanty wits withal! Here was the


semblance of an incalculable sum, enough to purchase the whole town,


and build every street anew, but which, vast as it was, no sane man


would have given a solid sixpence for. What then, in sober earnest,


were the delusive treasures of the chest? Why, here were old


provincial bills of credit, and treasury notes, and bills of land,


banks, and all other bubbles of the sort, from the first issue,


above a century and a half ago, down nearly to the Revolution. Bills


of a thousand pounds were intermixed with parchment pennies, and worth


no more than they.


   "And this, then, is old Peter Goldthwaite's treasure!" said John


Brown. "Your namesake, Peter, was something like yourself; and, when


the provincial currency had depreciated fifty or seventy-five per


cent, he bought it up in expectation of a rise. I have heard my


grandfather say that old Peter gave his father a mortgage of this very


house and land, to raise cash for his silly project. But the


currency kept sinking, till nobody would take it as a gift; and


there was old Peter Goldthwaite, like Peter the second, with thousands


in his strong box and hardly a coat to his back. He went mad upon


the strength of it. But, never mind, Peter! It is just the sort of


capital for building castles in the air."


   "The house will be down about our ears!" cried Tabitha, as the wind


shook it with increasing violence.


   "Let it fall!" said Peter, folding his arms, as he seated himself


upon the chest.


   "No, no, my old friend Peter," said John Brown. "I have house


room for you and Tabby, and a safe vault for the chest of treasure.


Tomorrow we will try to come to an agreement about the sale of this


old house. Real estate is well up, and I could afford you a pretty


handsome price."


   "And I, observed Peter Goldthwaite, with reviving spirits, "have


a plan for laying out the cash to great advantage."


   "Why, as to that," muttered John Brown to himself, "we must apply


to the next court for a guardian to take care of the solid cash; and


if Peter insists upon speculating, he may do it, to his heart's


content, with old PETER GOLDTHWAITE'S TREASURE."








                           THE END


.


