





Villainage in England



	by Paul Vinogradoff









Second Essay: The Manor and the Village Community





Chapter 1



The Open Field System and the Holdings



    My first essay has been devoted to the peasantry of feudal

England in its social character. We have had to examine its

classes or divisions in their relation to freedom, personal

slavery, and praedial serfage. The land system was touched upon

only so far as it influenced such classification, or was

influenced by it.

    But no correct estimate of the social standing of the

peasantry can stop here, or content itself with legal or

administrative definitions. In no degree of society do men stand

isolated, and a description of individual status alone would be

thoroughly incomplete. Men stand arranged in groups for

economical and political cooperation, and these groups are

composed according to the laws of the division and hierarchical

organisation of labour, composed, that is, of heterogeneous

elements, of members who have to fulfil different functions, and

to occupy higher and lower positions. The normal group which

forms as it were the constitutive cell of English mediaeval

society is the manor, and we must try to make out in what way it

was organised, and how it did its work in the thirteenth century,

at the time of fully developed feudalism.

    The structure of the ordinary manor is always the same. Under

the headship of the lord we find two layers of population the

villains and the freeholders; and the territory occupied divides

itself accordingly into demesne land (1*) and 'tributary land'

(if I may use that phrase) of two different classes. The

cultivation of the demesne depends to a certain extent on the

work supplied by the tenants of the tributary land. Rents are

collected, labour supervised, and all kinds of administrative

business transacted, by a set of manorial officers or servants.

The entire population is grouped into a village community which

centres round the manorial court or halimote, which is both

council and tribunal. My investigation will necessarily conform

to this typical arrangement. The holding of the peasant is the

natural starting-point: it will give us the clue to the whole

agrarian system. Next may come that part of the territory which

is not occupied in severalty, but used in common. The agrarian

obligations with regard to the lord and the cultivation of the

demesne land may be taken up afterwards. The position of

privileged people, either servants or freeholders, must be

discussed by itself, as an exceptional case. And, lastly, the

question will have to be put to what extent were all these

elements welded together in the village community, and under the

sway of the manorial court?

    The chief features of the field-system which was in operation

in England during the middle ages have been sufficiently cleared

up by modern scholars, especially by Nasse, Thorold Rogers, and

Seebohm, and there is no need for dwelling at length on the

subject. Everybody knows that the arable of an English village

was commonly cultivated under a three years' rotation of

crops;(2*) a two field system is also found very often;(3*) there

are some instances of more complex arrangements,(4*) but they are

very rare, and appear late-not earlier than the fourteenth

century. Walter of Henley's treatise on farming, which appears to

belong to the first half of the thirteenth, mentions only the

first two systems, and its estimate of the plough-land is based

on them. In the case of a three field rotation a hundred and

eighty acres are reckoned to the plough; a hundred and sixty in a

system of two courses.(5*) We find the same estimate in the

chapters on husbandry and management of an estate which are

inserted in the law-book known as Fleta.(6*) The strips in the

fields belonging to the several tenants were divided by narrow

balks of turf, and when the field lay fallow, or after the

harvest had been removed, the entire field was turned into a

common pasture for the use of the village cattle. The whole area

was protected by an inclosure while it was under crop.

    A curious deviation is apparent in the following instance,

taken from the cartulary of Malmesbury. The Abbey makes an

exchange with a neighbour who has rights of common on some of the

convent's land, and therefore does not allow of its being

cultivated and inclosed (inhoc facere). In return for certain

concessions on the part of the Abbey, this neighbouring owner

agrees that fallow pasture should be turned into arable on the

condition that after the harvest it should return to common use,

as well as the land not actually under seed. Lastly comes a

provision about the villains of the person entering into

agreement with the Abbey: if they do not want to conform to the

new arrangement of cultivation, they will be admitted to their

strips for the purpose of ploughing up or using the fallow.(7*)

The case is interesting in two respects: it shows the intimate

connexion between the construction of the inclosure (inhoc) and

the raising of the crop; the special paragraph about the villains

gives us to understand that something more than the usual

rotation of crops was meant: the 'inhokare' appears in opposition

either to the ordinary ploughing up of the fallow, or in a

general sense to its use for pasture; it seems to indicate

extra-cultivation of such land as ought to have remained

uncultivated. These considerations are borne out by other

documents. In a trial of Edward I's time the 'inheche' is

explained in as many words as the ploughing up of fallow for a

crop of wheat, oats, or barley.(8*) The Gloucester Survey, in

describing one of the manors belonging to the Abbey, arranges its

land into four fields (campi), each consisting of several parts:

the first field is said to contain 174 acres, the second 63, the

third 109, the fourth 69 acres. Two-thirds of the whole are

subjected to the usual modes of cultivation under a three-course

system, and one-third remains for pasture. But out of this last

third, 40 acres of the first field (of 174 acres) get inclosed

and used for crop in one year, and 20 acres of the second in

another.(9*) In this way the ordinary three-course alternation

becomes somewhat more complicated, and it will be hardly too bold

a guess to suppose that such extra-cultivation implied some

manuring of such patches as were deprived of their usual rest

once in three years. In contradiction to the customary

arrangement which did not require any special manuring except

that which was incident to the use of arable as pasture for the

cattle after the harvest, we find plots set apart for more

intense cultivation,(10*) and it is to be noticed that the

reckoning in connexion with them does not start from the division

according to three parts, but supposes a separate classification

in two sections.

    Another fact worth noticing in the Gloucester instance is the

irregular distribution of acres in the 'fields,' and the division

of the entire arable into four unequal parts. The husbandry is

conducted on the three-course system, and still four fields are

mentioned, and there is no simple relation between the number of

acres which they respectively contain (174, 63, 109, 69). It

seems obvious that the expression 'field' (campus) is used here

not in the ordinary sense suggested by such records as

spring-field, winter-field, and the like, but in reference to the

topography of the district. The whole territory under cultivation

was divided into a number of squares or furlongs which lay round

the village in four large groups. The alternation of crops

distributed the same area into three according to a mode not

described by the Survey, and it looks proVable at first glance

that each of the 'fields' (campi) contained elements of all three

courses. The supposition becomes a certainty, if we reflect that

it gives the only possible explanation of the way in which the

twofold alternation of the 'inhoc' is made to fit with the

threefold rotation of crops: every year some of the land in each

campus had to remain in fallow, and could be inclosed or taken

under 'inhoc.' Had the campus as a whole been reserved for one of

the three courses, there would have been room for the 'inhoc'

only every three years.

    I have gone into some details in connexion with this instance

because it presents a deviation from ordinary rules, and even a

deviation from the usual phraseology, and it is probable that the

exceptional use of words depended on the exceptional process of

farming. A new species of arable -- the manured plot under

'inhoc' -- came into use, and naturally disturbed the plain

arrangement of the old-fashioned three courses; the lands had to

be grouped anew into four sections which went under the

accustomed designation of 'fields,' although they did not fit in

with the 'three fields' of the old system. In most cases,

however, our records use the word 'field' (campus) in that very

sense of land under one of the 'courses,' which is out of the

question in the case taken from the Gloucester Cartulary. The

common use is especially clear when the documents want to

describe the holding of a person, and mention the number of acres

in each 'field.' The Abbot of Malmesbury, e.g., enfeoffs one

Robert with a virgate formerly held 'in the fields' by A.,

twenty-one acres in one field and twenty-one in another.(11*) The

charter does not contain any description of campi in the

territorial sense, and it is evident that the expression 'in the

fields' is meant to indicate a customary and well-known husbandry

arrangement. The same meaning must be put on sentences like the

following: -- R.A. holds a virgate consisting of forty-two acres

in both fields.(12*) The question may be raised whether we have

to look for 'both fields' in the winter and springfield of the

three courses rotation, or in the arable and fallow of the two

courses. In the first of these eventualities, the third reserved

for pasture and rest would be left out of the reckoning; it would

be treated as an appurtenance of the land that was in

cultivation. Cases in which the portions in the several fields

are unequal seem to point to the second sense.(13*) It was

impossible to divide the whole territory under cultivation like a

piece of paper: conformation of the soil had, of course, much to

do with the shape of the furlongs and their distribution, and the

courses of the husbandry could not impress themselves on it

without some inequalities and stray remnants. It may happen for

this reason that a man holds sixteen acres in one field and

fourteen in the other. There is almost always, however, a certain

correspondence between the number of acres in each field;

instances of very great disparity are rare, and suppose some

local and special reasons which we cannot trace. Such disparities

seem to point, however, to a rotation according to two courses,

because the fallow of the three courses could have been left out

of the reckoning only if all the parts in the fields were

equal.(14*) I think that a careful inspection of the surveys from

this point of view may lead to the conclusion that the two

courses rotation was very extensively spread in England in the

thirteenth century.

    A most important feature of the mediaeval system of tillage

was its compulsory character. The several tenants, even when

freeholders, could not manage their plots at their own

choice.(15*) The entire soil of the township formed one whole in

this respect, and was subjected to the management of the entire

village. The superior right of the community found expression in

the fact that the fields were open to common use as pasture after

the harvest, as well as in the regulation of the modes of farming

and order of tillage by the township. Even the lord himself had

to conform to the customs and rules set up by the community, and

attempts to break through them, although they become frequent

enough at the close of the thirteenth century, and especially in

the fourteenth, are met by a resistance which sometimes actually

leads to litigation.(16*) The freeholders alone have access to

the courts, but in practice the entire body of the tenantry is

equally concerned. The passage towards more efficient modes of

cultivation was very much obstructed by these customary rules as

to rotation of crops, which flow not from the will and interest

of single owners, but from the decision of communities.

    The several plots and holdings do not lie in compact I

patches, but are formed of strips intermixed with each other. The

so-called open-field system has been treated so exhaustively and

with such admirable clearness by Seebohm, that I need not detain

my readers in order to discuss it at length. I shall merely take

from the Eynsham Cartulary the general description of the arable

of Shifford, Oxon. It consists of several furlongs or areas, more

or less rectangular in shape; each furlong divided into a certain

number of strips (seliones), mostly half an acre or a rood

(quarter acre) in width; some of these strips get shortened,

however (seliones curtae), or sharpened (gorae), according to the

shape of the country. At right angles with the strips in the

fields lie the 'headlands' (capitales), which admit to other

strips when there is no special road for the purpose.(17*) When

the area under tillage abuts against some obstacles, as against a

highway, a river, a neighbouring furlong, the strips are stunted

(buttae). Every strip is separated from the next by balks on even

ground, and linches on the steep slopes of a hill. The holding of

a peasant, free or villain, has been appropriately likened to a

bundle of these strips of different shapes, the component parts

of which lie intermixed with the elements of other holdings in

the different fields of the township. There is e.g. in the

Alvingham Cartulary a deed by which John Aysterby grants to the

Priory of Alvingham in Lincolnshire his villain Robert and half a

bovate of land.(18*) The half-bovate is found to consist of

twelve strips west of Alvingham and sixteen strips east of the

village; the several plots lie among similar plots owned by the

priory and by other peasants. The demesne land of the priory is

also situated not in compact areas, but in strips intermixed with

those of the tenantry, in the 'communal fields' according to the

phraseology of our documents.

    Such a distribution of the arable seems odd enough. It led

undoubtedly to very great inconvenience in many ways: it was

difficult for the owner to look after his property in the several

fields, and to move constantly from one place to another for the

purposes of cultivation. A thrifty husbandman was more or less

dependent for the results of his work on his neighbours, who very

likely were not thrifty. The strips were not always measured with

exactness,(19*) and our surveys mention curious misunderstandings

in this respect: it happens that as much as three acres belonging

to a particular person get mislaid somehow and cannot be

identified.(20*) It is needless to say that disputes among the

neighbours were rendered especially frequent by the rough way of

dividing the strips, and by the cutting up of the holdings into

narrow strips involving a very long line of boundary. And still

the open-field system, with the intermixed strips, is quite a

prevalent feature of mediaeval husbandry all over Europe. It

covers the whole area occupied by the village community; it is

found in Russia as well as in England.

    Before we try to find an explanation for it, I shall call the

attention of the reader to the following tale preserved by an

ancient survey of Dunstable Priory. I think that the record may

suggest the explanation with the more authority as it will

proceed from well-established facts and not from

suppositions.(21*) The story goes back to the original division

of the land belonging to the Wahull manor by the lords de Wahull

and de la Lege. The former had to receive two-thirds of the manor

and the latter one-third: a note explains this to mean, that one

had to take twenty knight-fees and the other ten. The lord de

Wahull took all the park in Segheho and the entire demesne farm

in 'Bechebury'. As a compensation for the surrender of rights on

the part of his fellow parcener, he ordered the wood and pasture

called Northwood to be measured, as also the neighbouring wood

called Churlwood. He removed all the peasants who lived in these

places, and had also the arable of Segheho measured, and it was

found that there were eight hides of villain land. Of these eight

hides one-fourth was taken, and it was reckoned that this fourth

was an equivalent to the one-third of the park and of the demesne

farm, which ought by right to have gone to the lord de la Lege.

On the basis of this estimation an exchange was effected. In the

time of the war (perhaps the rebellion of 1173) the eight hides

and other hides in Segheho were encroached upon and appropriated

unrighteously by many, and for this reason a general revision of

the holdings was undertaken before Walter de Wahull and Hugh de

la Lege in full court by six old men; it was made out to which of

the hides the several acres belonged. At that time, when all the

tenants in Segheho (knights, freeholders, and others) did not

know exactly about the land of the village and the tenements, and

when each man was contending that his neighbours held

unrighteously and more than they ought, all the people decided by

common agreement and in the presence of the lords de Wahull and

de la Lege, that everybody should surrender his land to be

measured anew with the rood by the old men as if the ground had

been occupied afresh: every one had to receive his due part on

consideration of his rights. At that time R.F. admitted that he

and his predecessors had held the area near the castle

unrighteously. The men in charge of the distribution divided that

area into sixteen strips (buttos), and these were divided as

follows: there are eight hides of villain land in Segheho and to

each two strips were apportioned.

    The narrative is curious in many respects. it illustrates

beautifully the extent to which the intermixture of plots was

carried, and the inconveniences consequent upon it. Although the

land had been measured and divided at the time when the lord de

Wahull took the land, everything got into confusion at the time

of the civil war, and the disputes originated not in violence

from abroad but in encroachments of the village people among

themselves: the owners of conterminous strips were constantly

quarrelling. A new division became necessary, and it took place

under circumstances of great solemnity, as a result of an

agreement effected at a great meeting of the tenantry before both

lords. The new distribution may stand for all purposes in lieu of

the original parcelling of the land on fresh occupation. The mode

of treating one of the areas shows that the intermixture of the

strips was a direct consequence of the attempt to equalise the

portions. instead of putting the whole of this area into one lot,

the old men divide it into strips and assign to every great

holding, to every hide, two strips of this area. Many

inconveniences follow for some of the owners, e.g. for the church

which, it is complained, cannot put its plot to any use on

account of its lying far away, and in intermixture with other

people's land. But the guiding principle of equal apportionment

has found a suitable expression.

    We may turn now from the analysis of this case to general

considerations. The important point in the instance quoted was,

that the assignment of scattered strips to every holding depended

on the wish to equalise the shares of the tenants. I think it may

be shown that the treatment adopted in Segheho was the most

natural, and therefore the most widely-spread one. To begin with,

what other form of allotment appears more natural in a crude

state of society? To employ a simile which I have used already,

the territory of the township is not like a homogeneous sheet of

paper out of which you may cut lots of every desirable shape and

size: the tilth will present all kinds of accidental features,

according to the elevation of the ground, the direction of the

watercourses and ways, the quality of the soil, the situation of

dwellings, the disposition of wood and pasture-ground, etc. The

whole must needs be dismembered into component parts, into

smaller areas or furlongs, each stretching over land of one and

the same condition, and separated from land of different quality

and situation. Over the irregular squares of this rough

chess-board a more or less entangled network of rights and

interests must be extended. There seem to be only two ways of

doing it: if you want the holding to lie in one compact patch you

will have to make a very complicated reckoning of all the many

circumstances which influence husbandry, will have to find some

numerical expression for fertility, accessibility, and the like;

or else you may simply give every householder a share in every

one of the component areas, and subject him in this way to all

the advantages and drawbacks which bear upon his neighbours. If

the ground cannot be made to fit the system of allotment, the

system must conform itself to the ground. There can be no

question that the second way of escaping from the difficulty is

much the easier one, and very suitable to the practice of

communities in an early stage of development. This second way

leads necessarily to a scattering and an intermixture of strips.

The explanation is wide enough to meet the requirements of cases

placed in entirely different local surroundings and historical

connexions; the tendency towards an equalising of the shares of

the tenantry is equally noticeable in England and in Russia, in

the far west and in the far east of Europe. In Russia we need not

even go into history to find it operating in the way described;

the practice is alive even now.

    This intermixture of strips in the open fields is also

characteristic in another way: it manifests the working of a

principle which became obliterated in the course of history, but

had to play a very important part originally. It was a system

primarily intended for the purpose of equalising shares, and it

considered every man's rights and property as interwoven with

other people's rights and property: it was therefore a system

particularly adapted to bring home the superior right of the

community as a whole, and the inferior, derivative character of

individual rights. The most complete inference from such a

general conception would be to treat individual occupation of the

land as a shifting ownership, to redistribute the land among the

members of the community from time to time, according to some

system of lot or rotation. The western village community does not

go so far, as a rule, in regard to the arable, at least in the

time to which our records belong. But even in the west, and

particularly in England, traces of shifting ownership, 'shifting

severalty,' may be found as scattered survivals of a condition

which, if not general, was certainly much more widely spread in

earlier times.(22*) The arable is sometimes treated as meadows

constantly are: every householder's lot is only an 'ideal' one,

and may be assigned one year in one place, and next year in

another. The stubborn existence of intermixed ownership, even as

described by feudal and later records, is in itself a strong

testimony to the communal character of early property. The strips

of the several holders were not divided by hedges or inclosures,

and a good part of the time, after harvest and before seed,

individual rights retreated before common use; every

individualising treatment of the soil was excluded by the

compulsory rotation of crops and the fact that every share

consisted of a number of narrow strips wedged in among other

people's shares. The husbandry could not be very energetic and

lucrative under such pressure, and a powerful consideration which

kept the system working, against convenience and interest, was

its equalising and as it were communal tendency. I lay stress on

the fact: if the open-field system with its intermixture had been

merely a reflection of the original allotment, it would have

certainly lost its regularity very soon. People could not be

blind to its drawbacks from the point of view of individual

farming; and if the single strips had become private property as

soon as they ceased to be shifting, exchanges, if not sales,

would have greatly destroyed the inconvenient network. The lord

had no interest to prevent such exchanges, which could manifestly

lead to an improvement of husbandry,. and in regard to his own

strips, he must have perceived soon enough that it would be

better to have them in one compact mass than scattered about in

all the fields. And still the open-field intermixture holds its

ground all through the middle ages, and we find its survivals far

into modern times. This can only mean, that even when the

shifting, 'ideal,' share in the land of the community had given

way to the permanent ownership by each member of certain

particular scattered strips, this permanent ownership did by no

means amount to private property in the Roman or in the modern

sense. The communal principle with its equalising tendency

remained still as the efficient force regulating the whole, and

strong enough to subject even the lord and the freeholders to its

customary influence. By saying this I do not mean to maintain, of

course, that private property was not existent, that it was not

breaking through the communal system, and acting as a dissolvent

of it. I shall have to show by-and-by in what ways this process

was effected. But the fact remains, that the system which

prevailed upon the whole during the middle ages appears directly

connected in its most important features with ideas of communal

ownership and equalised individual rights.

    These ideas are carried out in a very rough way in the

mediaeval arrangement of the holding, which is more complicated

in England than on the continent. According to a very common mode

of reckoning, the hide contains four virgates, every virgate two

bovates, and every bovate fifteen acres. The bovate (oxgang)

shows by its very name that not only the land is taken into

account, but the oxen employed in its tillage, and the records

explain the hide or carucate (23*) to be the land of the

eight-oxen plough, that is so much land as may be cultivated by a

plough drawn by eight oxen. The virgate, or yard-land, being the

fourth part of a hide, corresponds to one-fourth part of the

plough, that is, to two oxen, contributed by the holder to the

full plough-team; the bovate or oxgang appears as the land of one

ox, and the eighth part of the hide.(24*) Such proportions are,

as I said, very commonly found in the records, but they are by no

means prevalent everywhere. On the possessions of Glastonbury

Abbey, for instance, we find virgates of forty acres, and a hide

of 160; and the same reckoning appears in manors of Wetherall

Priory, Westmoreland,(25*) of the Abbey of Eynsham,

Oxfordshire,(26*) and many other places.

    The so-called Domesday of St. Paul's reports,(27*) that in

Runwell eighty acres used to be reckoned to the hide, but in

course of time new land was acquired (for tillage) and measured,

and so the hide was raised to 120 acres. Altogether the

supposition of an uniform acre-measurement of bovates, virgates,

hides, and knights' fees all over England would be entirely

misleading. The oxen were an important element in the

arrangement, but, of course, not the only one. The formation of

the holding had to conform also to the quality of the soil, the

density of the population, etc. We find in any case the most

varying figures. The knight's fee contained mostly four or five

full ploughs or carucates, and still in Lincolnshire sixteen

carucates went to the knight's fee.(28*) The carucate was not

identical with the hide, but carucate and hide alike had

originally meant a unit corresponding to a plough-team. Four

virgates were mostly reckoned to the hide, but sometimes six,

eight, seven are taken.(29*) The yardlands (virgates) or full

lands, as they are sometimes called, because they were considered

as the typical peasant holdings, consist of fifteen, sixteen,

eighteen, twenty-four, forty, forty-eight, fifty, sixty-two,

eighty acres, although thirty is perhaps the figure which appears

more often than any other.(30*) Bovates of ten, twelve, and

sixteen acres are to be found in the same locality.(31*) We

cannot even seize hold of the acre as the one constant unit among

these many variables; the size of the acre itself varied from

place to place. In this way any attempt to establish a normal

reckoning of the holdings will not only seem hazardous, but will

actually stand in contradiction with patent facts.

    Another circumstance seems of yet greater import: even within

the boundaries of one and the same community the equality was an

agrarian one and did not amount to a strict correspondence in

figures. It was obviously impossible to cut up the land among the

holdings in such a way as to make every one contain quite the

same number of acres as the rest. In the Cartulary of Ramsey it

is stated, that in one of the manors the virgate contains

sometimes forty-eight acres and sometimes less.(32*) The

Huntingdon Hundred Rolls mentions a locality where some of the

half-virgates have got houses on their plots and some have

not.(33*) In the Dorsetshire manor of Newton, belonging to

Glastonbury, we find a reduction of the duties of one of the

virgates because it is a small one.(34*) A curious instance is

supplied by the same Glastonbury survey as to the Wiltshire manor

of Christian Malford: one of the virgates was formed out of two

former virgates, which were found insufficient to support two

separate households.(35*)

    This last case makes it especially clear that the object was

to make the shares on the same pattern in point of quality, and

not of mere quantity. It is only to be regretted that manorial

surveys, hundred rolls, and other documents of the same kind take

too little heed of such variations, and consider the whole

arrangement merely in regard to the interests of the landlord.

For this purpose a rough quantitative statement was sufficient.

They give very sparing indications as to the facts underlying the

system of holdings; their aim is to reduce all relations to

artificial uniformity in order to make them a fitter basis for

the distribution of rents and labour services. But very little

attention is required to notice a very great difference between

such figures and reality. In most of the cases, when the virgate

is described in its component parts, we come across

irregularities. Again, each component part is more or less

irregular, because instead of the acres and half-acres the real

ground presents strips of a very capricious shape. And so we must

come to the conclusion, that the hide, the virgate, the bovate,

in short every holding mentioned in the surveys, appears

primarily as an artificial, administrative, and fiscal unit which

corresponds only in a very rough way to the agrarian reality.

    This conclusion coincides with the most important fact, that

the reckoning of acres in regard to the plough-team is entirely

different in the treatises on husbandry from what it is in the

manorial records drawn up for the purpose of an assessment of

duties and payments. Walter of Henley and Fleta reckon 180 acres

to the plough in a three-field system, and 160 in a two-field

system. Now these figures are quite exceptional in surveys,

whereas 120 acres is most usual without any distinction as to the

course of rotation of crops. The relation between the three-field

ploughland of 180 acres and the hide of 120 suggests the

inference that the official assessment started from the

prevalence of the three-field rotation, and disregarded the

fallow. But the inference is hardly sufficient to explain the

facts of the case. The way towards a solution of the problem is

indicated by the terminology of the Ely surveys in the British

Museum. These documents very often mention virgates and full

yardlands of twelve acres de ware; on the other hand, the Court

Rolls from Edward I's time till Elizabeth's, and a survey of the

reign of Edward III, show the virgate to consist of twenty-four

acres.(36*) The virgate de ware corresponds usually to one-half

of the real virgate; I say usually, because in one case it is

reckoned to contain eighteen acres in the place of twenty-four

mentioned in the rolls and the later survey.(37*) Such 'acre

ware' are to be found, though rarely, in other manors besides

those of Ely minster.(38*) The contradiction between the

documents may be taken at first glance to originate in a

difference between the number of acres under actual tillage and

the number of acres comprised in the holding: perhaps the first

reckoning leaves out the fallow. This explanation has been tried

by Mr O. Pell, the present owner of one of the Ely manors he

started it in connexion with an etymology which brought together

'ware' and 'warectum': on this assumption twelve acres appeared

instead of twenty-four, because the fallow of the two-field

system was left out of the reckoning. But this reading of the

evidence does not seem satisfactory. It is one-sided at the

least. Why should the holding from which the 'warectum' has been

left out get its name from the 'warectum'? How is one to explain

either from the two-field or from the three-field system the case

when eighteen 'acre ware' correspond to twenty-four common acres,

or the even more perplexing case when eighteen acres of 'ware' go

to the full land and twelve to half-a-full land?(39*) In fact,

this last instance does not admit of any explanation from natural

conditions, because in the natural course of things twelve will

never come to be one-half of eighteen. Thus we are driven to

assume that the 'ware' reckoning is an artificial one: as such it

could, of course, treat the half-holdings in a different way from

the full holdings. Now the only possible basis for an artificial

distribution seems to be the assessment of rents and labour.

Starting from this assumption we shall have to say that the

virgate 'de wara' represents a unit of assessment in which twelve

really existing acres have been left out of the reckoning. The

assessment stretches only over half the area occupied by the real

holding.

    The conclusion we have come to is corroborated by the meaning

of the word 'wara.' The etymological connexion with warectum is

not sound; the meaning may be best brought out by a comparison

with those instances where the word is used without a direct

reference to the number of acres. We often find the expression

'ad inwaram' in Domesday, and it corresponds to the plain 'ad

gildam Regis'. If a manor is said to contain seven hides ad

inwaram, it is meant that it pays to the king for seven hides,

although there may have been more than seven ploughteams and

ploughlands. Another expression of like import is, 'pro sextem

hidis se defendit erga Regem.' The Burton Cartulary, the earliest

survey after Domesday, employed the word 'wara' in the same

sense.(40*) It is not difficult to draw the inference from the

above-mentioned facts: the etymological connexion for 'wara' is

to be sought in the German word for defence -- 'wehre.' The manor

defends itself or answers to the king for seven hides. The

expression could get other special significations besides the one

discussed: we find it for the poll-tax, by which a freeman

defends himself in regard to the state,(41*) and for the weir,

which prevents the fish from escaping into the river.(42*)

    This origin and use of the term is of considerable.

importance, because it shows the artificial character of the

system and its close connexion with the taxation by the State.

This is a disturbing element which ought to be taken into account

by the side of the agrarian influence. There cannot be the

slightest doubt that the assessment started from actual facts,

from existing agrarian conditions and divisions. The hide, the

yardland, the oxgang existed not only in the geld-rolls, but in

fact and on the ground. But in geld-rolls they appeared with a

regularity they did not possess in real fact; the rolls express

all modifications in the modes of farming and all exemptions, not

in the shape of any qualification or lighter assessment of single

plots, but by way of striking off from the number of these plots,

or from the number of acres in them; the object which in modern

times would be effected by the registration of a 'rateable value'

differing from the 'actual value' was effected in ancient times

by the registration of a 'rateable size' differing from the

'actual size'; lastly, the surveys and rolls of assessment do not

keep time with the actual facts, and often reflect, by their

figures and statistics, the conditions of bygone periods. The

hides of the geld or of the 'wara' tend to become constant and

rigid: it is difficult for the king's officers to alter their

estimates, and the people subjected to the tax try in every way

to guard against novelties and encroachments. The real agrarian

hide-area is changing at the same time because the population

increases, new tenements are formed, and new land is reclaimed.

    We find at every step in our records that the assessment and

the agrarian conditions do not coincide. If a manor has been

given to a convent in free almoign (in liberam et perpetuam

eleemosynam), that is, free from all taxes and payments to the

State, there is no reason to describe it in units of assessment,

and in fact such property often appears in manorial records

without any 'hidation' or reckoning of knight-fees.(43*) The

Ramsey Cartulary tells us that the land in Hulme was not divided

into hides and virgates.(44*) There are holdings, of course, and

they are equal, but they are estimated in acres. When the

hidation has been laid on the land and taxes are paid from it,

the smaller subdivisions are sometimes omitted: the artificial

system of taxation does not go very deep into details. Even if

most part of the land has been brought under the operation of

that system, some plots are left which do not participate in the

common payments, and therefore are said to be 'out of the

hide'.(45*) Such being the case, there can be no wonder that one

of the Ramsey manors answers to the king for ten hides, and to

the abbot for eleven and a-half.(46*)

    It is to be noted especially, that although in a few cases a

difference is made between the division for royal assessment and

for the manorial impositions, in the great majority of cases no

such difference exists, and the duties in regard to the king and

to the lord are reckoned according to the same system of

holdings. On the manors of Ely, for instance, the 12 acreware

(47*) form the basis of all the reckoning of rents and work. And

so if the royal assessment appear with the features of an

artificial fiscal arrangement, the same observation has to be

extended to the manorial assessment; and thus we reach by another

way the same conclusion which we drew from an analysis of the

single holding and of its component parts. No doubt the whole

stands in close relation to the reality of cultivation and

land-holding, but the rigidity, regularity, and correctness of

the system present a necessary contrast to the facts of actual

life. As the soil could not be made to fit into geometrical

squares, even so the population could not remain without change

from one age to the other within the same boundaries. Thus in

course of time the plough-land of 160 and 180 acres, which is the

plough-land of practical farming, appears by the side of the

statutory hide of 120 acres; and so again inside every single

holding there comes up the contrast between its real conformation

and distribution, and the outward form it assumed in regard to

the king, the lord, and the steward.

    The inquiry as to the relation between the holding and the

population on it is, of course, of the utmost importance for a

general estimate of the arrangement. From a formal point of view

the question is soon solved: on the one hand, the holding of the

villain remains undivided and entire; it does not admit of

partition by sale or descent; on the other, the will of the lord

may alter, if necessary, the natural course of inheritance and

possession; the socage tenure is often free from the first of

these limitations, and always free from the second. The

indivisibility of villain tenements is chiefly conspicuous in the

law of inheritance: all the land went to one of the sons if there

were several; very often the youngest inherited; and this custom,

to which mere chance has given the name of Borough English, was

considered as one of the proofs of villainage.(48*) It is

certainly a custom of great importance, and probably it depended

on the fact that the elder brothers left the land at the earliest

opportunity, and during their father's life. Where did they go?

It is easy to guess that they sought work out of the manor, as

craftsmen or labourers; that they served the lord as servants,

ploughmen, and the like; that they were provided with holdings,

which for some reason did not descend to male heirs; that they

were endowed with some demesne land, or fitted out to reclaim

land from the waste. We may find for all these suppositions some

supporting quotation in the records. And still it would be hard

to believe that the entire increase of population found an exit

by these by-paths. If no exit was found, the brothers had to

remain on their father's plot, and the fact that they did so can

be proved, if it needs proof, from documents.(49*) The unity of

the holding was not disturbed in the case; there was no division,

and only the right heir, the estiopamon as they said in Sparta,

had to answer for the services; the lord looked to him and no

further; but in point of fact the holding contained more than one

family, and perhaps more than one household. However this may be,

in regard to the lord the holding remained one and undivided.

This circumstance draws a sharp line between the feudal

arrangement of most counties and that which prevailed in Kent.

The gavelkind or tributary tenure there was subjected to equal

partition among the heirs.

    Let us take a Kentish survey, the Black Book of St.

Augustine's, Canterbury, for instance: it describes the peasant

holdings in a way which differs entirely from other surveys. It

begins by stating what duties lie on each sulung, that is, on the

Kentish ploughland corresponding to the hide of feudal England.

No regular sub-divisions corresponding to the virgates and

bovates are mentioned, and the reckoning starts not from separate

tenements, but from their combination into sulungs.(50*) Then

follow descriptions of the single sulungs, and it turns out that

every one of them consists of a very great number of component

parts, because the progeny of the original holders has clustered

on them, and parcelled them up in very complicated

combinations.(51*) The portions are sometimes so small, that an

independent cultivation of them would have been quite impossible.

In order to understand the description it must be borne in mind

that the fact of the tenement being owned by several different

persons in definite but undivided shares did not preclude farming

in common; while on the other hand, in judging of the usual

feudal arrangement of holdings we must remember that the

artificial unity and indivisibility of the tenement may be a mere

screen behind which there exists a complex mass of rights

sanctioned by morality and custom though not by law. The surveys

of the Kentish possessions of Battle Abbey are drawn up on the

same principle as those of St. Augustine's; the only difference

is, that the individual portions are collected not in sulungs,

but in yokes (juga).(52*)

    And so we have in England two systems of dividing the land of

the peasant, of regulating its descent and its duties. In one

case the tenant-right is connected with rigid holdings descending

to a single heir; in another the tenements get broken up, and the

heirs club together in order to meet the demands of the manorial

administration. The contrast is sharp and curious enough. How is

one to explain, that in conditions which were more or less

identical, the land was sometimes partitioned and sometimes kept

together, the people were dispersed in some instances and kept

together in others?

    Closer inspection will show that however sharp the opposition

in law may have been, in point of husbandry and actual management

the contrast was not so uncompromising. Connecting links may be

found between the two. The Domesday of St. Paul's, for instance,

is compiled in the main in the usual way, but one section of it

-- the description of the Essex manors of Kirby, Horlock, and

Thorpe -- does not differ from the Kentish surveys in anything

but the terminology.(53*) The services are laid on hides, and not

on the actual tenements. Each hide includes a great number of

plots which do not fall in with any constant subdivisions of the

same kind as the virgates and bovates. Some of these plots are

very small, all are irregular in their formation. It happens that

one and the same person holds in several hides. In one word, the

Kentish system has found a way for some unexplained reason into

the possessions of St. Paul's, and we find subjected to it some

Essex manors which do not differ much in their husbandry

arrangements from other properties in Essex, and have no claim to

the special privileges of Kentish soil.

    Once apprised of the possible existence of such inter mediate

forms, we shall find in most surveys facts tending to connect the

two arrangements. The Gloucester Cartulary, for instance,

mentions virgates held by four persons.(54*) The plots of these

four owners are evidently brought together into a virgate for the

purpose of assessing the services. Two peasants on the same

virgate are found constantly. It happens that one gets the

greater part of the land and is called the heir, while his fellow

appears as a small cotter who has to co-operate in the work

performed by the virgate.(55*) Indications are not wanting that

sometimes virgates crumbled up into cotlands, bordlands, and

crofts. The denomination of some peasants in Northumberland is

characteristic enough -- they are 'selfoders,' obviously dwelling

'self-other' on their tenements.(56*) On the other hand, it is to

be noticed that the gavelkind rule of succession, although

enacting the partibility of the inheritance, still reserves the

hearth to the youngest born, a trace of the same junior right

which led to Borough English.

    I think that upon the whole we must say that in practice the

very marked contrast between the general arrangement of the

holdings and the Kentish one is more a difference in the way of

reckoning than in actual occupation, in legal forms than in

economical substance. The general arrangement admitted a certain

subdivision under the cover of an artificial unity which found

its expression in the settlement of the services and of the

relations with the lord.(57*) The English case has its parallel

on the Continent in this respect. In Alsace, for instance, the

holding was united under one 'Trager' or bearer of the manorial

duties; but by the side of him other people are found who

participate with this official holder in the ownership and in the

cultivation.(58*) The second system also kept up the artificial

existence of the higher units, and obvious interests prevented it

from leading to a 'morcellement' of land into very small portions

in practice. The economic management of land could not go as far

as the legal partition. In practice the subdivision was certainly

checked, as in the virgate system, by the necessity of keeping

together the cattle necessary for the tillage. Virgates and

bovates would arise of themselves: it was not advantageous to

split the yoke of two oxen, the smallest possible plough; and

co-heirs had to think even more when they inherited one ox with

its ox-gang of land. The animal could not be divided, and this

certainly must have stopped in many cases the division of land.

When the documents speak of plots containing two or three acres,

it must be remembered that such crofts and cotlands occur also in

the usual system, and I do not see any reason to suppose that the

existence of such subdivided rights always indicated a real

dispersion of the economic unit: they may have stood as a

landmark of the relative rights of joint occupiers. I do not mean

to say, of course, that there was no real basis for the very

great difference which is assumed by the two ways of describing

the tenements. No doubt the hand of the lord lay heavier on the

Essex people than on the Kentish men, their occupation and usage

of the land was more under the control of the lord, and assumed

therefore an aspect of greater regularity and order. Again, the

legal privileges of the Kentish people opened the way towards a

greater development of individual freedom and a certain looseness

of social relations. Still it would be wrong to infer too much

from this formal opposition. In both cases the centripetal and

the centrifugal tendency are working against each other in the

same way, although one case presents the stronger influence of

disruptive forces, and the other gives predominance to the

collective power. In the history of socage and military tenure

the system of unity arose gradually, and without any sudden

break, out of the system of division. The intimate connexion

between both forms is even more natural in peasant ownership,

which had to operate with small plots and small agricultural

capital, and therefore inclined naturally towards the artificial

combination of divided interests. In any case there is no room in

practice for the rigid and consequent operation of either rule of

ownership, and, if so, there is no actual basis for the inference

that the unification of the holding is to be taken as a direct

consequence of a servile origin of the tenement and a sure proof

of it. Unification appears on closer inspection as a result of

economic considerations as well as of legal disabilities, and for

this reason the tendency operated in the sphere of free property

as well as among the villains; among these last it could not

preclude the working of the disruptive elements, but in many

cases only hid them from sight by its artificial screen of rigid

holdings.

    We have seen that the size and distribution of the holdings

are connected with the number of oxen necessary for the tillage,

and its relation to the full plough. The hide appears as the

ploughland with eight oxen, the virgate corresponds to one yoke

of oxen, and the bovate to the single head. it need not be added

that such figures are not absolutely settled, and are to be

accepted as approximate terms, The great heavy plough drawn by

eight or ten oxen is certainly often mentioned in the records,

especially on demesne land.(59*) The dependent people, when they

have to help in the cultivation of the demesne, club together in

order to make up full plough teams.(60*) It is also obvious that

the peasantry had to associate for the tilling of their own land,

as it was very rare for the single shareholder to possess a

sufficient number of beasts to work by himself. But it must be

noticed that alongside of the unwieldy eight-oxen plough we find

much lighter ones. Even on the demesne we may find them drawn by

six oxen. And as for the peasantry, they seem to have very often

contented themselves with forming a plough team of four

heads.(61*) It is commonly supposed by the surveys that the

holder of a yardland joins with one of his fellows to make up the

team. This would mean on the scale of the hide of 120 acres that

the team consists of four beasts.(62*) It happens even that a

full plough is supposed to belong to two or three peasants, of

which every one is possessed only of five acres; in such cases

there can be no talk of a big plough; it is difficult to admit

even a four-oxen team, and probably those people only worked with

one yoke or pair of beasts.(63*) Altogether it would be very

wrong to assume in practice a strict correspondence between the

size of the holding and the parts of an eight-oxen plough. The

observation that the usual reckoning of the hide and of its

subdivisions, according to the pattern of the big team, cannot be

made to fit exactly with the real arrangement of the teams owned

by the peasantry -- this firmly established observation leads us

once more to the conclusion that the system of equal holdings had

become very artificial in process of time and was determined

rather by the relation between the peasants and the manorial

administration than by the actual conditions of peasant life.

Unhappily the artificial features of the system have been made by

modern inquirers the starting point of very far-reaching theories

and suppositions. Seebohm has proposed an explanation of the

intermixture of strips as originating in the practice of

coaration. He argues that it was natural to divide the land

tilled by a mixed plough-team among the owners of the several

beasts and implements. Every man got a strip according to a

certain settled and ever-recurring succession. I do not pretend

to judge of the value of the interesting instances adduced by

Seebohm from Celtic practices, but whatever the arrangement in

Wales or Ireland may have been, the explanation does not suit the

English case. A doubt is cast on it already by the fact that such

a universal feature as the intermixture of strips appears

connected with the occurrence of such a special instrument as the

eight-oxen plough, The intermixture is quite the same in Central

Russia, where they till with one horse, and in England where more

or less big ploughs were used. the doubt increases when we

reflect that if the strips followed each other as parts of the

plough-team, the great owners would have been possessed of

compact plots. Every holder of an entire hide would have been out

of the intermixture, and every virgater would have stood in

conjunction with a sequence of three other tenants. Neither the

one nor the other inference is supported by the facts. The

observation that the peasantry are commonly provided with small

ploughs drawn by four beasts ruins Seebohm's hypothesis entirely.

One would have to suppose that most fields were divided into two

parts, as the majority of the tenements are yardlands with half a

team. The only adequate explanation of the open-field

intermixture has been given above; it has its roots in the wish

to equalise the holdings as to the quantity and quality of the

land assigned to them in spite of all differences in the shape,

the position, and the value of the soil.

    Before I leave the question as to the holdings of the feudal

peasantry, I must mention some terms which occur in different

parts of England, although more rarely than the usual hides and

virgates.(64*) Of the sulung I have spoken already. It is a full

ploughland, and 200 acres are commonly reckoned to belong to it.

The name is sometimes found out of Kent, in Essex for instance.

In Tillingham, a manor of St. Paul's of London, we come across

six hides 'trium solandarum'.(65*) The most probable explanation

seems to be that the hide or unit of assessment is contrasted

with the solanda or sulland (sulung), that is with the actual

ploughland, and two hides are reckoned as a single solanda.

    The yokes (juga) of Battle Abbey (66*) are not virgates, but

carucates, full ploughlands. This follows from the fact that a

certain virgate mentioned in the record is equivalent only to one

fourth of the yoke. In the Norfolk manors of Ely Minster we find

tenmanlands (67*) of 120 acres in the possession of several

copartitioners, participes. The survey does not go into a

detailed description of tenements and rights, and the reckoning

of services starts from the entire combination, as in the Kentish

documents. A commonly recurrent term is wista;(68*) it

corresponds to the virgate: a great wista is as much as

half-a-hide, or two virgates.(69*)

    The terms discussed hitherto are applied to the tenements in

the fields of the village; but besides those there are other

names for the plots occupied by a numerous population which did

not find a place in the regular holdings. There were craftsmen

and rural labourers working for the lord and for the tenants;

there were people living by gardening and the raising of

vegetables. This class is always contrasted with the tenants in

the fields. The usual name for their plots is cote, cotland, or

cotsetland. The so-called ferdel, or fourth part of a virgate, is

usually mentioned among them because there are no ploughbeasts on

it.(70*) Another name for the ferdel is nook.(71*) Next come the

crofters, whose gardens sometimes extend to a very fair size --

as much as ten acres in one enclosed patch.(72*) The cotters

proper have generally one, two, and sometimes as much as five

acres with their dwellings; they cannot keep themselves on this,

as a rule, and have to look out for more on other people's

tenements. A very common name for their plots is

'lundinaria'(73*) 'Mondaylands,' because the holders are bound to

work for the lord only one day in the week, usually on Monday.

Although the absence of plough-beasts, of a part in coaration,

and of shares in the common fields draws a sharp line between

these men and the regular holders, our surveys try sometimes to

fit their duties and plots into the arrangement of holdings; the

cotland is assumed to represent one sixteenth or even one

thirty-second part of the hide.(74*) The Glastonbury Survey of

1189 contains a curious hint that two cottages are more valuable

than one half-virgate: two cotlands were ruined during the war,

and they were thrown together into half a virgate, although it

would have been more advantageous to keep two houses on them,

that is two households.(75*) The bordae mentioned by the

documents are simply cottages or booths without any land

belonging to them.(76*) The manorial police keeps a lookout that

such houses may not arise without licence and service.(77*)

    A good many terms are not connected in any way with the

general arrangement of the holdings, but depend upon the part

played by the land in husbandry or the services imposed upon it.

To mention a few among them. A plot which has to provide cheese

is called Cheeseland.(78*) Those tenements which are singled out

for the special duty of carrying the proceeds of the manorial

cultivation get the name of averlands.(79*) The terms

lodland,(80*) serland (81*) or sharland, are also connected with

compulsory labour. The first is taken from the duty to carry

loads or possibly to load waggons; the second may be employed in

reference to work performed with the sithe or reap-hook. A plot

reserved for the leader of the plough-team, the akerman, was

naturally called akermanland.(82*) Sometimes, though rarely, the

holding gets its name from the money rent it has to pay. We hear

of denerates (83*) and nummates (84*) of land in this connexion.

    All these variations in detail do not avail to modify to any

considerable extent the chief lines on which the medieval system

of holdings is constructed. I presume that the foregoing

exposition has been sufficient to establish the following points:

--

    1. The principle upon which the original distribution

depended was that of equalizing the shares of the members of the

community. This led to the scattering and to the intermixture of

strips. The principle did not preclude inequality according to

certain degrees, but it aimed at putting all the people of one

degree into approximately similar conditions.

    2. The growth of population, of capital, of cultivation, of

social inequalities led to a considerable difference between the

artificial uniformity in which the arrangement of the holdings

was kept and the actual practice of farming and ownership.

    3. The system was designed and kept working by the influence

of communal right, but it got its artificial shape and its legal

rigidity from the manorial administration which used it for the

purpose of distributing and collecting labour and rent.

    4. The holdings were held together as units, not merely by

the superior property of the lord, but by economic

considerations. They were breaking up under the pressure of

population, not merely in the case of free holdings, but also

where the holdings were servile.



NOTES:





1. It should be observed that the word demesne (dominicum) is

constantly used in two different senses, (a) the narrower sense

in which it stands for the land directly occupied and cultivated

by the lord or for his use, and excludes the land held by his

villain tenants, and (b) the wider sense ill which it includes

these villain tenements. The first meaning is that which the word

usually bears in manorial documents, in which the dominicum is

contrasted with the villenagium or bondagium. But in legal

pleadings and documents which state the doctrine of the common

law and the king's courts the villain tenements are part of the

lord's demesne, he is seised of them in his demesne (in dominico

suo). This discrepancy between what I may call the manorial and

the legal uses of the term deserves notice as an indication of

the imperfect adjustment of law to fact. I shall use the term in

its narrower sense.



2. Eynsham Cartulary, MSS. of Christ Church, Oxford, N. 27, f 1,

a: 'Est una cultura nuncupata Shyppelond, et continet in toto

septem acras dimidiam acram et dimidiam rodam, et valet acra 4d.,

et bis successive seminatur.' Inqu. p. mortem 20 Henry III, N. 14

(Record Office): 'Extensio manerii de Remdun (Lincoln). Sunt

ibidem 360 acre terre et faciunt duas carucatas. Et seminata sunt

per annum 240 acre... De waracto per annum 12 d.'



3. Glastonbury Survey of 1189 (Roxburghe Ser.), 99: 'Idem tenet

de dominico tres acras a tempore Henrici episcopi quas colit in

uno anno et altero noll.'



4. Eynsham Cart., I, a: 'Est ibidem prope alia cultura nuncupata

Clayfurlong et continet cum capitali inferiore octo acras unam

rodam tres perticas cum dimidia, et potest ter seminari

successive, videlicet post warectum ordium, anno sequente cum

grosso pulstro et anno tercio cum frumento, et valet acra 8 d....

(Alia cultura) et potest ter seminari ut supra mutato grosso

pulstro in pisas.'



5. Two husbandry treatises were chiefly in use in mediaeval

England. The fourteenth-century MS., Merton College 91, contains

both, and both mention the two systems. (Modus qualiter balliui

et prepositi debent onerari super compotum reddendum et qualiter

manerium custodiri), f 152: 'E la vu les chaumps sunt semez e

parti en deus, le iuernage e le trameys sunt tous semez en un

champ.' -- (Maior husbonderia, otherwise Walter of Henley's

treatise), f 155: 'Si les terres seent partiz en iii, la ulle

partie en le yuernage, lautre partie en le quaremel, e la tierce

partie a warect, donqes est la charrue de terre de xxx acres,

(sic, corr. ixxx)., E si vos terres seent partez en ii, com sont

en plusurs pays, la une partie a yuernage e a quaremel, e lautre

partie a waret, donqes serra la charue de terre de viiixx acres.'

Cf. Thorold Rogers, Six Centuries, 75.



6. Fleta, ii. 72.



7. Malmesbury Cart. (Rolls Ser.), ii. 186: 'De terris inbladandis

et inhoc faclendis in campis de Brokeneberewe et de Burestone, a

ponte de Julebrocke usque ad Halbrigge de Bremelham, ubi dictus

Ricardus dicebat se habere communam, ita quod nec abbas et

conventus, nec eorum tenentes possint inhoc facere sine consensu

dicti Ricardi, nec pro voluntate sua terras suas ibidem

inbladare... Abbas et conventus concesserunt praedicto Ricardo...

ut cum terrae prenominatae inbladatae fuerint et blada a terris

amota, liberam et plenam communam in praefatis terris una cum

abbate et suis hominibus (habeat) sicut ipse vel praedecessores

sui unquam melius et plenius habere consueverunt.... Ita quod si

de campo predicto in quo factum est inhoc pars quaedam remaneat

inculta sine blado, in eadem parte habebunt predictus Ricardus et

heredes sui communam cum abbate et conventu et suis. Similiter si

villani praedicti Ricardi nolint inhokare terras suas infra

praedictum inhoc sitas, habebunt liberum ingressum et egressum ad

warectandum eas.'



8. Coram Rege, Hill. 3 Edw. I, m. 17, d: 'Item quicumque facit

inheche scilicet excolit warectum frumento, ordeo vel auena,

dabit pro qualibet acra unum denarium, excepta una acra quam

habere debet quietam.' See App. xii.



9. Gloucester Cart. iii. 35, 36: ' Omnes dictae particulae jacent

pro uno campo, summa I74 acre arabiles, etc.... Et de predicto

campo possunt inhokari quolibet secundo anno 40 acre et valet

inde commodum eo anno 10 solidos.... De dictis 63 acris possunt

quolibet secundo anno inhokari 20 acre, et valet inde commodum eo

anno 11 sol. 8 d.... Et est summa totalis omnium acrarum

arabilium 412. Et est summa dictarum acrarum in valore denariorum

9 librae 12 solidi. De quibus subtracta tertia parte pro campo

jacente ad warectum, 64 sol. scilicet, remanent ad extentam

annuam de puro 6 librae 8 sol. et de commodo terrae quae singulis

annis potest inhokari 15 sol. 10d.' -- Cf Minor husbanderia,

Merton Coll. MS. 91, f 152: 'E si li ad Inhom, i deit veer quele

cuture i prent del Inhom, e de quel ble est seme checune cuture,

e tel semail deit il cuiler tut per ly e respondre tut per ly,

hors des autres blees.'



10. Cart. of Boxgrave, Cotton MSS., Claudius, A. vi. p. 2: 'Debet

compostare unam helvam ad frumentum et aliam ad ordeum.' Essex

Court Rolls (Bodleian), 4: 'Milencia Tegulatrix posuit fimos in

communa ad nocumentum custumariorum.' Glastonbury Inquest of 1189

(Roxburghe Ser.), 141: 'A. de N. occupavit quendam mariscum per

concessum Roberti abbatis et illum marliavit et coluit.' Cf

Domesday of St. Paul's (Camden Ser.), 8: ' Dicunt eciam quod

emendatum est manerium in 50 acris marlatis per Willelmum

Thesaurarium ad summam 10 solidorum.' Ib. 21.



11. Malmesbury Cart. (Rolls Ser. ' ii. 27: 'Concessimus...

Roberto filio Roberti... illam virgatam terre quam A. de C.

tenuit in campis, scilicet in uno campo 21 acras et in alio campo

21 acras.'



12. Gloucester Cart., iii. 194: 'Robertus Abovetun tenet unam

virgatam terre continentem 44 acras in utroque campo.'



13. Ramsey Register, Cotton MSS., Galba, E. x. 27, d: 'Radulfus

tenet 11 seliones in uno campo et 5 in alio de vilenagio.,

Worcester Cart. (Camden Ser.), 62, a: 'Henricus clericus tenet

unam virgatam, 16 acras in uno campo et 14 in alio. Item tenet

aliam virgatam similiter. T. T. tenet unam virgatam, 15 acras

excepto dimidio furtendello in uno campo et 11 in alio. O. le E.

tenet unam virgatam 13 a. et 1/2 in uno campo et 12 et dimidiam

in alio. T. le F. tenet unam virgatam, 16 acras in uno campo et

12 in alio.'



14. As in Gloucester Cart., i. 246: 'Ecclesiam Omnium

Sanctorum... cum omnibus pertinenciis suis, videlicet unam

virgatam terrae, undecim acras terrae in campo lucrabili.' Cf

247.



15. Dunstable Cart., Harleian MSS. 1885, f 7, d: 'Postquam buttum

habuimus bis seminatio fuerit et non amplius, quia omnes ceteri

non excolunt ibi terram, sed at pascua reservant.'



16. Eynsham Cart., Christ Church, Oxford, MSS., N. 27, f 74, b:

'Placitum de Haneberge in recordo de banco de termino Sti

Trinitatis anni xliij (Edw. III)... Est quidam hamelettus vocatus

Tilgerdesle infra bundos ville de Eynesham, infra quem hamelettum

tam in vastis quam in terris, pratis et pasturis eiusdem

hameletti iidem Johannes Smyth et omnes alii habent communam cum

omnibus averiis suis tanquam pertinens ad tenementa sua que ipsi

separati tenent in Hanberge, scilicet in vasto et pastura

quolibet anno per totum annum et in terris arabilibus post blada

messa et asportata quousque... resemenentur et quolibet tercio

anno tempore warecti per totum annum eo quod omnes terrae

arabiles infra dictum hamelettum per duos annos continuos debent

seminari et tercio anno warectari, et in pratis post fenum

levatum et asportatum usque ad festum purificacionis beate

Marie.... Et dicunt quod diversis vicibus quibus predictus Abbas

nunc queritur etc. diuerse parcelle terrarum arabilium in

hameletto predicto que tunc temporis warectare debuissent per

predictum abbatem et alios seminate fuerunt per quod ipsi tam in

parcellis illis sic seminatis que tunc temporis warectare

debuerunt quam in aliis vastis, pratis et pascuis hameletti

predicti in communa sua cum aueriis suis prout eis bene licuerit

usi fuerunt... Et predictus abbas non cognoscit quod terre

arabiles infra hamelettum predictum quolibet tercio anno debent

warectari, immo protestando quod eedem terre per tres annos

continuos debent seminari et quarto anno warectari.' The case is

a rather complicated one, because the persons claiming common are

not tenants of the Abbot but of the King. Still, their

pretensions are grounded on the customary order of farming in a

hamlet belonging to the manor of Eynsham, and this is the point

which concerns us. Cf Coram Rege, Pascha, 25 Henry III: 'Abbas...

partitus fuit terras suas in tres partes quae antea partitae

fuerunt in duas partes.' See also Placit. Abbrev. 153. The case

is quoted by Scrutton, Common Fields, 57.



17. Some of these expressions are intcresting. Balk is the O. N.

balkr; gora is the spear.head or its long triangular shape, O. E.

gar, O. N. geirr. These linguistic affinities have been pointed

out to me by Mr. F. York Powell.



18. Alvingham Priory Cart., Laud MSS. 642 (Bodleian), f 12. Cf

Malmesbury Cart. ii. 294; Madox, History of the Exchequer, 258.



19. Eynsham Cart., 5, a: 'I. I. virgatarius... Idem tenet unam

selionem terre apud Blakelond non mensuratam.'



20. Domesday of St. Paul's, 11: 'Laurencius de hospitale dimidiam

virgatam pro 40 denariis; tres acre quas tenuit Laurencius sine

servicio inveniri non possunt.'



21. Dunstable Priory Cart., Harleian MSS. 1885, f 7, d. See

Appendix xiii.



22. Elton, English Historical Review, i, 435.



23. The expressions are not identical, but they ought both to

correspond to the ploughteam.



24. As to all this, see Seebohm, Village Community.



25. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Ser.), 144, v. Hide, virgate.



26. Eynsham Cart., 4, a.



27. Domesday of St. Paul's: 'Manerium istud secundum dictum

juratorum continet octo hidas, et hida continet sexcies viginti

acras, set antiqua inquisicio dixit, quod non consuevit continere

nisi quater viginti, quia postmodum exquisite sunt terre et

mensuratae.'



28. Inqu. post mort. 30 Henry III, N. 36: 'Extensio de terris

Roberti de Sancto Georgio (in com. Lincoln.)... tenuit in capite

de domino Rege 20 bovatas terre et dimidiam pro servicio sexte

partis unius feodi militis.... Et Robertus de Drayton tenet 2

bovatas et quartam partem unius bovate terre de dicto Roberto per

forinsecum servicium tantum, unde 16 carucate terre faciunt

feodum militis.'



29. Rot. Hundred. ii. 631, b: '... et ad dictam villam pertinent

sex hide quarum quelibet continet 6 virgatas terre et quelibet

virgata continet 30 acras.' Ramsey Survey, Galba, E. x. 41: 'In

una hydarum istarum... septem virgatae 4 acris minus.' Eynsham

Cart., 21, a: 'Et abbas habet in eodem manerio 4 carucatas terre

et continent 16 virgatas terre in dominico et in villenagio 16

virgatas terre.'



30. Ramsey Cart. (Rolls Ser.), i. 55, 284: 295, 309, 333, 373,

380; Ely Inqu., Claudius, xi. 82, 95, 97, 121, 129, 186;

Gloucester Cart., iii. 128, 142, 145, 196; Coram Rege, Hill. 3

Edw. I, 17, b; Eynsham Cart., II, a; 88, a; Rot. Hundr., ii. 605,

b.



31. Chapterhouse Boxes, A. 4/22, m. 31-33.



32. Ramsey Cart. (Rolls Ser.), i. 354: 'Aliquando 48 acre faciunt

virgatam et aliquando pauciores.'



33. Rot. Hundr., ii. 628, b.



34. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Ser.), 134: '... R. de W. unam

virgatam pro 4 solidis pro omni servicio quia terra parva est.'



35. Ibid., 113: 'Super hanc virgatam terre fuerunt olim 2 domus

et pro duabus virgatis computata fuit terra illa, sed quia non

potuerant 2 homines ibi vivere, redacte ille 2 virgate ad unam,

et sicut audierant dicere 7 solidi reddebantur, sed nunquam hoc

viderunt et facit idem servitium quod alii faciunt virgarii.'



36. O C. Pell in the Transactions of the Cambridge Archaeological

Society, vi. 17 sqq., 63 sqq.



37. Ely Inqu., Claudius, C xi. 30, a.



38. Duchy of Lancaster Court Rolls, Ble 62, N. 750; 3, b. Burton

Cartulary, Transactions of the Staffordshire William Salt

Society, pp. 22, 28.



39. Ely Inqu, 31, b.



40. Burton Cart. (William Salt Ser.), 22, 28. Compare Peoples,

Ranks and Laws, cap. 3 (Schmid, p. 388).



41. Peterborough Cart., Cotton MSS., Faustina, B. iii. 97:

'Libera wara est unus redditus et est talis condicionis quod si

non solvatur... dupplicatibur ill crastino et sic in dies.'



42. Beaulieu Cart., 103: 'Et inveniet hominem ad gurgitem

faciendum et waram.'



43. Rot. Hundr., ii. 323: 'Tenementum quod non est hidatum nec

feodatum.'



44. Ramsey Cart. (Rolls Ser.), i. 401: 'Terrae de Hulmo non sunt

distinctae per hydas vel per virgatas.' 413: 'Nescitur quot

virgatae faciunt hidam, nec quot acrae faciunt virgatam.' Cf 405.

Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Ser.), 5: '... Nescit quantum

amuntat in hida.'



45. Ramsey Cart. i. 441: 'Terrae quae sunt extra hydam et quae

non dant hydagium.'. 355., Virgatam extra hydam firmarius

appropriavit.' 324: 'Ponere extra hydam.'



46. Ibid. 473: 'Villata defendit, etc. versus Regem pro 10 hydis

et versus abbatem pro 11 hydis et dimidia.'



47. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi. 38, b: 'Plena terra

que facit 12 acras de ware.'



48. St. Alban's Formulary, Cambridge Univ., E, e, iv, 20; f 165,

a: 'Item dicunt quod quando predictus Robertus fuerit mortuus

quod dominus habebit melius animal suum pro herieto et carettam

suam ferro ligatam, omnes pullos suos, omnes porculos suos, omnes

pannos Suos laneos, omnia vaSa sua argentea, aenea et ferrea. Et

quod filius suus postnatus habebit terram quam pater suus tenuit

et dabit pro ingressu habendo tantum quantum unus alius extraneus

et faciet eadem seruilia (sic) que et pater suus fecit,' Ramsey

Cart., i, 372: 'Erit dicta terra post mortem patris vel matris

gersummata filio juniori vel propinquiori de sanguine secundum

consuetudinem ville.'



49. Duchy of Lancaster, B.e 62, N, 750, m, 2: 'Siwardus cepit

unam hidam cum dimidia virgata terre et illam tenuit usque ad

obitum uxoris sue; postea venit idem Siwardus et rogauit Hugonem

fratrem suum ut auderet remanere in terra patris sui prenominati,

quia fuit sine terra, Et idem Hugo sibi concessit, saluo iure

suo, Item Siwardus cepit uxorem... de qua habuit Robertum,

Radulfum et Gunnildam. Post obitum dicti Siwardi venit Rogerus

qui fuit filius Hugonis et exigebat terram prenominatam et per

consideracionem curie fuit seisitus in predicta terra, set quia

uxor dicti Siwardi pauper fuit, consideratum sibi fuit ut haberet

iv acras de predicta terra, quantum sibi custodiret. Postea

maritata fuit et revcrtebant predicte acre terre dicto Rogero ut

de jure suo pertinentes ad dictam virgatam terre,' Cf Q. R. Misc,

902/77,



50. Black Book of St. Augustine's, Cotton MSS., Faustina, A. i.

15, a: 'In Taneto sunt 45 sullung 150 acre reddentes gablum

denariorum. In festo Sti Martini videlicet de unoquoque sullung

reddunt de Gabulo 2 solidos 2 denarios, summa quorum facit 25

libras 105 solidos 10 denarios obolum. Ipsi qui tenent predictos

sullung reddunt in equinoctio autumpnae de unoquoque sullung pro

horsarer 16 den. et de 150 acris 12 den. Ipsi idem arant pro

anererthe in purificacione de unoquoque sullung unam acram et 150

acris 3 virgatas. Ipsi idem reddunt in festo Sti Johannis de

unoquoque sullung 2 agnos separabiles et de 150 acris 1 agnum et

valenciam dimidii agni. lpsi idem reddunt in natali de unoquoque

sullung unum ferendel ordei,' etc.



51. Ibid. 60; Suolinga de Ores: 'Heredes Salomonis de Ores tenent

8 acras... Heredes Willelmi de Ores tenent 12 acras... Jacobus

tenet 3 acras et dimidiam perchatam... Thomas filius G. de Hores

tenet 2 acras... Ricardus et Salomon filius Augustini... et

Willelmus filius Ricardi tenent 2 acras et dimidiam,' etc.



52. Augment. Off. Misc. Books, N. 57, f 96, a: 'Johannes Bairot

heredes Hamoni Daniel, heredes Johannis hugheleyn, heredes

Roberti atte mede, heredes Walteri et Willelmi Ram et Gilbertus

le Rome tenent unum jugum et dimidium de Cukulycumbe.'



53. Domesday of St Paul's, 38 sqq. Comp. Ramsey Cart., i. 413.



54. Gloucester Cart., iii. 213: 'Robertus Altegreue, Willelmus

Godere, Johannes Abraham, Isabella relicta Lucae tenent Unam

virgatam, scilicet quilibet eorum unum quarterium et faciunt

conjunctim in omnibus sicut unus virgatarius.' Comp. 59, 201.

Hereford Court Rolls (Bodleian), 3, b: 'T. Hake, Ricardus de

Poluchulle et Muriel filius Galfridi pyoner tenent unam dimidiam

virgatam terre consuetudinarie.'



55. Bury St. Edmund's Cart., Cambridge University, G. g. iv. 4. f

35, a: 'Johannes Knop tenet cotagium et contribuit heredi qui

tenet maiorem partem tenementorum.'



56. Inqu. post mort. 55 Henry III, N. 33: 'Redditarii qui

vocantur self-oders.'



57. Euch. Q. R. Anc. Misc. Court Rolls, xxi. 513/82: 'Dicunt quod

aliquis habens virgatam terre et vendiderit omnes partes excepto

capitati domo et loco focarii, tenentes locum focarii erunt

sectatores curie et alteri non. Similiter de tenentibus dimidiam

virgatam et codsetlestoftes: semper tenentes locum focarii

colligent firmam et erunt liberi de pannagio et de aliis

tallagiis et alteri tenentes partes erunt geldabiles.' (Curia de

Brigstock tenta die veneris proxima ante festum Sancti Andree

Apostoli anno [r. r. Edw. xxvi]).



58. See Hanauer, Les paysans de l'Alsace au Moyen Age.



59. Domesday of St. Paul's, xv. 7,. Gloucester Cartulary, iii.

55, 6I; Cartulary of Christ Church, Canterbury, Add. MSS. 6759,

f. 21, b.



60. Battle Cart. Augm. Off. Books, N. 18, f 7, a: 'Aratra

uertuntur in terram domini.' Ely Inqu., Claudius, C. xi. 38 b, 86

b, etc.



61. Ely Inqu, 72 b; comp. 24, b., Gloucester Cart., iii. 183.



62. Eynsham Reg., 6, b: 'Robertus Tony tenet de domino unam

virgatam terre in bondagium... Idem semel arabit cum vicino

adiuncto.' Ramsey Cart., i. 56. Comp. Q. R. Min. Acc., Ble 513,

N. 97: 'Estimatur quod communiter tres custumarii possunt facere

unam carucam (tenent 20 acras).'



63. Rot. Hundr., ii. 461, b: 'Robertus de Tony habet in

villenagio scil. Reginaldum Toni qui tenet 5 acras... Item si

ipse habeat cum uno vel cum duobus sociis unam carucam, arabit

unam selionem terre domini.' Comp. 462, a. Add. MSS. 6159, f 22,

b: 'W. J. tenet de domino in villenagio unum mesuagium et 10

acras terre.... Et arabit cum caruca sua sive jungat sive non 4

acras.'



64. Black Book of St. Augustine's, 53.



65. Domesday of St. Paul's, 58.



66. Augm. Off. Misc. Books, N. 57, f 65, b. See Cartulary of

Battle Abbey (Camd. Soc.), p. 133.



67. Ely Inqu., 185, a: '... tenent dimidium tenmanland, scilicet

60 acras terre... Al. et M. et eorum participes tenent unum

tenmanland, scilicet 120 acras terre.' The expression may be

corrupted from tunmanland, or else it may be a mark of a

beginning of cultivation in Danish times.



68. Chapter-house Books, A. 4/22, p. 21: 'Custumarii tenent 22

virgatas quas vocant wistas.'



69. Battle Abbey Cart., Augment. Off. Misc. Books, N. 57, f. 27,

a; comp. 15, b.



70. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Ser.), 66, 90



71. Worcester Cart., 41, b.



72. Glastonbury Inqu., 67, 70; Rot. Hundr., ii. 404, b.



73. Gloucester Cart., iii. 207.



74. Abingdon Cart., ii. 304: 'In dominio camerae sunt 4 hidae Uno

cotsettel minus.'



75. Glastonbury Inqu., 41: 'Robertus blundus tenet dimidiam

virgatam eodem servicio. Hec terra solet esse divisa in duo

cotsetlanda, set in tempore werre deciderunt, eo ex his duabus

terris facta fuit dimidia virgata. Si esset divisa utilius esset

domino.'



76. Domesday of St. Paul's, 19; Ramsey Cart. ( Rolls Ser.), i.

309



77. Gloucester Cart., iii. 61.



78. Black Book of St. Augustine's, 57.



79. Ibid.



80. Domesday of St. Paul's, 49.



81. Gloucester Cart., ii. 109.



82. Exch. Q. R. Anc. Misc., xxi. 513/82 (Curia de Brigstock,

Friday after Annunciation, 27 Edw. I): 'Ille due dimidie rode

prati... pertinent ad Hakermannislond, et nemo potest habere

seysinanm predictarum sine breui Domini Regis.'



83. Glastonbury Inqu., 2: 'In marisco 110 acras terrae et quoddam

molendinum, et octo deneratas terrae secus molendinum.'



84. Madox, Exch., i. 155, n. 257: 'Duodecim tamen nummatas quas

Ordurcus tenuit... usque ad 10 annos debemus tenere, singulis

annis reddentes ei 12 denarios ad festum Sti Michaelis.'



Chapter 2



Rights of Common



    The influence of the village community is especially.

apparent in respect of that portion of the soil which is used for

the support of cattle. The management of meadows is very

interesting because it presents a close analogy to the treatment

of the arable, and at the same time the communal features are

much more clearly brought out by it. We may take as an instance a

description in the Eynsham Survey. The meadow in Shifford is

divided into twelve strips, and these are distributed among the

lord and the tenantry, but they are not apportioned to any one

for constant ownership. One year the lord takes all the strips

marked by uneven numbers, and the next year he moves to those

distinguished by even numbers.(1*) The tenants divide the rest

according to some settled rotation. Very often lots are drawn to

indicate the portions of the several households.(2*) It must be

added that the private right of the single occupiers does not

extend over the whole year: as in the case of the arable all

inclosures fall after the harvest, so in regard to meadows the

separate use, and the boundaries protecting it, are upheld only

till the mowing of the grass: after the removal of the hay the

soil relapses into the condition of undivided land. The time of

the 'defence' extends commonly to 'Lammas-day'; hence the

expression 'Lammas-meadow' to designate such land. It is hardly

necessary to insist on the great resemblance between all these

features and the corresponding facts in the arrangement of the

arable. The principle of division is supplied by the tendency to

assign an equal share to every holding, and the system of

scattered strips follows as a necessary consequence of the

principle. The existence of the community as a higher organising

unit is shewn in the recurrence of common use after the

'defence,' and in the fact that the lord is subjected to the

common rotation, although he is allowed a privileged position in

regard to it. The connexion in which the whole of these rights

arises is made especially clear by the shifting ownership of the

strips: private right appears on communal ground, but it is

reduced to a minimum as it were, has not settled down to constant

occupation, and assumes its definite shape under the influence of

the idea of equal apportionment. Of course, by the side of these

communal meadows we frequently find others that were owned in

severalty.

    Land for pasture also occurs in private hands and in

severalty, but such cases are much rarer.(3*) Sometimes the

pasture gets separated and put under 'defence' for one part of

the year, and merges into communal ownership afterwards.(4*) But

in the vast majority of cases the pasture is used in common, and

none of the tenants has a right to fence it in or to appropriate

it for his own exclusive benefit. It ought to be noted, that the

right to send one's cattle to the pasture on the waste, the

moors, or in the woods of a manor appears regularly and

intimately connected with the right to depasture one's cattle on

the open fields of the village.(5*) Both form only different

modes of using communal soil. As in the case of arable and meadow

the undivided use cannot be maintained and gets replaced by a

system of equalised shares or holdings, so in the case of pasture

the faculty of sending out any number of beasts retires before

the equalisation of shares according to certain modes of

'stinting' the common. We find as an important manorial

arrangement the custom to 'apportion' the rights of common to the

tenements, that is to decide in the manorial Court, mostly

according to verdicts of juries, how many head of cattle, and of

what particular kind, may be sent to the divers pasture-grounds

of the village by the several holdings. From time to time these

regulations are revised. One of the Glastonbury Surveys contains,

for instance, the following description from the 45th year of

Henry III. Each hide may send to the common eighteen oxen,

sixteen cows, one bull, the offspring of the cows of two years,

two hundred sheep with four rams, as well as their offspring of

one year, four horses and their offspring of one year, twenty

swine and their offspring of one year.(6*) According to a common

rule the only cattle allowed to use the village pasture was that

which was constantly kept in the village, levant e couchant en le

maner. In order to guard against the fraudulent practice of

bringing over strange cattle and thus making money at the expense

of the township, it was required sometimes that the commonable

cattle should have wintered in the manor.(7*)

    These last rules seem at first sight difficult of

explanation: one does not see in what way the bringing in of

strange cattle could damage the peasantry of the village, as

nobody could drive more than a certain number of beasts to the

common, and as the overburdening of it depended entirely on the

excess of this number, and not on the origin of the beasts. And

so one has to look to something else besides the apprehension

that the common would get overburdened, in order to find a

suitable explanation of the rule. An explanation is readily

supplied by the notion that the use of the common was closely

connected with the holding. Strange cattle had nothing to do with

the holding, and were to be kept off from the land of the

community. it is as representatives of a community whose

territory has been invaded that the individual commoners have

cause to complain. In fact, the common pasture, as well as the

meadows, were thought of merely as a portion of the holding. The

arrangements did not admit of the same certainty or rather of the

same kind of determination as the division of the arable, but the

main idea which regulated the latter was by no means cut short in

its operation, if one may say so: it was not bound up with the

exact measurement of arable acres. The holding was the necessary

agricultural outfit of a peasant family, and of this outfit the

means of feeding the cattle were quite as important a part as the

means of raising crops. It is only inaccurately that we have been

speaking of a virgate of 30 acres, and of a ploughland of 180 or

160. The true expression would be to speak of a virgate of 30

acres of arable and the corresponding rights to pasture and other

common uses. And the records, when they want to give something

like a full description, do not omit to mention the

'pertinencia,' the necessary adjuncts of the arable. The term is

rather a vague one, quite in keeping with the rights which,

though tangible enough, cannot be cut to so certain a pattern as

in the case of arable.(8*) And for this reason the laxer right

had to conform to the stricter one, and came to be considered as

appendant to it.

    We have considered till now the different aspects assumed by

common of pasture, when it arises within the manor, and as a

consequence of the arrangement of its holdings. But this is not

the only way in which common of pasture may arise. It may

originate in an express and special grant by the lord either to a

tenant or to a stranger.(9*) it may also proceed from continuous

use from time beyond legal memory.(10*) it must have been

difficult in many cases to prevent strangers from establishing

such a claim by reason of long occupation in some part of a

widely stretching moor or wood pasture.(11*) It was not less

difficult in such cases to draw exact boundaries between

adjoining communities, and we find that large tracts of country

are used as a common pasture-ground by two villages, and even by

more.(12*) Neighbours deem it often advantageous to establish a

certain reciprocity in this respect.(13*) By special agreement or

by tacit allowance lords and tenants intercommon on each other's

lands: this practice extends mostly to the waste only, but in

some cases the arable and meadow are included after the removal

of the crop and of the hay. The procedure of the writ 'quo jure'

was partly directed to regulate these rights and to prevent

people from encroaching wantonly upon their neighbours.(14*) When

land held in one fee or one manor was broken up for some reason

into smaller units, the rights of pasture were commonly kept up

according to the old arrangements.(15*)

    These different modes of treating the pasture present rather

an incongruous medley, and may be classified in several ways and

deduced from divers sources.

    The chief distinctions of modern law are well known: 'Common

Appendant is the right which every freehold tenant of the manor

possesses, to depasture his commonable cattle, levant and

couchant on his freehold tenement anciently arable, on the wastes

of the manor, and originally on all (common) pasture in the

manor. Common appurtenant on the other hand is against common

right, becoming appurtenant to land either by long user or by

grant express or implied. Thus it covers a right to common with

animals that are not commonable, such as pigs, donkeys, goats,

and geese; or a right to common claimed for land not anciently

arable, such as pasture, or land reclaimed from the waste within

the time of legal memory, or for land that is not freehold, but

copyhold.'(16*) Common in gross is a personal right to common

pasture in opposition to the praedial rights. Mr Scrutton has

shown from the Year Books that these terms and distinctions

emerge gradually during the fourteenth century, and appear

substantially settled only in Littleton's treatise. Bracton and

his followers, Fleta and Britton, do not know them. These are

important facts, but they hardly warrant the inferences which

have been drawn from them. The subject has been in dispute in

connexion with discussions as to the free village community.

Joshua Williams, in his Rights of Common,(17*) had assumed common

appendant to originate in ancient customary right bestowed by the

village community and not by the lord's grant; Scrutton argues

that such a right is not recognised by the documents. He lays

stress on the fact, that Bracton speaks only of two modes of

acquiring common, namely, express grant by the lord, and long

usage understood as constant sufferance on the part of the lord

amounting to an express grant. But this is only another way of

saying that Bracton's exposition is based on feudal notions, that

his land law is constructed on the principle 'nulle terre sans

seigneur,' and that every tenement, as well as every right to

common, is considered in theory as granted by the lord of the

manor. It may be admitted that Bracton does not recognise just

that kind of title which later lawyers knew as appendancy, does

not recognise that a man can claim common by showing merely that

he is a freeholder of the manor. Unless he relies on long

continued user, he must rely upon grant or feoffment. But the

distinction between saying 'I claim common because I am a

freeholder of the manor' and saying 'I claim common because I or

my ancestors have been enfeoffed of a freehold tenement of the

manor and the right of common passed by the feoffment,' though it

may be of juristic interest and even of some practical importance

as regulating the burden of proof and giving rise to canons for

the interpretation of deeds, is still a superficial distinction

which does not penetrate deeply into the substance of the law. On

the whole we find that the freeholder of Bracton's time and of

earlier times does normally enjoy these rights which in after

time were described as 'appendant' to his freehold; and it is

well worth while to ask whether behind the general assumptions of

feudal theory there do not lie certain data which, on the one

hand, prepare and explain later terminology, and are connected,

on the other, with the historical antecedents of the feudal

system.

    A little reflection will show that the divisions of later law

did not spring into being merely as results of legal reasoning

and casuistry. indeed, from a lawyer's point of view, nothing can

be more imperfect than a classification which starts from three

or four principles of division seemingly not connected with each

other. Common appendant belongs to a place anciently arable,

common appurtenant may belong to land of any kind; the first is

designed for certain beasts, the second for certain others; one

is bound up with freehold, the other may go with copyhold; in one

case the right proceeds from common law, in the other from

'specialty.' One may reasonably ask why a person sending a cow to

the open fields or to the waste from a freehold tenement can

claim common appendant, and his neighbour sending a cow to the

same fields from a copyhold has only common appurtenant. Or

again, why does a plot of arable reclaimed from the waste confer

common appurtenant, and ancient arable common appendant? Or

again, why are the goats or the swine of a tenement sent to

pasture by virtue of common appurtenant, and the cows and horses

by virtue of common appendant? And, above all, what have the

several restrictions and definitions to do with each other? Such

a series of contrasted attributes defies any attempt to simplify

the rules of the case according to any clearly defined principle:

it seems a strange growth in which original and later elements,

important and secondary features, are capriciously brought

together.

    In order to explain these phenomena we have to look to

earlier and not to later law. What seems arbitrary and discordant

in modern times, appears clear and consistent in the original

structure of the manor.

    The older divisions may not be so definitely drawn and so

developed as the later, but they have the advantage of being

based on fundamental differences of fact. Even when the names and

terms do not appear well settled, the subject-matter arranges

itself according to some natural contrasts, and it is perhaps by

too exclusive study of names and terms that Mr. Scrutton has been

prevented from duly appreciating the difference in substance. He

says of the end of the thirteenth century: 'In the reports about

this time it seems generally to be. assumed that if the commoner

cannot show an especialte or special grant or title, he must show

"fraunc tenement en la ville a ques commune est appendant." Thus

we have the question: -- "Coment clamez vous commune? Com

appendant, ou par especialte,' while Hengham, J. says:

'prescription de terre est assez bon especialte"' (p. 50). This

is really the essence of all the rules regarding common of

pasture, and, what is more, the contrast follows directly from

arrangements which did not come into use in the fourteenth

century, but were in full work at the time of Bracton and long

before it. What is called in later law common appendant, appears

as the normal adjunct to the holding, that is, to a share in the

system of village husbandry. If a bovate is granted to a person,

so much of the rights of pasture as belongs to every bovate in

the village is presumed to be granted with the arable. ' So much

as belongs to every bovate in the village; 'this means, that the

common depends in this case on a general arrangement of the

pasture in the village. Such an arrangement exists in every

place; it is regulated by custom and by the decisions of the

manorial court or halimote, it extends equally over the free and

over the unfree land, over the waste, the moor and wood, and over

the fallow. It admits a certain number and certain kinds of

beasts, and excludes others. Only because such a general

arrangement is supposed to exist, is the right to com mon treated

in so vague a manner; the documents present, in truth, only a

reference to relations which are substantiated in the husbandry

system of the manor. But the right of common may exceed these

lines in many ways: it may be joined to a tenement which lies

outside the manorial system, or a plot freshly reclaimed from the

waste, or to a holding belonging to some other manor. It may

admit a greater number and other kinds of beasts than those which

were held commonable in the usual course of manorial husbandry.

In such cases the right to pasture had to proceed from some

special agreement or grant, and, of course, had to be based on

something different from the ordinary reference to the existing

system of common husbandry. If there was no deed to go by, such a

right could only be established by long use.

    I think that all this must follow necessarily as soon as the

main fact is admitted, that common is normally the right to

pasture of a shareholder of the manor. The objection may be

raised, that such a priori reasoning is not sufficient in the

case, because the documents do not countenance it by their

classification. Would the objection be fair? Hardly, if one does

not insist on finding in Bracton the identical terms used in Coke

upon Littleton. It is true that Bracton speaks of common in

general, and not of common appendant, appurtenant, and in gross,

but the right of common which he treats as normal appears to be

very peculiar on a closer examination of his rules. It is

praedial and not personal; to begin with, it is always thought of

as belonging to a tenement.(18*) What is more, it cannot belong

to a tenement reclaimed from the waste,(19*) and in this way the

requirement of 'ancient arable' is established, that is, the

pasture is considered as one of the rights conceded to the

original shares of a manorial community. The use of the open

field outside the time of reasonable defence (20*) is primarily

meant, and the common pasture appears from this point of view as

one of the stages in the process of common farming. To make up

the whole, the right to common is defined by a 'quantum

pertinet.'(21*) which has a sense only in connexion with the

admeasurement of claims effected by the internal organisation of

the manor. Such is evidently the normal arrangement presupposed

by Bracton's description, and his only fault is, that he does not

distinguish with clearness between the consequences of the normal

arrangement, and of grants or usurpations which supplement and

modify it. It must be remembered that he only gives the

substantive law about common rights in the course of a discussion

of the pleadings in actions 'quo jure' and assizes of pasture. If

we compare with Bracton's text the rules and decisions laid down

in the legal practice of the thirteenth century, we shall find

that the same facts are implied by them. They all suppose a

contrast between 'intrinsec' and 'forinsec' claims to common,

that is between the rights of those who are members of the

manorial group, and the rights, if any, of those who are outside

it, and again a contrast between the normal rights of commoners

and any more extensive rights acquired by special grant or

agreement. Only the freeholders are protected in the enjoyment of

their commons; only the freeholders are protected in the

enjoyment of their tenements; but their claims are based on

arrangements in which the unfree land participates in everything

with the free. It may be added that litigation mostly arises from

the adjustment of 'forinsec' claims under the writ 'Quo jure.'

The intercommoning between neighbours gives rise to a good many

disputes, and is much too frequent to be considered, as it was by

later law, a mere 'excuse for trespassing.'(22*) This common 'pur

cause de vicinage' may be a relic of a time when adjoining

villages formed a part of a higher unit of some kind, of the

Mark, of a hundred, for example. It may be explained also by the

difficulty of setting definite boundaries in wide tracts of moor

and forest. However this may be, its constant occurrence forms

another germ of a necessary contrast between the two classes

which afterwards developed into common appendant and common

appurtenant. It could not be brought under the same rules as

those which flowed from the internal arrangement of the manor. A

special difficulty attended it as to admeasurement: the customary

treatment of other holdings could not in this case serve as a

standard. The very laxity of the principle naturally gave

occasion to very different interpretations and deductions. And so

we are justified in saying, that the chief distinctions of later

law are to be found in their substance in the thirteenth century,

and that although a good deal of confusion occurs in details, the

earlier documents give even better clues than the later to the

reasons which led to the well-known classification.

    Common appendant, if we may use the modern term for the sake

of brevity, is indissolubly connected with the system of

husbandry followed by the village community. A very noticeable

feature of it is, that, in one sense, it towers over the lord of

the manor as well as over the tenants. Of course, legally the

lord is considered as the owner of the waste,(23*) but even from

the point of view of pure law his ownership is restricted by his

own grants. in so much as he has conceded freehold tenements to

certain persons, he is bound by his own deed not to withhold from

these persons the necessary adjuncts of such tenements, and

especially the rights of pasture bound up with them. The free

tenants share with the lord, if he wants to turn his common

pasture to some special and lucrative use; if, for instance,

strangers are admitted to it for money, one part of the proceeds

goes to the tenantry.(24*) Again, the lord may not overburden the

common, and sometimes freeholders try their hand at litigation

against the lord on the ground that he sends his cattle to some

place where they ought not to go.(25*) The point cannot be

overlooked, that the lord of the manor appears subjected to

certain rules set up by custom and common decision in the

meetings of his tenantry. The number and kind of beasts which may

come to the common from his land is fixed, as well as the number

that may come from the land of a cottager.(26*) The freeholders

alone can enforce the rule against him, but it is set up not by

the freeholders, but by the entire community of the manor, and

practically by the serfs more than by the freeholders, because

they are so much more numerous.

    As the common of pasture appears as an outcome of a system of

husbandry set up by the village community, so every change in the

use of the pasture ought in the natural course to proceed from a

decision of this community. Such a change may be effected in one

of two manners: the customary rotation of crops may be altered,

or else a part of the waste may be reclaimed for tillage. In the

first case, a portion of the open arable and meadow, which ought

to have been commonable at a certain time, ceases to be so; in

the second, the right to send cattle to the waste is stinted in

so much as the arable is put under defence, or the land is used

for the construction of dwellings. By the common law the free

tenants alone could obtain a remedy for any transgression in this

respect. I have mentioned already that suits frequently arose

when the old-fashioned rotation of crops was modified in

accordance with the progress of cultivation. As to the right of

approving from the waste, the relative position of lord and

tenants was for a long time debateable, and, as everybody knows,

the lord was empowered to approve by the Statute of Merton of 20

Henry III, with the condition that he should leave sufficient

pasture to his free tenants according to the requirements of

their tenements. The same power was guaranteed by the Statute of

Westminster II against the claims of neighbours. It has been

asked whether, before the Statute of Merton, the lord had power

to enclose against commoners, if he left sufficient common to

satisfy their rights. Bracton's text in the passage where he

treats of the Statute is distinctly in favour of the view that

this legislative enactment did actually alter the common law, and

that previously it was held that a lord could not approve without

the consent of his free-tenants.(27*) Turning to the practice of

the thirteenth-century courts, we find that the lawyers were

rather doubtful as to this point. In a case of 1221 the jurors

declare, that although the defendant has approved about two acres

of land from the waste where the plaintiff had common, this

latter has still sufficient pasture left to him. And thereupon

the plaintiff withdraws.(28*) In 1226 a lord who has granted

pasture everywhere, 'ubique,' and has inclosed part of it,

succumbs in a suit against his tenant, and we are led to suppose

that if the qualification 'ubique' had been absent, his right of

approvement would have been maintained. It must be noticed,

however, that the marginal note in Bracton's Notebook does not

lay stress on the 'ubique,' and regards the decision as contrary

to the law subsequently laid down by the Constitution of

Merton.(29*) In a case of 1292 one of the counsel for the

defendant took it for granted that the Statute of Merton altered

the previously existing common law.(30*) The language of the

Statutes themselves is certainly in favour of such a

construction: in the Merton Constitution it is stated as a fact

that the English magnates were prevented from making use of their

manors,(31*) and the Westminster Statute. Is as positive as to

neighbours; 'multi domini hucusque... impediti extiterunt,' etc.

It seems hardly possible to doubt that the enactments really

represent a new departure, although the way towards it had been

prepared by the collision of interests in open Court. The

condition negatively indicated by the documents in regard to the

time before these enactments cannot be dismissed by the

consideration that the lord would derogate from his grant by

approving. Although a single trial may bear directly on the

relation between the lord and only one of the tenants or a few of

them, every change in the occupation of the land touches all

those who are members of the manorial community. The removal of

difficulties as to approvement was, before the Statute of Merton,

not a question of agreement between two persons, but a question

as to the relative position of the lord and of the whole body of

the tenantry. The lord might possibly settle with every tenant

singly, but it seems much more probable that he brought the

matter, when it arose, before the whole body with which the

management of the village husbandry rested, that is, before the

halimote, with its free and unfree tenants. In any case, the

influence of the free tenants as recognised by the common law was

decisive, and hardly to be reconciled with the usual feudal

notions as to the place occupied by the lord in the community. It

must be noted that even that order of things which came into

being in consequence of the Statute contains an indirect

testimony as to the power of the village community. The Act

requires the pasture left to the free tenants to be sufficient,

and it may be asked at once, what criterion was there of such a

sufficiency, if the number of beasts was not mentioned in the

instrument by which the common was held. Of course, in case of

dispute, a jury had to give a verdict about it, but what had the

jury to go by? It was not the actual number of heads of cattle on

a tenement that could be made the starting-point of calculation.

Evidently the size of the holding, and its relation to other

holdings, had to be taken into account. But if so, then the legal

admeasurement had to conform to the customary admeasurement

defined by the community.(32*) And so again the openly recognised

law of the kingdom had to be set in action according to local

customs, which in themselves had no legally binding force.

    Besides the land regularly used for pasture, the cattle of

the village were sent grazing along the roads (33*) and in the

woods.(34*) These last were mostly used for feeding swine. In

other respects, also, the wood was subjected to a treatment

analogous to that of the pasture land. The right of hunting was,

of course, subjected to special regulations, which have to be

discussed from the point of view of forest law. But, apart from

that right, the wood was managed by the village community

according to certain customary rules. Every tenant had a right to

fell as many young trees as he wanted to keep his house and his

hedges in order.(35*) It sometimes happens, that the lord and the

homage enter into agreement as to the bigger trees, and for every

trunk taken by the lord the tenantry are entitled to take its

equivalent.(36*) Whenever the right had to be apportioned more or

less strictly, the size of the holdings was always the main

consideration.(37*)

    It would be strange to my purpose to discuss the details of

common of estovers, of turbary,(38*) or of fishery. The chief

points which touch upon the problems of social origins are

sufficiently apparent in the subject of pasture. The results of

our investigation may, I think, be summed up under the following

heads: --

    1. Rights of common are either a consequence of the communal

husbandry of the manor, or else they proceed from special

agreement or long use.

    2. The legal arrangement of commons depends on a customary

arrangement, in which free and unfree tenants take equal

part.(39*)

    3. The feudal theory of the lord's grant is insufficient to

explain the different aspects assumed by rights of common, and

especially the opposition between lord and free commoners.



NOTES:



1. Eynsham Cart. 2, c: 'Est quoddam pratum nuncupatum Clayhurste

et continet de prato et pastura 35 acras dimidiam rodam 13

perticas. Est ibidem ex parte australi una pecia prati et pasture

et continet 10 acras et 7 perticas et nuncupatur twelueacres que

annuatim diuiditur in 12 parcellas per le virgam equales, unde

dominus habet uno anno i, iii, v, vii, ix et xi, heredes Freman

et Walterus le Reue eodem anno habent parcellas ii, iv, vi, viii,

x et xii. Alio anno habet dominus parcellas quas tenentes

habuerunt et tenentes parcellas domini. Et sic annuatim habet

dominus quinque acras, tres perticas et dimidiam perticam.' Cf.

23, c: 'Memorandum quod in prato de Landemede sunt sex parcelle

bundate quarum prima parcella nuncupata Stubbefurlong continet 4

acras et dimidiam rodam et est domini anno incarnacionis Domini

impari et tenencium anno incarnacionis Domini pari. Quandovero

est tenencium, diuiditur per sortem.'



2. A very good instance is supplied by Williams, Rights of

Common, 89, 9o. Cf Birkbeck, Sketch of the Distribution of Land

in England, 19.



3. Gloucester Cart. iii. 67 (Extenta de Berthona Regis): 'De

pastura separabili dicunt quod Rex habet quandam moram quae

continet 4 1/2 acras et valet 4 solidos et potest sustinere 12

boves per nouem menses. Item de pastura inseparabili dicunt quod

Abbas Gloucestriae debet invenire pasturam ad I8 boves domini

Regis, et ad 2 vaccas, et 2 afros, a vigilia Pentecostes quousque

prata sint falcata, levata et cariata.' Exch. Q. R. Treas. of

Rec. 59/69: 'item dicunt quod sunt ibi de pastura separabili 50

acrae et valet acra 3 d.'



4. Eynsham Cart. 3, b: 'Dicunt eciam quod omnia prata pasture

domini et omnes culture non seminate et [que] deberent seminari

sunt separalia per tempus predictum.' 10, b: 'Et sunt dicte

pasture separales quousque blada circumcrescentia asportentur.' A

curious case is the following; ibid., 3, b: 'Dicunt eciam quod

dominus tenetur pratum suum de Langenhurst custodire nec potest

attachiare malefactores in eodem a solis ortu usque ad occasum,

aliis temporibus... licet, et est separale a festo annunciacionis

beate Marie usque gulam Augusti.'



5. Domesday of St. Paul's, 69: 'Non est ibi certa pastura nisi

quando terre dominice quiescunt alternatim inculte.' Cf 59: 'Non

est ibi pastura nisi cum quiescit dominicum per wainnagium...

possunt ibi esse 4 sucs cum uno verre et suis fetibus et 4 vacce

cum suis fetibus si quiescunt pasture dominice alternatim.' Rot.

Hundr. ii. 768, b: 'Item porci eius et aliorum vicinorum suorum

pascent in campis dominicis extra tassum dum bladum domini stat

in campis, et post bladum domini cariatum ibunt in campis per

totum et omnes alie bestie ejus et aliorum vicinorum suorum

pascent per totum in stipulo domini sine imparcamento.'



6. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS. 1 (Bodleian), f 182, b. Cf f 239,

240: 'Memorandum anni 1243 de amensuratione pasture... dicunt

precise quod ad quamlibet hidatam terre in eadem villa pertinent

16 boues ad terram excolendam, 4 vacce, 4 averia, 50 bidentes et

6 porci... ad unam virgatam terre pertinent 4 boues, et 2 vacce,

et 1 auerium, et 3 porci et 12 bidentes ad tantam terram colendam

et sustinendam.' Leigerbook of Kirkham Priory, Yorkshire, Fairfax

MSS. 7, f 8 a: 'Amensuratio pasture de Sexendale facta anno regni

regis Henrici filii regis Iohannis 36to... qui dicunt per

sacramentum suum quod quelibet bouata terre in Sexendale potest

sustinere duo grossa animalia, 30 oues cum sequela unius anni,

duos porcos sine sequela et 3 aucas cum sequela dimidii anni, ct

non amplius.'



7. In a case of 1233 (Note-book of Bracton, 749) it is

complained, -- 'Cum idem Robertus non possit aliena aueria in

pasturam illam recolligere, scil. hominum alterius religionis,'

etc.



8. Note.book of Bracton, pl. 174: 'Dicunt eciam quod in manerio

de Billingiheie, sicut inquirere possunt, sunt 12 carucate terre

tam in certa terra quam in marisco predicto, scilicet sex

carucate de certa terra et sex carucate in marisco, et in

Northkime sunt sex carucate terre et quatuor bouate tam in certa

terra quam in marisco predicto, set nesciunt aliquam

distinctionem quantum sit in certa terra et quantum in marisco

nec aliquid inquirere potuerunt de metis infra mariscos illos.'



9. Note-book of Bracton, pl. 749: 'Robertus de Spraxtona

summonitus fuit ad warantizandum Abbati de Riuallibus 42 acras

terre et pasturam ad 30 uaccas cum uno tauro et 48 boues et 40

oues cum pertinenciis in Sproxtona que tenet et de eo tenere

clamat, et unde cartam Simonis de S. auunculi sui cuius heres

ipse est habet,' etc.



10. Note-book of Bracton, pl. 818: 'Et Saherus et Matillis per

attornatos suos ueniunt et dicunt quod semper, a conquestu Anglie

usque nunc communicauerunt cum eodem Roberto et antecessoribus

suis in Locke, et idem Robertus et antecessores semper

communicauerunt in terris ipsorum S. et M. in Gaham... et unde

dicunt quod si idem Robertus uelit se retrahere de communa quam

habet in terris ipsorum, ipsi nolunt se retrahere et dicunt quod

semper communicauerunt horn underhorn... Et Robertus uenit et

dicit quod nec ipse nec antecessores unquam communam habuerunt in

Locke nisi post gwerram et per vim etc. scil. post gwerram motam

inter regem S. et homines suos.' Spelman renders the horn

unherhorn by, horn with horn,' but the editor of Bracton's

Note-book thinks, and I believe rightly, that the phrase means a

common for all manner of horned beasts. Brunner has translated it

by, gemeinschaftlich-durcheinander.'



11. Rot. Hundr. ii. 605, e: 'In dicto manerio 1 maguus boscus qui

continet 300 acras in quo quidem bosco homines propinquarum

villarum ut Wardeboys. Wodehirst, Woldhirst, Sti Ivonis,

Niddingworth et Halliwell communicant omnes bestias suos pascendo

cum sokna de Sumersham.' Note book of Bracton, 1194: 'Iuratores

dicunt quod mora illa ampla est et magna et nesciunt aliquas

divisas quantum pertinet ad unam uillam, quantum ad aliam.' In

the case of forest land many villages enjoyed and still enjoy

rights of intercommoning over a wide space. The case of Epping is

the familiar example.



12. Eynsham Cart. 3, b: 'Dicunt eciam quod dominus et villata de

Shyfford intercommunicant cum villatis de Stanlake, Brytlamptone

et Herdewyk a gula Augusti usque festum Sti Martini, cum villatis

vero de Astone Cote et Elcforde a festo Sti Michaelis usque

dictum festum Sti Martini.'



13. Note-book of Bracton, pl. 914: 'Et Thomas venit et dicit quod

nullam communam clamat in Oure, set uerum uult dicere. Certe

diuise et mete continentur inter terram Prioris de Oure et terram

ipsius Thome de Merkwrthe et quamdiu placuit eidem Priori habere

aesiam in terra ipsius Thome in Markwrthe habuit ipse Thomas

aesiam in terra ipsius Prioris de Oure, et si Prior uult

subtrahere se, ipse libenter subtrahet se.'



14. The relation between this writ and the action, quod reddat ei

tantam pasturam, is well illustrated by a case of 1230 (Note-book

of Bracton, pl. 392): 'Ricardus de Willeye et Iohanna de Willeye

summoniti fuerunt ad respondendum Willelmo de Kamuilla quo iure

communam pasture exigunt in terra ipsius W. in Arewe, desicut

idem Willelmus nullam commUnam habet in terris ipsorum Ricardi et

Iohanne, nec ipsi Ricardus et Johanna seruicium faciunt quare

communam habere debeant,' etc...., Et quia Willelmus cognoscit

quod habet communam quantamcumque licet paruam, consideratum est

quod nichil capiat per breue istud et sit in misericordia pro

falso clamore et perquirat sibi per aliud breue sicut per breue

quod reddat ei tantam pasturam,' etc. One may say that the Quo

Jure was an, actio negatoria.'



15. Note-book of Bracton, pl. 561: 'Et quia Simon non potest

dedicere quin terra illa ubi communa est sit de 1 frodo et una

uilla, consideratum est quod ipsa communicet cum eodem Simone in

terra ipsius Simonis,' etc.



16. Scrutton, Commons and Common Fields. 42.



17. Page 37.



18. Bracton, f 223, a: 'Non debet dici communia quod quis

habuerit in alieno... cum tenementum non habeat ad quod possit

communia pertinere, sed potius herbagium dici debet quam

communia, cum hoc posset esse personale quid.'



19. Bracton, f 226, b: 'Item dicere potest quod nulla communia

pertinet ad tale tenementum, quia illud fuit aliquando foresta,

boscus, et locus vastae solitudinis et communia, et iam inde

efficitur assartum, vel redactum est in culturam, et non debet

communia pertinere ad communiam, et ubi omnes de patria solebant

communicare.'



20. Bracton, f 229, a: 'Hoc non erit intelligendum quod omni

tempore, nisi tantum temporibus competentibus, scilicet post

blada asportata et fena levata, vel quando tenementum iacet

incultum et ad waractum.'



21. Bracton, f 228, b: 'Item eodem modo si ita feoffatus fuerit

quis, sine expressione numeri vel generis, sed ita, cum pastura

quantum pertinet ad tantum tenementum in eadem villa. talem ligat

constitutio sicut prius cum expressione: quia cum constet de

quantitate tenementi, de facili perpendi poterit de numero

aueriorum, et etiam de genere, secundum consuetudinem locorum.'



22. Scrutton, 55.



23. Cartulary of Christ Church, Harl. MSS. 1006, p. 3: 'Prior et

conventus est capitalis dominus commune pasture de B.'



24. Ely Cart.. Cotton MSS. Claudius, xi, f iii, a: 'In L. debet

villata communicare cum suis averiis propriis cum domino

Episcopo. Et si dominus voluerit, ibidem possunt habere extranei

bestias pro denariis. Set inde habebunt liberi homines de W.

quemlibet septimum denarium preter decimum.'



25. Registrum cellararii of Bury St. Edmunds, Cambr. Univ., Gg.

iv. 4, f 31, b: 'Et notandum quod inquisitio super calumpnia

Egidii de Neketona clamantis quod abbas non haberet communam

infra precinctum villate de Bertone scribitur in forma (tali),'

etc.



26. Cart. of Christ Church, Canterbury, Add. MSS. 6159. f 21, b:

'Sciendum quod dominus potest habere in communia pasture de bosco

cum aisiamento friscorum et dominicorum domini tempore apto c

bidentes per maius centum.'



27. Bracton, f 228, b: 'Inprimis videndum est qualiter

constitutio illa sit intelligenda, ne male intellecta trahat

utentes ad abusum... non omnes nec in omnibus per constitutionem

restringuntur, et ideo videndum erit utrum feoffati fuerint

large, scilicet per totum, et ubique, et in omnibus locis, et ad

omnia averia et sine numero... tales non ligat constitutio

memorata, quia feoffamentum non tollit licet tollat abusum.'



28. Note-book of Bracton, 1975.



29. Note-book of Bracton, 1881. The marginal note runs: 'Nota

quod nichil includi poterit de forestis et moris licet minimum

quid et quamuis quaerens extra clausum habere possit ad

sufficientiam.' And a little higher the decision is marked as,

contra constitutionem de Merton.'



30. See Scrutton, 63, 64.



31. Bracton, f 227, b: 'Quia multi sunt magnates qui feoffauerunt

milites et libere tenentes suos in maneriis suis de paruis

tenementis, et qui impedlti sunt per eosdem quod commodum suum

facere non possunt de residuo maneriorum suorum.' Reference may

also be made to a note on a Plea Roll of 1221 (printed in L. Q.

R. iv. 230), which shows that some years before the statute the

magnates complained that they were prevented from assarting their

pasture land by the claims of virgaters.



32. This is directly stated by Bracton, f 228, b., vide supra.



33. Cartulary of Christ Church, Canterbury, Addit. MSS. 6159, f

52, b: 'Pastura... de herbagiis cuiusdam vie inter curiam et

ecclesiam de Pritelwelle.' Domesday of St. Paul's, I: 'Nulla est

ibi pastura nisi in boscis et viis.'



34. Rot. Hundr. 613, b: 'Et omnes libere tenentes... communicant

in bosco de A. cum omnibus bestiis suis libere per totum annum.'



35. Eynsham Cart. 10, b: 'Est ibidem unus boscus... cuius valor

non appreciatur pro eo quod minister regis non permittit includi

si fiat copicium, sufficiens tamen est pro housebote et heybote.'

Gloucester Cart. iii. 67: 'De boscis dicunt quod rex habet

quandam costeram bosci de fago juvene quae continet ad

aestimationem 30 acras, unde rex poterit approbare per annum

dimidiam marcam, scilicet in subbosco et virgis ad clausturam, et

meremium ad carucas et alia facienda sine destructione, et ille

boscus est communis omnibus vicinis in herbagio.'



36. Cart. of Christ Church, Canterbury, Add. MSS. 6159, f 28, b:

'Boscus ibi est cuius medietas est ecclesie et medietatem clamant

tenentes illius denne, ut si dominus arborem unam accipiat, ipsi

aliam accipient.'



37. Worcester Cart. (Camden Ser.), 62, b: 'Quaelibet virgata

tenet 3 feorthendels de Bruera, et dimidia virgata I feorthendel

et dimidium.'



38. For instance, Madox, Exch. I, 27, n. 47: 'Habebunt turbas

sufficientes in predicta mora ad focalium fratrum... secundum

quantitatem terrarum suarum in eadem villa.'



39. A very remarkable instance of the way in which rights of

common were divided and arranged between lords and villains is

afforded by the Court Rolls of Brightwaltham. Maitland, Manorial

Rolls, Selden Soc. ii. 172. I shall have to discuss the Case in

the Fifth Chapter of this Essay.



Chapter 3



Rural Work and Rents



    Our best means of judging of the daily work in an English

village of the thirteenth century is to study the detailed

accounts of operations and payments imposed on the tenants for

the benefit of a manorial lord. Surveys, extents, or inquisitions

were drawn up chiefly for the purpose of settling these duties,

and the wealth of material they afford enables us to form a

judgment as to several interesting questions. It tells directly

of the burden which rural workmen had to bear in the

aristocratical structure of society; it gives indirectly an

insight into all the ramifications of labour and production since

the dues received by the lord were a kind of natural percentage

upon all the work of the tenants; the combination of its details

into one whole affords many a clue to the social standing and

history of the peasant classes of which we have been treating.

    Let us begin by a survey of the different kinds of labour

duties performed by the dependent holdings which. clustered round

the manorial centre. Foremost stands ploughing and the operations

connected with it. The cultivation of the demesne soil of a manor

depended largely on the help of the peasantry. By the side of the

ploughs and plough-teams owned by the lord himself, the

plough-teams of his villains are made to till his land, and

manorial extents commonly mention that the demesne portion has to

be cultivated by the help of village customs, 'cum

consuetudinibus villae.'(1*) The duties of every householder in

this respect are reckoned up in different ways. Sometimes every

dependent plough has its number of acres assigned to it, and the

joint owners of its team are left to settle between themselves

the proportions in which they will have to co-operate for the

performance of the duty.(2*) In most cases the 'extent' fixes the

amount due from each individual holder. For instance, every

virgater is to plough one acre in every week. This can only mean

that one acre of the lord's land is reckoned on every single

virgate in one week, without any reference to the fact that only

one part of the team is owned by the peasant. If, for example,

there were four virgaters to share in the ownership of the

plough, the expression under our notice would mean that every

team has to plough four acres in the week.(3*) But the ploughs

may be small, or the virgaters exceptionally wealthy, and their

compound plough team may have to cultivate only three acres or

even less. The lord in this case reckons with labour-weeks and

acres, not with teams and days-work. A third possibility would be

to base the reckoning on the number of days which a team or a

holder has to give to the lord.(4*) A fourth, to lay on the

imposition in one lump by requiring a certain number of acres to

be tilled, or a certain number of days of ploughing.(5*) It must

be added, that the peasants have often to supplement their

ploughing work by harrowing, according to one of these various

systems of apportionment.(6*)

    The duties here described present only a variation of the

common 'week-work' of the peasant, its application to a certain

kind of labour. They could on occasion be replaced by some other

work,(7*) or the lord might lose them if the time assigned for

them was quite unsuitable for work.(8*) There is another form of

ploughing called gafol-earth, which has no reference to any

particular time-limits. A patch of the lord's land is assigned to

the homage for cultivation, and every tenant gets his share in

the work according to the size of his holding. Gafol-earth is not

only ploughed but mostly sown by the peasantry.(9*)

    A third species of ploughing-duty is the so-called averearth.

or grass-earth. This obligation arises when the peasants want

more pasture than they are entitled to use by their customary

rights of common. The lord may grant the permission to use the

pasture reserved for him, and exacts ploughings in return

according to the number of heads of cattle sent to the

pasturage.(10*) Sometimes the same imposition is levied when more

cattle are sent to the commons than a holding has a right to

drive on them.(11*) It is not impossible that in some cases the

very use of rights of common Was made dependent on the

performance of such duties.(12*) A kindred exaction was imposed

for the use of the meadows.(13*) Local variations have, of

course, to be taken largely into account in all such matters: the

distinction between gafol-earth and grass-earth, for instance,

though drawn very sharply in most cases, gets somewhat confused

in others.

    Manorial records mention a fourth variety of ploughing work

under the name of ben-earth, precariae carucarum. This is extra

work in opposition to the common ploughings described

before.(14*) It is assumed that the subject population is ready

to help the lord for the tillage of his land, even beyond the

customary duties imposed on it. It sends its ploughs three or

four times a year 'out of love,' and 'for the asking.' It may be

conjectured how agreeable this duty must have been in reality,

and indeed by the side of its common denominations, as boon-work

and asked-work, we find much rougher terms in the speech of some

districts -- it is deemed unlawenearth and godlesebene.(15*) It

must be said, however, that the lord generally provided food on

these occasions, and even went so far as to pay for such extra

work.

    Other expressions occur in certain localities, which are

sometimes difficult of explanation. Lentenearth,(16*) in the

manors of Ely Minster, means evidently an extra ploughing in

Lent. The same Ely records exhibit a ploughing called Filstnerthe

or Filsingerthe,(17*) which may be identical with the Lentenearth

just mentioned: a fastnyngseed (18*) occurs at any rate which

seem s connected with the ploughing under discussion. The same

extra work in Lent is called Tywe (19*) in the Custumal of

Bleadon, Somersetshire. When the ploughing-work is paid for it

may receive the name of penyearth.(20*) The Gloucester survey

speaks of the extra cultivation of an acre called Radacre, and

the Ely surveys of an extra rood 'de Rytnesse.'(21*) I do not

venture to suggest an explanation for these last terms; and I

need not say that it would be easy to collect a much greater

number of such terms in local use from the manorial records. It

is sufficient for my purpose to mark the chief distinctions.

    All the other labour-services are performed more or less on

the same system as the ploughings, with the fundamental

difference that the number of men engaged in them has to be

reckoned with more than the number of beasts. The extents are

especially full of details in their descriptions of reaping or

mowing corn and grass; the process of thrashing is also

mentioned, though more rarely. In the case of meadows (mederipe)

sometimes their dimensions are made the basis of calculation,

sometimes the number of work-days which have to be employed in

order to cut the grass.(22*) As to the corn-harvest, every

holding has its number of acres assigned to it,(23*) or else it

is enacted that every house has to send so many workmen during a

certain number of days.(24*) If it is said that such and such a

tenant is bound to work on the lord's field at harvest-time with

twenty-eight men, it does not mean that he has to send out such a

number every time, but that he has to furnish an amount of work

equivalent to that performed by twenty-eight grown-up labourers

in one, day. It may be divided into fourteen days' work of two

labourers, or into seven days' of four, and so forth.

    Harvest-time is the most pressing time in the year for rural

work; it is especially important not to lose the opportunity

presented by fine weather to mow and garner in the crop before

rain, and there may be only a few days of such weather at

command. For this reason extra labour is chiefly required during

this season, and the village people are frequently asked to give

extra help in connexion with it. The system of precariae is even

more developed on these occasions than in the case of

ploughing.(25*) All the forces of the village are strained to go

through the task; all the houses which open on the street send

their labourers,(26*) and in most cases the entire population has

to join in the work, with the exception of the housewives and

perhaps of the marriageable daughters.(27*) The landlord treats

the harvesters to food in order to make these exertions somewhat

more palatable to them.(28*) These 'love-meals' are graduated

according to a set system. If the men are called out only once,

they get their food and no drink: these are 'dry requests.' If

they are made to go a second time, ale is served to them

(precariae cerevisiae). The mutual obligations of lords and

tenantry are settled very minutely;(29*) the latter may have to

mow a particular acre with the object of saying 'thanks' for some

concession on the part of the lord.(30*) The same kind of

'requests' are in use for mowing the meadows. The duties of the

peasants differ a great deal according to size of their holdings

and their social position. The greater number have of course to

work with scythe and sickle, but the more wealthy are called upon

to supervise the rest, to ride about with rods in their

hands.(31*) On the other hand, a poor woman holds a messuage, and

need do no more than carry water to the mowers.(32*)

    A very important item in the work necessary for medieval

husbandry was the business of carrying produce from one part of

the country to the other. The manors of a great lord were usually

dispersed in several counties, and even in the case of small

landowners it was not very easy to arrange a regular

communication with the market. The obligation to provide horses

and carts gains in importance accordingly.(33*) These averagia

are laid out for short and long distances, and the peasants have

to take their turn at them one after the other.(34*) They were

bound to carry corn to London or Bristol according to the size of

their holdings.(35*) Special importance was attached to the

carriage of the 'farm,' that is of the products designed for the

consumption of the lord.(36*) In some surveys we find the

qualification that the peasants are not obliged to carry anything

but such material as may be put on the fire, i.e. used in the

kitchen.(37*) In the manor itself there are many carriage duties

to be performed: carts are required for the grain, or for

spreading the dung. The work of loading and of following the

carts is imposed on those who are not able to provide the

implements.(38*) And alongside of the duties of carriage by

horses or oxen we find the corresponding manual duty. The

'averagium super dorsum suum' falls on the small tenant who does

not own either horses or oxen.(39*) Such small people are also

made to drive the swine or geese to the market.(40*) The lord and

his chief stewards must look sharp after the distribution of

these duties in order to prevent wealthy tenants from being put

to light duties through the protection of the bailiffs, who may

be bribed for the purpose.(41*)

    It would be hard to imagine any kind of agricultural work

which is not imposed on the peasantry in these manorial surveys.

The tenants mind the lord's ploughs, construct houses and booths

for him, repair hedges and dykes, work in vineyards, wash and

shear the sheep,(42*) etc. In some cases the labour has to be

undertaken by them, not in the regular run of their services, but

by special agreement, as it were, in consideration of some

particular right or permission granted to them.(43*) Also it

happens from time to time that the people of one manor have to

perform some services in another, for instance, because they use

pasture in that other manor.(44*) Such 'forinsec' labour may be

due even from tenants of a strange lord. By the side of purely

agricultural duties we find such as are required by the political

or judicial organisation of the manor. Peasants are bound to

guard and hang thieves, to carry summonses and orders, to serve

at the courts of the superior lord and of the king.(45*)

    In consequence of the great variety of these labour-services

they had to be reduced to some chief and plain subdivisions for

purposes of a general oversight. Three main classes are very

noticeable notwithstanding all variety the araturae, averagia,

and ianuoperationes. These last are also called hand-dainae or

daywerke,(46*). and the records give sometimes the exact

valuation of the work to be performed during a day in every kind

of labour. Sometimes all the different classes are added up under

one head for a general reckoning, and without any distinction as

to work performed by hand or with the help of horse or ox, Among

the manors of Christ Church, Canterbury,(47*) for instance, we

find at Borle '1480 work-days divided into 44 weeks of labour

from the virgaters, 88 from the cotters, 320 from the tofters

holding small tenements in the fields.' In Bockyng the work-days

of 52 weeks are reckoned to be 3222. It must be added, that when

such a general summing up appears, it is mostly to be taken as an

indication that the old system based on labour in kind is more or

less shaken. The aim of throwing together the different classes

of work is to get a general valuation of its worth, and such a

valuation in money is commonly placed by the side of the

reckoning. The single day-work yields sometimes only one penny or

a little more, and the landlord is glad to exchange this cumbrous

and cheap commodity for money-rents, even for small ones.

    We must now proceed to examine the different forms assumed by

payments in kind and money: they present a close parallel to the

many varieties of labour-service. Thirteenth-century documents

are full of allusions to payments in kind- that most archaic form

of arranging the relations between a lord and his subjects. The

peasants give corn under different names, and for various

reasons: as gavelseed, in addition to the money-rent paid for

their land.(48*) as foddercorn, of oats for the feeding of horses

(49*); as gathercorn, which a manorial servant has to collect or

gather from the several homesteads.(50*) as corn-bole, a best

sheaf levied at harvest-time.(51*) Of other provender supplied to

the lord's household honey is the most common, both in combs and

in a liquid form,(52*) Ale is sometimes brewed for the same

purpose, and sometimes malt and braseum furnished as material to

be used in the manorial farm,(53*) Animals are also given in

rent, mostly sheep, lambs, and sucking-pigs, The mode of

selection is peculiar in some cases. In the Christ Church

(Canterbury) manor of Monckton each sulung has to render two

lambs, and the lord's servant has the right to take those which

he pleases, whereupon the owner gets a receipt, evidently in view

of subsequent compensation from the other co-owners of the

sulung.(54*) If no suitable lamb is to be found, eight pence are

paid instead of it as mail (mala), on one of the estates of

Gloucester Abbey a freeman has to come on St. Peter's and Paul's

day with a lamb of the value of 12d., and besides, 12 pence in

money are to be hung in a purse on the animal's neck.(55*)

Poultry is brought almost everywhere, but these prestations are

very different in their origin. The most common reason for giving

capons is the necessity for getting the warranty of the

lord:(56*) In this sense the receipt and payment of the rent

constitute an acknowledgment on the part of the lord that he is

bound to protect his men, and on the part of the peasant that he

is the lord's villain.  Wood hens' are given for licence to take

a load of wood in a forest; similar prestations occur in

connexion with pasture and with the use of a moor for

turbary.(57*) At Easter the peasantry greet their protectors by

bringing eggs: in Walton, a manor of St. Paul's, London, the

custom is said to exist in honour of the lord, and at the free

discretion of the tenants.(58*) Besides all those things which

may be 'put on the fire and eaten,' rents in kind sometimes take

the shape of some object for permanent use, especially of some

implement necessary for the construction of the plough.(59*)

Trifling rents, consisting of flowers or roots of ginger, are

sometimes imposed with the object of testifying to the lord's

seignory; but the payers of such rents are generally

freeholders.(60*) I need not dwell long on the enumeration of all

the strange prestations which existed during the Middle Ages, and

partly came down to our own time: any reader curious about them

will find an enormous mass of interesting material in Hazlitt's

'Tenures of Land and Customs of Manors.'

    In opposition to labour and rents in kind we find a great

many payments in money. Some of these are said in as many words

to have stept into the place of labour services; of mowing,

carrying, making hedges,(61*) etc. The same may be the case in

regard to produce: barlicksilver is paid instead of barley,

fish-silver evidently instead of fish, malt-silver instead of

malt; a certain payment instead of salt, and so on.(62*) But

sometimes the origin of the money rent is more difficult to

ascertain. We find, for instance, a duty on sheep, which is

almost certainly an original imposition when it appears as

fald-silver. Even so the scythe-penny from every scythe, the

bosing-silver from every horse and cart, the wood-penny, probably

for the use of wood as fuel, must be regarded as original taxes

and not quit-rents or commutation-rents.(63*) Pannage is paid in

the same way for the swine grazing in the woods.(64*) Ward-penny

appears also in connexion with cattle, but with some special

shade of meaning which it is difficult to bring out definitely;

the name seems to point to protection, and also occurs in

connexion with police arrangements.(65*)

    I must acknowledge that in a good many cases I have been

unable to find a satisfactory explanation for various terms which

occur in the records for the divers payments. An attentive study

of local usages will probably lead to definite conclusions as to

most of them.(66*) From a general point of view it is interesting

to notice, that we find already in our records some attempts to

bring all the perplexing variety of payments to a few main

designations. Annual rents are, of course, reckoned out under the

one head of 'census.' Very obvious reasons suggested the

advisability of computing the entire money-proceed yielded by the

estate.(67*) It sometimes happens that the general sum made up in

this way, fixed as it is at a constant amount, is used almost as

a name for a complex of land.(68*) A division of rents into old

and new ones does not require any particular explanation.(69*)

But several other subdivisions are worth notice. The rent paid

from the land often appears separately as landgafol or landchere.

It is naturally opposed to payments that fall on the person as

poll taxes.(70*) These last are considered guaranteed by the as a

return for the personal protection lord to his subjects. Of the

contrast between gafol as a customary rent and mal as a payment

in commutation I have spoken already, and I have only to add now,

that gild is sometimes used in the same sense as mal.(71*)

Another term in direct opposition to gafol is the Latin

donum.(72*) It seems to indicate a special payment imposed as a

kind of voluntary contribution on the entire village. To be sure,

there was not much free will to be exercised in the matter; all

the dependent people of the township had to pay according to

their means.(73*) But the tax must have been considered as a

supplementary one in the same sense as supplementary boon-work.

It may have been originally intended in some cases as an

equivalent for some rights surrendered by the lord, as a mal or

gild, in fact.(74*) In close connexion with the donum we find the

auxilium,(75*) also an extraordinary tax paid once a year, and

distinguished from the ordinary rent. It appears as a direct

consequence of the political subjection of the tenantry.(76*). It

is, in fact, merely an expression of the right to tallage. Our

records mention it sometimes as apportioned according to the

number of cattle owned by the peasant, but this concerns only the

mode of imposition of the duty and hardly its origin.(77*) As I

have said already, the auxilium is in every respect like the

donum. One very characteristic trait of both taxes is, that they

are laid primarily on the whole village, which is made to pay a

certain round sum as a body.(78*) The burden is divided

afterwards between the several householders, and the number of

cattle, and more particularly of the beasts of plough kept on the

holding, has of course to be taken into account more than

anything else. But the manorial administration does not much

concern itself with these details: the township is answerable for

the whole sum.

    It is to be added that the payment is sometimes actually

mentioned as a political one in direct connexion with 'forinsec'

duties towards the king. The burdens which lay on the land in

consequence of the requirements of State and Church appear not

unfrequently in the documents. Among those the scutage and hidage

are the most important. The first of these taxes is so well known

that I need not stop to discuss it. It may be noticed however

that in relation to the dependent people scutage is not commonly

spoken of; the tax was levied under this name from the barons and

the armed gentry, and was mostly transmitted by these to the

lower strata of society under some other name, as an aid or a

tallage. Hidage is historically connected with the old English

Danegeld system, and in some cases its amount is set out

separately from other payments, and the tenants of a manor have

to pay it to the bailiff of the hundred and not to the steward. A

smaller payment called ward-penny is bound up with it, probably

as a substitute for the duty of keeping watch and ward.(79*) In

the north the hidage is replaced by cornage,(80*) a tax which has

given rise to learned controversy and doubt; it looks like an

assessment according to the number of horns of cattle, pro numero

averiorum, as our Latin extents would say. The Church has also an

ancient claim on the help of the faithful; the churchscot of

Saxon times often occurs in the feudal age under the name of

churiset or cheriset.(81*) It is mostly paid in kind, but may be

found occasionally as a money-rent.

    A survey of the chief aspects assumed by the work and the

payments of the dependent people was absolutely necessary, in

order to enable us to understand the descriptions of rural

arrangements which form the most instructive part of the

so-called extents. But every survey of terms and distinctions

(even if it were much more detailed than the one I am able to

present), will give only a very imperfect idea of the obligations

actually laid on the peasantry. It must needs take up the

different species one by one and consider them separately,

whereas in reality they were meant to fit together into a whole.

On the other hand it may create a false impression by enumerating

in systematic order facts which belonged to different localities

and perhaps to different epochs. To keep clear of these dangers

we have to consider the deviations of practical arrangements from

the rules laid down in the books and the usual combinations of

the elements described.

    When one reads the careful notices in the cartularies as to

the number of days and the particular occasions when work has to

be performed for the lord, a simple question is suggested by the

minuteness of detail. What happened when this very definite

arrangement came into collision with some other equally exacting

order? One of the three days of week-work might, for instance,

fall on a great feast; or else the weather might be too bad for

out-of-doors work. Who was to suffer or to gain by such

casualties? The question is not a useless one. The manorial

records raise it occasionally, and their ways of settling it are

not always the same. We find that in some cases the lord tried to

get rid of the inconveniences occasioned by such events, Or at

least to throw one part of the burden back on the dependent

population; in Barling, for instance, a manor of St. Paul's,

London,(82*) of two feasts occurring in one week and even in two

consecutive weeks, one profits to the villains and the other to

the lord; that is to say, the labourer escapes one day's work

altogether. But the general course seems to have been to liberate

the peasants from work both on occasion of a festival and if the

weather was exceptionally inclement.(83*) Both facts are not

without importance: it must be remembered that the number of

Church festivals was a very considerable one in those days.

Again, although the stewards were not likely to be very

sentimental as to bad weather, the usual test of cold in case of

ploughing seems to have been the hardness of the soil -- a

certain percentage of free days must have occurred during the

winter at least. And what is even more to be considered -- when

the men were very strictly kept to their week-work under

unfavourable circumstances, the landlord must have gained very

little although the working people suffered much. The reader may

easily fancy the effects of what must have been a very common

occurrence, when the village householders sent out their ploughs

on heavy clay in torrents of rain. The system of customary work

on certain days was especially clumsy in such respects, and it is

worth notice that in harvest-time the landlords rely chiefly on

boon-days. These were not irrevocably fixed, and could be shifted

according to the state of the weather. Still the week-work was so

important an item in the general arrangement of labour-services

that the inconveniences described must have acted powerfully in

favour of commutation.

    Of course, the passage from one system to the other, however

desirable for the parties concerned, was not to be effected

easily and at once: a considerable amount of capital in the hands

of the peasantry was required to make it possible, and another

necessary requirement was a sufficient circulation of money.

While these were wanting the people had to abide by the old

labour system. The facts we have been discussing give indirect

proof that there was not much room for arbitrary changes in this

system. Everything seems ruled and settled for ever. It may

happen, of course, that notwithstanding the supposed equality

between the economic strength of the, different holdings, some

tenants are unable to fulfil the duties which their companions

perform.(84*) As it was noticed before, the shares could not be

made to correspond absolutely to each other, and the distribution

of work and payments according to a definite pattern was often

only approximate.(85*) Again, the lord had some latitude in

selecting one or the other kind of service to be performed by his

men.(86*) But, speaking generally, the settlement of duties was a

very constant one, and manorial documents testify that every

attempt by the lord to dictate a change was met by emphatic

protests on the part of the peasantry.(87*) The tenacity of

custom may be gathered from the fact that when we chance to

possess two sets of extents following each other after a very

considerable lapse of time, the renders in kind and the

labour-services remain unmodified in the main.(88*) One has to

guard especially against the assumption that such expressions as

'to do whatever he is bid' or 'whatever the lord commands' imply

a complete servility of the tenant and unrestricted power on the

part of the lord to exploit his subordinate according to his

pleasure. Such expressions have been used as a test of the degree

of subjection of the villains at different epochs; it has been

contended, that the earlier our evidence is, the more complete

the lord's sway appears to be.(89*) The expressions quoted above

may seem at first glance to countenance the idea, but an

attentive and extended study of the documents will easily show

that, save in exceptional cases, the earlier records are by no

means harder in their treatment of the peasantry than the later.

The eleventh century is, if anything, more favourable to the

subjected class as regards the imposition of labour-services than

the thirteenth, and we shall see by-and-by that the observation

applies even more to Saxon times. In the light of such a general

comparison, we have to explain the above-mentioned phrases in a

different way. 'Whatever he is bid' applies to the quality and

not to the quantity of the work.(90*) It does not mean that the

steward has a right to order the peasant about like a slave, to

tear him at pleasure from his own work, and to increase his

burden whenever he likes. It means simply that such and such a

virgater or cotter has to appear in person or by proxy to perform

his weekwork of three days, or two days, or four days, according

to the case, and that it is not settled beforehand what kind of

work he is to perform. He may have to plough, or to carry, or to

dig trenches, or to do anything else, according to the bidding of

the steward. A similar instance of uncertainty may be found in

the expression 'without measure'(91*) which sometimes occurs in

extents. It would be preposterous to construe it as an indication

of work to be imposed at pleasure. It is merely a phrase used to

suit the case when the work had to be done by the day and not by

a set quantity; if, for instance, a man had to plough so many

times and the number of acres to be ploughed was not specified.

It is true that such vague descriptions are mostly found in older

surveys, but the inference to be drawn from the fact is simply

that manorial customs were developing gradually from rather

indefinite rules to a minute settlement of details. There is no

difference in the main principle, that the dependent householder

was not to be treated as a slave and had a customary right to

devote part of his time to the management of his own affairs.

    Another point is to be kept well in view. The whole

arrangement of a manorial survey is constructed with the holding

as its basis. The names of virgaters and cotters are certainly

mentioned for the sake of clearness, but it would be wrong to

consider the duties ascribed to them as aiming at the person.

John Newman may be said to hold a virgate, to join with his

plough-oxen in the tillage of twenty acres, to attend at three

boon-days in harvest time, and so forth. It would be misleading

to take these statements very literally and to infer that John

Newman was alone to use the virgate and to work for it. He was

most probably married, and possibly had grown-up sons to help

him; very likely a brother was there also, and even servants,

poor houseless men from the same village or from abroad. Every

householder has a more or less considerable following

(sequela),(92*) and it was by no means necessary for the head of

the family to perform all manorial work in his own person. He had

to appear or to send one workman on most occasions and to come

with all his people on a few days -- the boon-days namely. The

description of the precariae is generally the only occasion when

the extents take this into account, namely, that there was a

considerable population in the village besides those tenants who

were mentioned by name.(93*) I need not point out, that the fact

has an important meaning. The medieval system, in so far as it

rested on the distribution of holdings, was in many respects more

advantageous to the tenantry than to the lord. It was superficial

in a sense, and from the point of view of the lord did not lead

to a satisfactory result; he did not get the utmost that was

possible from his subordinates. The factor of population was

almost disregarded by it, households very differently constituted

in this respect were assumed to be equal, and the tenacity of

custom prevented an increase of rents and labour-services in

proportion to the growth of resource and wealth among the

peasants. Some attempts to get round these difficulties are

noticeable in the surveys: they are mostly connected with the

regulation of boon-works. But these exceptional measures give

indirect proof of the very insufficient manner in which the

question was generally settled.

    The liabilities of the peasantry take the shape of produce,

labour, and money-rents. Almost in every manor all three kinds of

impositions are to be found split up into a confusing variety of

customary obligations. It is out of the question to trace at the

present time, with the help of fragmentary and later material,

what the original ideas were which underlie these complicated

arrangements. But although a reduction to simple guiding

principles accounting for every detail cannot be attempted, it is

easy to perceive that chance and fancy were not everything in

these matters. The several duties are brought together so as to

form a certain whole, and some of the aims pursued in the

grouping may be perceived even now.

    The older surveys often show the operation of a system which

is adapted by its very essence to a very primitive state of

society. It may be called the farm-system, the word farm being

used in the original sense of the Saxon feorm, food, and not in

the later meaning of fixed rent, although these two meanings

appear intimately connected in history. The farm is a quantity of

produce necessary for the maintenance of the lord's household

during a certain period: it may be one night's or week's or one

fortnight's farm accordingly. A very good instance of the system

may be found in an ancient cartulary of Ramsey, now at the

British Museum, which though compiled in the early thirteenth

century, constantly refers to the order of Henry II's time. The

estates of the abbey were taxed in such a way as to yield

thirteen full farms of a fortnight, and each of these was to be

used for the maintenance of the monks through a whole month. The

extension of the period is odd enough, and we do not see its

reason clearly. It followed probably on great losses in property

and income at the time of Abbot Walter. However this may be, the

thirteen fortnights' farms were made to serve all the year round,

and to cover fifty-two weeks instead of twenty-six. A very minute

description of the single farm is given as it was paid by the

manor of Ayllington (i.e. Elton). Every kind of produce is

mentioned: flour and bread, beer and honey, bacon, cheese, lambs,

geese, chicken, eggs, butter, &c. The price of each article is

mentioned in pence, and it is added, that four pounds have to be

paid in money. By the side of the usual farm there appears a

'lent' farm with this distinction, that only half as much bacon

and cheese has to be given as usual, and the deficiency is to be

made up by a money payment. Some of the manors of the abbey have

to send a whole farm, some others only one half, that is one

week's farm, but all are assessed to pay sixteen pence for every

acre to be used as alms for the poor.(94*) This description may

be taken as a standard one, and it would be easy to supplement it

in many particulars from the records of other monastic

institutions. The records of St. Paul's, London, supply

information as to a distribution of the farms at the close of the

eleventh century, which covered fifty-two weeks, six days, and

five-sixths of a day.(95*) The firmae of St. Alban's were

reckoned to provide for the fifty-two weeks of the year, and one

in advance.(96*) The practice of arranging the produce-rents

according to farms was by no means restricted to ecclesiastical

management; it occurs also on the estates of the Crown, and was

probably in use on those of lay lords generally. Every person a

little conversant with Domesday knows the firmae unius noctis, at

which some of the royal manors were assessed.(97*) In the period

properly called feudal, that is in the twelfth and thirteenth

centuries, the food-revenue had very often become only the

starting-point for a reckoning of money-rents. The St. Alban's

farms, for example, are no longer delivered in kind; their

equivalent in money has taken their place. But the previous state

of things has left a clear trace in the division by weeks.

Altogether it seems impossible to doubt that the original idea

was to provide really the food necessary for consumption. One

cannot help thinking that such practice must have come from the

very earliest times when a Saxon or a Celtic chieftain got his

income from the territory under his sway by moving from one place

to another with his retinue and feeding on the people for a

certain period. This very primitive mode of raising income and

consuming it at the same time may occasionally strike our eye

even in the middle of the thirteenth century. The tenants of the

Abbot of Osulveston in Donington and Byker are bound to receive

their lord during one night and one day when he comes to hold his

court in their place. They find the necessary food and beverage

for him and for his men, provender for his horses, and so forth.

If the abbot does not come in person, the homage may settle about

a commutation of the duties with the steward or the sergeant sent

for the purpose. If he refuses to take money, they must bring

everything in kind.(98*)

    This is an exceptional instance: generally the farm has to be

sent to the lord's residence, probably after a deduction for the

requirements of the manor in which it was gathered. When it had

reached this stage the system is already in decay. It is not only

difficult to provide for the carriage, but actually impossible to

keep some of the articles from being spoilt. Bread sent to

Westminster from some Worcestershire possession of the minster

would not have been very good when it reached its destination.

The step towards money-payments is natural and necessary.

    Before leaving the food-rents we must take notice of one Or

two more peculiarities of this system. It is obvious that it was

arranged from above, if one may use the expression. The

assessment does not proceed in this case by way of an estimate of

the paying or producing strength of each unit subjected to it,

i.e. of each peasant household. The result is not made up by

multiplying the revenue from every holding by the number of such

holdings. The whole reckoning starts from the other end, from the

wants of the manorial administration. The requirements of a night

or of a week are used as the standard to which the taxation has

to conform. This being the case, the correspondence between the

amount of the taxes and the actual condition of the tax-payer was

only a very loose one. Manors of very different size were brought

into the same class in point of assessment, and the rough

distinctions between a whole farm and half-a-farm could not

follow at all closely the variety of facts in real life, even

when they were supplemented by the addition of round sums of

money.

    These observations lead at once to important questions; how

was the farm-assessment distributed in every single manor, and

what was its influence on the duties of the single householder?

It seems hardly doubtful, to begin with, that the food-rent

changed very much in this respect. Originally, when the condition

of things was more or less like the Osulvestone example, the farm

must have been the result of co-operation on the part of all the

householders of a township, who had to contribute according to

their means to furnish the necessary articles. But the farm of

St. Paul's, London, even when it is paid in produce, is a very

different thing. It is the result of a convention with the

firmarius, or may be with the township itself in the place of a

firmarius.(99*) It depends only indirectly on the services and

payments of the peasantry. Part of the flour, bread, beer, etc.,

may come from the cultivation of the demesne lands; another

portion will appear as the proceed of week-work and boon-work

performed by the villains, and only one portion, perhaps a very

insignificant one, will be levied directly as produce. In this

way there is no break between the food-rent system and the

labour-system. One may still exist for purposes of a general

assessment when the other has already taken hold of the internal

arrangement of the manor.

    Most of our documents present the labour arrangement in full

operation. Each manor may be regarded as an organised group of

households in which the central body represented by the lord's

farm has succeeded in subordinating several smaller bodies to its

directing influence. Every satellite has a movement of its own,

is revolving round its own centre, and at the same time it is

attracted to turn round the chief planet, and is carried away in

its path. The constellation is a very peculiar one and most

significant for the course of medieval history. Regarded from the

economic standpoint it is neither a system of great farming nor

one of small farming, but a compound of both. The estate of the

lord is in a sense managed on a great scale, but the management

is bound up with a supply and a distribution of labour which

depend on the conditions of the small tributary households. It

would be impossible now-a-days to say for certain how much of the

customary order of week-work and boon-work was derived from a

calculation of the requirements of the manorial administration,

and how much of it is to be regarded as a percentage taken from

the profits of each individual tenant.(100*) Both elements

probably co-operated to produce the result: the operations

performed for the benefit of the lord were ordered in a certain

way partly because so many acres had to be tilled, so much hay

and corn had to be reaped on the lord's estate; and partly

because the peasant virgaters or cotters were known to work for

themselves in a certain manner and considered capable of yielding

so much as a percentage of their working power. But although we

have a compromise before us in this respect, it must be noted

that the relation between the parts and the whole is obviously

different under the system of labour services from what it was

under the farm-system. It has been pointed out that the food-rent

arrangement was imposed from above without much trouble being

taken to ascertain the exact value and character of the tributary

units subjected to it. This later element is certainly very

prominent in the customary labour-system, which on the whole

appears to be constructed from below. Is it necessary to add that

this second form of subjection was by no means the lighter one?

The very differentiation of the burden means that the

aristocratical power of the landlord has penetrated deep enough

to attempt an exact evaluation of details.

    I have had occasion so many times already to speak of the

process of commutation, that there is no call now to explain the

reasons which induced both landlords and peasants to exchange

labour for money-rents. I have only to say now that the same

remark which applied to the passage from produce 'farms' to

labour holds good as to the passage from labour to money

payments. There is no break between the arrangements. In a

general way the money assessment follows, of course, as the third

mode of settling the relation between lord and tenant, and we may

say that rentals are as much the rule from the fourteenth century

downwards as custumals are the rule in the thirteenth and earlier

centuries. But if we take up the Domesday of St. Paul's of 1222,

or the Glastonbury inquest of 1189, or even the Burton Cartulary

of the early twelfth century, in every one of these documents we

shall find a great number of rent-paying tenants,(101*) and even

a greater number of people fluctuating, as it were, between

labour and rent. In some cases peasants passed directly from the

obligation of supplying produce to the payment of corresponding

rents in money. The gradual exemption from labour is even more

apparent in the records. It is characteristic that the first move

is generally a substitution of the money arrangement with the

tacit or even the expressed provision that the assessment is not

to be considered as permanent and binding.(102*) It remains at

the pleasure of the lord to go back to the duties in kind. But

although such a retrogressive movement actually takes place in

some few cases, the general spread of money payments is hardly

arrested by these exceptional instances.(103*)

    One more subject remains to be discussed. Is there in the

surveys any marked difference between different classes of the

peasantry in point of rural duties?

    An examination of the surveys will show at once that the free

and the servile holdings differ very materially as to services,

quite apart from their contrast, in point of legal protection and

of casual exactions such as marriage fines, heriots, and the

like. The difference may be either in the kind of duties or in

their quantity. Both may be traced in the records. If we take

first the diversities in point of quality we shall notice that on

many occasions the free tenants are subjected to an imposition on

the same occasion as the unfree, but their mode of acquitting

themselves of it is slightly different -- they have, for

instance, to bring eggs when the villains bring hens. The object

cannot be to make the burden lighter; it amounts to much the

same, and so the aim must have been to keep up the distinctions

between the two classes. It is very common to require the free

tenants to act as overseers of work to be performed by the rest

of the peasantry. They have to go about or ride about with rods

and to keep the villains in order. Such an obligation is

especially frequent on the boon-days (precariae), when almost all

the population of the village is driven to work on the field of

the lord. Sometimes free householders, who have dependent people

resident under them, are liberated from certain payments; and it

may be conjectured that the reason is to be found in the fact

that they have to superintend work performed by their labourers

or inferior tenants.(104*) All such points are of small

importance, however, when compared with the general opposition of

which I have been speaking several times. The free and the

servile holdings are chiefly distinguished by the fact that the

first pay rent and the last perform labour.

    Whenever we come to examine closely the reason underlying the

cases when the classification into servile and free is adopted,

we find that it generally resolves itself into a contrast between

those who have to serve, in the original sense of the term, and

those who are exempted from actual labour-service. Being

dependent nevertheless, these last have to pay rent. I need not

repeat that I am speaking of main distinctions and not of the

various details bound up with them. In order to understand

thoroughly the nature of such diversities, let us take up a very

elaborate description of duties to be performed by the peasants

in the manor of Wye, Kent, belonging to the Abbey of

Battle.(105*) Of the sixty-one yokes it contains thirty are

servile, twenty-nine are free, and two occupy an inter mediate

position. The duties of the two chief classes of tenants differ

in many respects. The servile people have to pay rent and so have

the free, but while the first contribute to make up a general

payment of six pounds, each yoke being assessed at seven

shillings and five-pence, the free people have to pay as much as

twenty-three shillings and seven-pence per yoke. Both sets have

to perform ploughings, reapings, and carriage duties, but the

burden of the servile portion is so much greater in regard to the

carriage-work, that the corresponding yokes sometimes get their

very name from it, they are juga averagiantia, while the free

households are merely bound to help a few times during the

summer. Every servile holding has a certain number of acres of

wood assigned to it, or else corresponding rights in the common

wood, while the free tenants have to settle separately with the

lord of the manor. And lastly, the relief for every unfree yoke

is fixed at forty pence, and for every free one is equal to the

annual rent. This comparison of duties shows that the peasants

called free were by no means subjected to very light burdens: in

fact it looks almost as if they were more heavily taxed than the

rest. Still they were exempted from the most unpopular and

inconvenient labour services.

    Altogether, the study of rural work and rents leads to the

same conclusion as the analysis of the legal characteristics of

villainage. The period from the Conquest onwards may be divided

into two stages. In later times, that is from the close of the

thirteenth century downwards, the division between the two great

classes of tenants and tenements, a contrast strictly legal, is

regulated by the material test of the certainty or uncertainty of

the service due, and the formal test of the mode of conveyance.

In earlier times the classification depends primarily on the

economic relation between the manorial centre and the tributary

household, labour is deemed servile, rent held to be free. It is

only by keeping these two periods clearly distinct, that one is

enabled to combine the seemingly conflicting facts in our

surveys. If we look at the most ancient of these documents, we

shall have to admit that a rent-paying holding is free,

nevertheless it would be wrong to infer that when commutation

became more or less general, classification was settled in the

same way. A servile tenement no longer became free because rent

was taken instead of labour; it was still held 'at the will of

the lord,' and conveyed by surrender and admittance. When all

holdings were fast exchanging labour for rent, the old notions

had been surrendered and a new basis for classification found in

those legal incidents just mentioned. The development of copyhold

belongs to the later period, copyhold being mostly a rent-paying

servile tenure. Again, if we turn to the earlier epoch we shall

have to remember that the contrast between labour and rent is not

to be taken merely as a result of commutation. Local distinctions

are fitted on to it in a way which cannot be explained by the

mere assumption that every settlement of a rent appeared in the

place of an original labour obligation. The contrast is

primordial, as one may say, and based on the fact that the labour

of a subject appears directly subservient to the wants and

arrangements of the superior household, while the payment of rent

severs. the connexion for a time and leaves each body to move. In

its own direction till the day when the tributary has to pay

again.

    There can be no doubt also that the more ancient surveys

disclose a difference in point of quantity between free and

servile holdings, and this again is a strong argument for the

belief that free socage must not be considered merely as an

emancipated servile tenancy. Where there has been commutation we

must suppose that the labour services cannot have been more

valuable than the money rent into which they were changed. The

free rent into which labour becomes converted is nothing but the

price paid for the services surrendered by the lord. It must have

stood higher, if anything, than the real value of the labour

exchanged, because the exchange entailed a diminution of power

besides the giving up of an economic commodity. No matter that

ultimately the quit-rents turned out to the disadvantage of the

lord, inasmuch as the buying strength of money grew less and

less. This was the result of a very long process, and could not

be foreseen at the time when the commutation equivalents were

settled. And so we may safely lay down the general rule, that

when there is a conspicuous difference between the burdens of

assessment of free and unfree tenants, such a difference excludes

the idea that one class is only an emancipated portion of the

other, and supposes that it was from the first a socially

privileged one. The Peterborough Black Book, which, along with

the Burton Cartulary, presents the most curious instance of an

early survey, describes the services of socmen on the manors of

the abbey as those of a clearly. privileged tenantry.(106*) The

interesting point is, that these socmen are even subjected to

week-work and not distinguishable from villains so far as

concerns the quality of their services. Nevertheless the contrast

with the villains appears throughout the Cartulary and is

substantiated by a marked difference in point of assessment: a

socman has to work one or two days in the week when the villain

is made to work three or four.

    Three main points seem established by the survey of rural

work and rents.

    1. Notwithstanding many vexatious details, the impositions to

which the peasantry had to submit left a considerable margin for

their material progress. This system of customary rules was

effectively provided against general oppression.

    2. The development from food-farms to labour organisation,

and lastly to money-rents, was a result not of one-sided pressure

on the part of the landlords, but of a series of agreements

between lord and tenants.

    3. The settlement of the burdens to which peasants were

subjected depended to a great extent on distinctions as to the

social standing of tenants which had nothing to do with economic

facts.



NOTES:



1. Domesday of St. Paul's, 93: 'Potest wainnagium fieri cum 12

bobus et quatuor stottis cum consuetudinibus ville.' 75: 'Item

(juratores) dicunt quod potest fieri wainnagium totius dominici

cum 2 carucis bonis habentibus 20 capita in jugo et 2

herciatoribus cum consuetudinibus operariorum.'



2. Add. MSS. 61 59, f 44, a: '(Leyesdon)... debet quelibet caruca

coniuncta arrare unam acram et habebunt 3 denarios pro acra et

quadrantem.'



3. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189 (Roxburghe Ser.), 64: '(Virgatarius)

a festo Sti Michaelis qualibet ebdomada arat unam acram donec

tota terra domini sit culta.'



4. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS. Claudius, c. xi. f 185: 'Unusquisque

arabit per tres dies, si habeat sex boves; per duos, si habeat

quatuor boves; per unum, si habeat duos boves; per dimidium, si

habeat unum bovem.'



5. Add. MSS. 6159, f. 53, a: 'Item debent predicte 22 virgate

terre arrare ad frumentum, ad auenam et ad warectum 113 acras et

valent 56 solidos 6 denarios.'



6. Gloucester Cart. iii. 92: 'Et quicquid araverit debet herciare

tempore seminis. Et faciet unam hersuram que vocatur landegginge

et valet 1 den.' iii. 194: 'Et debet herciare quotidle si necesse

fuerit quousque semen domini seminetur, et allocabitur ei pro

operacione manuali, et valet ultra obolum. Et quia non est

numerus certus de diebus herciandis, aestimant juratores 40

dies.'



7. Ramsey Cart. I. 345: 'Qualibet autem septimana, a festo Sti

Michaelis usque ad tempus sarclationis tribus diebus operatur,

quodcunque opus sibi fuerit injunctum; et quarto die arabit unum

sellionem, sive jungatur cum alio, sive non.'



8. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 64: 'A die circumcisionis

similiter, excepta ebdomada Pasche, si possit per gelu, et si

gelu durat per 12 dies, quietus debet esse. Si amplius durat,

restituet araturam.'



9. Add. MSS. 6159, f. 49, b: 'Idem tenentes de predictis 22 et

dimidia (terris) debent arrare ad seysonam frumenti 45 acras de

gable et de qualibet terra 2 acras.' 35, b: 'Gauilherth:

Willelmus de Bergate debet arrare dimidiam acram; Nicholaus de

Jonebrigge et socii ejus unam virgam; heredes Johannis 8 pedes;

Ricardus Cutte 8 pedes... Summa acrarum 25 acre 1 pes. Hec debent

arrare et seminare.'



10. Rot. Hundred. ii. 768, b: 'Item si habeat carucam integram

vel cum sociis conjunctam, illa caruca arabit domino 2 acras

terre ad yvernagium et herciabit quantum illa caruca araverit in

die, et istud servicium appellatur Greserthe, pro quo servicio

ipse W. et omnes alii consuetudinarii habebunt pasturas dominicas

ad diem (sic. corr. a die) ad Vincula Sti Petri usque ad festum

beate Marie in Marcio et prata dominica postquam fenum fuerit

cariatum.'



11. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS. I, f 44, b: 'Tenens dimidiam

hidam habet 4 animalia in pascius quieta, et si plus

habuerit-arabit et herciabit pro unoquoque dimidiam acram.'



12. Add. MSS. 6159, f 26, b: 'De qualibet caruca arant unam acram

de averherde., et si per negligenciam alicujus remanserit acra

non arata, tunc mittet dominus semen quod sufficiat ad unam acram

ad domum illius et oportebit illum reddere bladum ad mensuram

propinque acre et habebit tum herbagium de acra assignata.' Cart.

of Beaulieu, Cotton MSS. Nero, A. xii, f 102, b: 'Et si habeat

bovem vel vaccam iunctam, arabit pro quolibet virgo dimidiam

acram ad festum Sti Martini sine cibo.' Glastonbury Inqu. of

1189, f. 116: 'De qualibet carruca debent arare ad seminandum 7

acras, et ad warectum 7 acras, ut boves possint ire cum bobus

domini in pastura.'



13. Exch. Q. R. Min. Acc. Bk. 514; T. G. 41, 173: '(Extenta

manerii de Burgo) medwelond... debent arare tantam terram quantum

habent de prato.'



14. Exch. Q. R. Min. Acc. Bk. 513, 97: 'Beinerth: 12 custumarii

arabunt 6 acras terre ad semen yemale. Grasherthe: 12 arabunt cum

quanto iungunt per unum diem ad semen yemale.' Ely Inqu., Cotton

MSS. Claudius, C. xi. f. 30, a: 'Arabit de beneerthe si habeat

carucam integram 3 rodas, et si iungat cum aliis ipse et ille cum

quo iungit assidue arabunt 3 rodas.' Domesday of St. Paul's, 26;

'Et ad precariam carucarum arabit unam rodam scil. quartam partem

acre sine cibo.' Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 98: 'R. de Wttone

tenet dimidiam hidam pro una marca et debet habere ad preces per

annum 12 homines et bis arare ad preces.'



15. Gloucester Cart. iii. 115: 'Johannes Barefoth tenet dimidiam

virgatam terre continentem 24 acras... et debet arare qualibet

secunda septimana a festo Sti Michaelis usque ad festum Beati

Petri ad Vincula uno die... Et praeterea debet quater arare in

terra domini, et vocantur ille arurae Unlawenhere.' Black Book

of St Augustine's, Cotton MSS. Faustina, A. i. f 44: '... arare

18 acras ad frumentum de godlesebene.'



16. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS. Claudius, C. xi, f 45, a: 'Preterea

idem arabit de Lentenere dimidiam acram.'



17. Ibid., 30, b: 'Item iste cum quanto iungit arabit de

filstnerthe eodem tempore (ante Natale) per unum diem... Item

arabit in quadragesima tres acras et 3 rodas et araturam de

filsingerhe (sic). Item arabit in estate 3 acras et de beneerthe

3 rodas ut in hyeme, set nihil arabit de filsingere.'



18. Ibid., 35, a: 'Item per idem tempus arabit (ante Natale)

dimidiam acram pro fastningsede sine cibo et opere si habeat

carucam integram. Et si iungat Cum aliis, tunc iste et socenarii

sui cum quibus iunget arabunt tantum et non amplius.'



19. Custumal of Bleadon, 189.



20. Gloucester Cart. ii. 134: 'Et facit unam aruram que vocatur

penihere et valet tres denarii, quia recipiet de bursa domini

quartum denarium.' Cf ii. 162: 'Et praeterea faciet unam aruram

que vocatur yove (yoke?), scil. arabit dimidiam acram, et

recipiet de bursa domini unum denarium obolum, et valet ultra

Unum denarium obolum.'



21. Gloucester Cart. iii. 80: '(Dimidius virgatarius) debet unam

aruram que vocatur radaker, scil. arare unam acram ad semen

yemale, et triturare semen ad eamdem acram, scil. duos bussellos

frumenti.' On iii. 79 we have another reading for the same thing:

'Et arabit unam acram quae vocatur Eadacre et [debet] triturare

semen ad eamdem acram, et valet arura cum trituracione seminis 4

denarios.' What is the right term? -- Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS.

Claudius, C. xi. f 133, a: 'Et arabit qualibet die a festo Sti

Michaelis usque ad gulam Augusti dimidiam rodam, que faciunt per

totum quinque acras... Et praeterea arabit Unam rodam de

Rytuesse.'



22. Add. MSS. 6159, f 53, b: 'Item tota villata de Bocayng debet

falcare 12 acras prati et dimidiam, et valet 4 solidos.'



23. Domesday of St. Paul's, 47: 'Et preter hec unaquaque domus

hide debet metere 3 dimidias acras avene et colligere unum

sellionem fabarum.'



24. Gloucester Cart. iii. 84, 85: 'Ricardus Bissop tenet unum

messuagium et 10 acras terre... (operabitur) in messe domini cum

24 hominibus.'



25. Eynsham Cart. 88, b: 'Idem metet dimidiam acram bladi domini

sine cibo domini et valet opus 4 denarios et vocatur la bene.

Idem faciet cum uno homine beripam sine cibo domini et vocatur

mederipe, et valet opus 4 den.... Idem veniet ad magnam bederipam

domini ad cibum domini cum omnibus famulis suis et ipse

supervidebit operari in propria persona sua. Quod si famulos non

habuerit, tunc operabitur in propria (persona).'



26. Ramsey Cart. i. 488: 'Quaelibet domus habens ostium apertum

versus vicum tam de malmannis quam de cotmannis et operariis

inveniet unum hominem ad louebone.'



27. Ely lnqu., Cotton MSS. Claudius, C. xi. f 38, b: 'Ad

precariam ceruisie inveniet omnem familiam preter uxorem domus et

filiam maritabilem... Quod si voluerint metere propria blada

metent in suis croftis et non alibi.'



28. Domesday of St. Paul's, 75, 76: 'Et falcare dimidiam acram

sumptibus suis et postmodum falcare cum tota villata pratum

domini ita quod totum sit falcatum, et qualibet falx habebit Unum

panem... et ad siccas precarias in autumpno inveniet unum

hominem, et ad precarios ceruisie veniet cum quot hominibus

habuerit ad cibum domini.' Cf 61.



29. Cart. of Battle, Augment Off. Misc. Books, N. 57, f. 36, a:

'Quilibet virgarius... debet invenire ad quemlibet precarium

autumpnalem ad metendum 2 homines et habebunt singuli singulos

panes ponderis 18 librarum cere et duo unum ferchulum carnis

precii unius denarii, si sit dies carnis et potagium ad primum

precarium. Ad secundum uero erit panis medietas de frumento et

medietas ordei et cetera alia ut supra. Ad terciam precariam erit

panis totus de frumento et cetera ut prenotatur. Ad quartam

precariam quod vocatur hungerbedrip quilibet de tenentibus domini

preter Henricum de Chaus inveniet unum hominem ad metendum et

habebunt semel in die cibum, scil. panem et potum et unum

ferculum secundum quod serviens illius loci providere placuerit,

et caseum.'



30. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS. Claudius, C. xi. 166, b... Metet

dimidiam acram que vocatur anc alfaker.' The name may possibly

mean, that the peasant earned the gratitude of the lord by

ploughing the half-acre. This construction would be supported by

other instances of, sentimental, terminology. Cf Warwickshire

Hundr. Roll, Q. R. Misc. Books, N. 18, f 94, b: 'Lovebene.'

Cartul. of Okeburn, Al. Prior. 2/2, 17: 'Post precarias

consuetudinarias debet de gratia, ut dicitur, quocienscumque

precatus fuerit, (operare) per unum hominem.' Roch. Custum., ed.

Thorp, 10, b: 'Et pro prato de Dodecote falcando, pro amore, non

pro debito, habebunt unum multonem et unum caseum de 4 d.'



31. Gloucester Cart. i. 110: 'Idem Thomas cum virga sua debet

interesse operationibus quo ad metebederipas.'



32. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 91: 'Editha tenet unam

mesuagium et unam croftam pro 6 d. et fert aquam falcatoribus.'



33. Add. MSS. 6159, f 53, a: 'Item sunt in dicto manerio 22

virgate et debent invenire in proxima septimana post festum Sti

Michaeli, per unum diem a mane usque ad horam meridianam 44

carecta, ad fima domini cariandum.' Domesday of St. Paul's, 62:

'Quod si boves non habuerit vel alia animalia ad arandum faciet

aliud opus quod jussum fuerit et educet 10 plaustra de fimo post

Pascha et habebit dignerium de domino et infra hundredum portabit

unum plaustrum vel duas carectatas.'



34. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS. Claudius C. xi. 38, b: 'Averagium

secundum turnum vicinorum suorum curtum et longum.'



35. Domesday of St. Paul's, 55: 'Rogerus dives... cum villata ad

firmam portandam Londinium facit quantum requiritur de 20 acris.'

Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, f 97: 'Quater faciet summagium apud

Bristolliam.' Domesday of St. Paul's, 47: 'Preterea debet hida

portare 4 summagia et dimidiam per totum ab horreo domini usque

ad navem ter in anno divisim.'



36. Add. MSS. 6159, f 28, a: 'Item de predictis cotariis

unusquisque habet unum horsacram et de ista acra debet

unusquisque invenire unum equum ad ducendum cum aliis frumentum

de firma ad Cantuariam, et pisas, et sal, et presencia portare.'



37. Black Book of St. Augustine's, Cotton MSS. Faustina, A. I, f

186: 'Nihil debent averare ad tunc, nisi res que sunt ad opus

conventus et que poni debent super ignem.'



38. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, f 65: 'W. Sp. tenet unum fordil

pro 15 den. et operatur quolibet die lune per totum annum et

(debet) ladiare cum alio ferdilario sicut dimidii virgatarii.'

Domesday of St. Paul's, 19: 'Omnes isti (cotarii) debent operari

semel... Debent eciam portare et chariare.'



39. Rot. Hundr. ii. 605, b: 'Et faciet averagium super dorsum

suum ad voluntatem domini.'



40. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, f 71: 'Portat et fugat aucas, et

gallinas, et porcos Glastonie.' Domesday of St. Paul's, 27:

'(Cotarii) isti debent singnlis diebus Lune unam operacionem et

portare et fugare porcos Londoniam.'



41. Gloucester Cart. iii. 218: 'Item, quod nullus prepositus

aliquid ab aliquo recipiat, ut ipsum ad firmam esse permittat vel

ad levem ponat operationem mutando cariagia summagia debita in

operibus manualibus.'



42. See, for instance, Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, pp. 22, 29;

Gloucester Cart. iii. 17; Domesday of St. Paul's. 54.



43. Cart. of Bury St. Edmunds, Harl. MSS. 3977, f 82: '(Debet)

metere pro porcis quilibet dimidiam acram siliginis.'



44. Black Book of St. Augustine's, Cotton MSS. Faustina, A. I, f.

44: 'Aratum hominum de N.' Cartul. of Battle, Augm. Off. Miscell.

Books, N. 18, f 2, a: 'Forinseca servicia... arant... seminant.'



45. Domesday of St. Paul's, 38; '... et furem captum in curia

custodiet et iudicatum suspendet et sparget fimum ad cibum

domini. ' Ibid. 62: 'G. G. tenet 5 acras... (debet) qualibet

septimana 2 opera et sequitur precarias in autumpno... R. H. 5

acras per idem servicium et preterea defendit eas versus regem.'



46. Gloucester Cart. iii. 54: 'Debet a festo Sti Michaelis usque

ad festum Sti Petri ad Vincula qualibet septimana per 4 dies

operari opus manuale cum uno homine, et valet quolibet dieta

obolum.' Glastonbury Inqu. 28: 'Si est ad opus a festo Sti Petri

ad Vincula usque ad festum Sti Michaelis nisi festum intercurrat

qualibet die faciet unam dainam.'



47. Add. MSS. 6159, f 25, a; 53, b.



48. Domesday of St. Paul's, 33: 'Singule virgate debent per

annum... de gavelsed 3 mensuras quarum 7 faciunt mensuram de

Colcester.' Black Book of St. Augustine's, Cotton MSS., Faustina,

A. i, 31, d: 'Sunt praeterea 5 sullungi et 50 acre in eadem

hamietto qui debent bladum de gabulo.'



49. Domesday of St. Paul's, 6: 'Et unum quarterium de auena ad

foddercorn.'



50. Add. MSS. 6159, 26, b: 'Et de gadercorn reddunt de quolibet

swlinge 4 coppas de puro ordeo et de presenti gallum et gallinam

de qualibet domo... quas serviens curie. debet circumeundo

querere.'



51. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi. 185. b; Bury St.

Edmunds Cart., Harl. MSS. 3977, f 84, b.



52. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 67 cf 145): 'Henricus Wlde

tenet 25 acras de prato pro stacha mellis. Utilius quod esset in

manu domini.' Gloucester Cart. ii. 128: 'Honilond T. T. tenet 6

acras terre pro 8 lagenis nlellis vel pretio.'



53. Ramsey Cart. i. 300: 'Faciet etiam unam mutam (leg. mittam)

et dimidiam braesii, quam recipiet in curia pro voluntate sua

bene mundatam, et per se ipsum, et illam carriabit apud

Rameseiam. Quae si refutetur, defectum ejus propriis sumptibus in

omnibus supplebit, nisi mensura sibi tradita sit minor.'



54. Add. MSS. 6159, f 26, b: 'De quolibet Swlinge duos agnos

reddunt in estate. Ita quidem quod serviens curie, si invenerit

agnum in sulungis illis qui ei placuerit, accipiat eum

cuiuscumque sit, et ille ad quem pertinebit adquietacionem. Quod

si agnus inventus non fuerit 8 den. dabit quando mala persolvat.'



55. Gloucester Cart. iii. 77: 'Walterus Fremon tenet 6 acras

terrae cum mesuagio et reddit inde per annum die Apostolorum

Petri et Pauli unum multonem pretii 12 den. vel ultra, cum 12

den. circa collum suum ligatis.'



56. Exch. Q. R. Treas. of Rec. 59/69: 'Capones... pro warentia.'



57. Gloucester Cart. iii. 71: 'Propter illam gallinam

conquererunt habere de bosco domini regis unam summam bosci, quae

vocatur dayesen.' Exch. Q. R. Min. Acc. Bk. 513, N. 97:,

Wodehennus... ad Natale.' Suffolk Rolls (Bodleian), 3: 'Dicet

curia quod R. debet facere domino sicut alii custumarii, scil.

oues et gallinas, quia fodit etsi non pascat.' Ely Inqu., Cotton

MSS., Claudius, C. xi, f 52, a: 'Redditus caponum per annum pro

aueriis termino pasche.'



58. Domesday of St. Paul's, 51: 'Et ad pascha ova ad libitum

tenencium et ad honorem domini.'



59. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 35: 'Hoc est accrementum

redditus tempore Roberti; Ordricus pro 4 retiis terre altero anno

1 soccum.' Gloucester Cart. iii. 79: 'Walterus de Hale tenet unam

acram terre et reddit inde per annum unum vomerem ad festum Sti

Michaelis pretii 8 den. pro omni servitio.'



60. Warwickshire Hundr. Roll, Exch. Q. R. Misc. Books, N. 18, f

2, a: 'Per servicium unius radicis gyngibrii... unius rose.'



61. Gloucester Cart. iii. 55: 'Omnes praedicti consuetudinarii...

debent cariare molas, scil. petras molares ad molendinum domini,

vel dabunt in communi 13 den. quadrantem.' Rot. Hundr. ii. 750,

b.., Et modo eorum servicia convertuntur in denariis.'



62. Add. MSS. 6159, f 53, a:, Barlicksilver. Item debet Willelmus

de B. per annum 6 quarteria ordei et 6 quarteria auene.' etc.



63. Roch. Custum. 4, a: 'Dabunt eciam denarlum pro falce quod

anglice dicunt sithpeni.' Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 59: 'Et

dabit 4 stacas et dimidiam frumenti ad consuetudinem et eadem die

1 denarium illi qui colligit fualia.' Ely Reg., Cotton MSS.,

Claudius. C. xi. f 82, b: 'De bosingsiluer 1 denarium ad festum

Sti Martini si habeat equum et carectam.'



64. Add. Charters, 5, 629: '(Stephanus) retraxit et abduxit

porcos suos tempore pannagii.'



65. Rot. Hundr. ii. 453, a: 'Memorandum quod omnes isti

prenominati tam liberi quam villani qui habent bestias precii 30

den. dant domino predicto per annum 1 den. pro quadam

consuetudine que vocatur Wartpenny.'



66. What may be, for instance, the explanation of the

huntenegild, which not unfrequently appears in the records. E.g.

Gloucester Cart. iii. 22: 'Johannes Carpentarius et relicta

Kammock tenent dimidiam virgatam terrae et faciunt idem quod

praescripti, exceptis huntenesilver et gallina.' Add. MSS. 6159,

f 23, a: 'Ricardus atte mere tenet de domino in villenagio 20

acras terre; reddit inde per annum de unthield ad festum

purificacionis 4 sol. 5 den. ob. et ad pascham 6 d. Et ad festum

Sti Michaelis 17 denarios.' The payment is a very important one

and hardly connected with hunting.



67. Domesday of St. Paul's, 140 (Inqu. of 1181): 'Keneswetha...

summa denariorum 10 libre et 7 sol. et obolus.' Cf xx.



68. Battle Cart., Augment. Off. Misc. Books, N. 18, f 5, a: 'Juga

que sunt in sex libris in Wy.'



69. Christ Church Reg., Harl. MSS. 1006, f 56: 'Newerentes.'



70. Domesday of St. Paul's, 83: 'Inferius notati tenentes terras

dant landgablum. Et si habent uxores 2 denarios de havedsot quia

capiunt super dominium boscum et aquam et habent exitum, et si

non habent uxorem vel uxor virum, dabit unum denarium. Galfridus

filius Ailwardi pro terra quondam Theodori cui non attinet 5

denarios landgabuli.' Ramsey Inqu., Cotton MSS., Galba E. x. f

46, b: 'S. de W. dat pro terra sua 16 denarios et 12 denarios pro

se et uxore sua.' Exch. Q. R. Min. Acc. Bk. 587, T. P. R. 8109:

'Denarii... ad existendum in warentia.'



71. Archaeologia, xlvii. 127: '(Soke of Rothley) Gildi hoc est

quietum de consuetudinibus servilibus quae quondam dare

consueverint sicuti Hornchild et hiis similibus.'



72. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 4: '... unam virgatam et

dimidiam et 5 acras pro 5 solidis de gabulo et 7 denariis de

dono.'



73. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 39: 'Omnes simul dant de dono

40 solidos secundum terras quas tenent.' Ibid. 5: 'Debet dare de

dono quantum pertinet de quinque libris.' Ramsey Cart. i. 46: 'De

denariis qui vocantur 20 solidi dat dimidius virgatarius 6

denarios. '



74. Ramsey Cart. i. 440: 'Villa dat 20 solidos, qui dantur quod

cum aliquis in misericordia domini, det ante judicium sex

denarios, et post, si expectct judicium, duodecim denarios, nisi

sit pro furto, vel aliqua maxima transgressione.



75. Gloucester Cart. iii. 78: 'Dicta terra consuevit dare de

auxilio 14 denarios et obolum qui modo allocantur consuetudinario

in solutione octo marcarum.'



76. Exch. Q. R. Treas. Rec. 20/68: 'Item debent domino ad festum

Sti Michaelis auxilium ad placitum suum et ad forinsecum

servitium.'



77. Gloucester Cart. iii. 180: 'Et dabit pro terra 6 denarios ad

auxilium. Dabit etiam auxilium pro averiis suis secundum numerum

eorundem.' iii. 50: 'Et dabit auxilium secundum numerum

animalium.' iii. 208: 'Et si impositum fuerit eidem quod in

taxatione auxilii aliquod animal concelaverit, potest cogi ad

sacramentum praestandum et se super hoc purgandum. Et si per

vicinos suos convictus fuerit super hoc, puniendus est pro

voluntate domini.'



78. Gloucester Cart. iii. 203: '... omnes isti consuetudinarii de

Colne dant in communi ad auxilium 46 solidos 8 denarios.,

Rochester Custumal, 4, a: 'De omnibus decem jugis debent scotare

ad donum domini ville et ad servicium domini Regis.'



79. Domesday of St. Paul's, 64: 'Dicunt quod manerium de Berlinge

defendit se versus regem pro duabus hidis et dimidia...

Reddunt... pro hidagio baillivo hundredi de Reilee 31 denarios et

13 denarios de Wardpeni, de quibus dominicum reddit de 20 acris 2

den. et obolem pro hidagio et 2 denarios pro Wardpeni.'



80. Exch. Esch. Ultra Trentam, 1/49: 'Pro cornagio de feodis

militum 17 sol. 8 den.'



81. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 65: 'In die Sti Martini debet

dimidiam dainam frumenti de cheriset.'



82. Domesday of St. Paul's, 66: 'Beatrix relicta Osberti Casse

tenet 15 acras et a festo Sti Michaelis usque ad Vincula qualibet

septimana debet 3 operaciones nisi festum impedierit; quod si

festum feriabile evenerit in septimana die lune et aliud die

mercurii, unum festum erit ei utile, aliud domino. Quod si festum

evenerit eadem septimana die veneris, addito alio festo in alia

septimana veniente, dividentur illi duo dies inter dominum et

operarium ut supradictum est.'



83. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 64: 'A festo Sti Petri ad

Vincula debent qualibet ebdomada metere uel aliud opus facere

usque ad festum Sti Michaelis nisi festum intercurrat, die lune,

die martis et die mercurii.' Ibid. 62: 'Ab Hoccadei usque ad

festum Sti Johannis qualibet ebdomada arabit dimidiam acram, si

possit propter duritiem.'



84. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 59: 'Willelmus filius Osanore

(tenet) unam virgatam eodem servitio, sed non potest perficere

servitium.'



85. Domesday of St. Paul's, 51: 'Et omnes alii similiter

operabuntur sive plus teneant sive minus, pro racione 5 acrarum.'

Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 104: 'W. de H. tenet unam virgatam

pro dimidia virgata... pro alia viigata facit sicut pro quarta

parte dimidie hide.'



86. Gloucester Cart. iii. 199: 'Et sciendum quod dominus potest

eligere utrum voluerit habere servitium predictum de Johanne

Spere, uel quod duplicet servitium R. de A. inferius inter

akermannos scripti.'



87. Rot. Hundr. ii. 757, a: 'Set isti tenentes memorati ut

asserunt ad alias consuetudines et servitia antiquitus esse

consueverunt.'



88. E.g. a comparison of the inquests contained in the Ramsey

Cartulary published in the Rolls Series with the earlier extents

contained in Cotton MS., Galba, E. x, and with the Hundred Rolls

of Huntingdonshire and Cambridgeshire, will support the opinion

expressed in the text.



89. Seebohm, Village Community.



90. The meaning of the expression may be gathered from the

following extracts from the Ramsey Cartulary, i. 358: 'Die autem

Jovis proxima ante Pascha et die Jovis contra festum Sti

Benedicti quodcunque opus sibi fuerit injunctum operabitur.' Cf

357: 'Et si opus fuerit, faciet hayam in campis, habentem

longitudinem duarum perticarum, et allocabitur ei pro opere unius

diei. Et die quo carriare fenum debet, ducet unam carrectatam

domi de alio feno Abbatis, uel aliud carriagium cum carrecta

faciet, si sibi fuerit injunctum.' 361: 'A gula autem Augusti

usque ad festum Sancti Michaelis qualibet septimana operabitur

per unum diem integrum, qualecunque opus sibi praecipiatur.' 365:

'Et operatur quaelibet virgata a festo Sancti Michaelis usque ad

festum Translationis Sancti Benedicti qualibet septimana tribus

diebus... quodcumque opus praeceptum fuerit; videlicet, si

flagellare oportet, flagellabit infra villam viginti quatuor

garbas de frumento et siligini, de hordeo triginta garbas, de

avena triginta garbas. Extra villam flagellabit de frumento

viginti garbas, de avena viginti quatuor garbas. Nec exibit extra

hundredum ad flagellandum nisi ex gratia. Quodcunque aliud genus

operis. ballivus voluerit; praeterquam in bosco, facere debeat,

operabitur tota die si ubi si secare debeat, operabitur usque ad

nonam; et si pascere eum dominus voluerit, operabitur usque ad

vesperam. Si debeat spinas vel virgas colligere, colliget unum

fesciculum, et portabit usque ad curiam pro opere unius diei. In

quadragesima autem nullum genus operis faciet ad cibum proprium

usque nonam nisi quod herciabit tota die.' It seems quite clear

that the lord has in some cases the choice between different

kinds of work, but the amount to be required is settled once for

all. When we find in the Glastonbury Inquisition of 1189 the

sentence, 'operabitur quodcumque ei praeceptum fuerit sicut

neth,' it means evident, that the peasant's work, whatever it is,

is settled according to the standard of the neat's holding.



91. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 41: 'Et herciat semel sine

mensura aliqua ei assignata cum hoc quod habet in carruca.'



92. Placitorum Abbreviatio, p. 212: 'Alia carta eiusdem eidem

Elie facta et heredibus suis de dicta bovata terre una cum dicto

Rogero villano suo et secta et sequela sua.' Ramsey Cart. i. 355:

'Prior de Sancto Ivone habet ingressum in una virgata terrae per

Henricum de Kylevile, in qua tres sunt mansiones, et unus pro

caeteris facit servitium debitum manerio.'



93. Ramsey Inqu., Cotton MSS., Galba, E. x. f 49: 'Quicumque

acceperit.pro mercede sua 18 denarios debet operari cum domino

suo tribus diebus vel dare unum denarium.' Cf Rot. Hundr. ii.

781, b: 'Servi: Dabit ad exenllium contra Natale 6 panes... et

venit ad prandium domini pro predicto exennio sexta manu si

voluerit.'



94. Cotton MSS., Galba, E. x. f 19. See Appendix xiv.



95. Domesday of St. Paul's, Hale's Introduction, pp. xxxviii,

xxxix.



96. Gesta Abbatum (Rolls Ser.), 74. Cf Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189,

p. 145.



97. See, for instance, the beginning of the description of

Dorsetshire.



98. Exch. Q. R. Min. Acc. Bk. 587, T. P. R. 8109: 'Sciendum quod

tenentes Abbatis de Osoluestone in Donington et Byker cum

pertinentiis fuerunt semel in anno pro voluntate Abbatis ad

curiam suam tenendum ibidem et invenient eidem Abbati et toti

familie sue quam secum duxerit omnia necessaria sufficientia in

adventu suo per unum diem integrum et noctem sequentem, vel

noctem precedentem et diem sequentem in esculentis et poculentis

tam vino quam cervisia, feno et prebenda pro equis eorum et equis

carucariorum salem querencium, una cum candela et ceteris costis

omnimodis inter necessaria computandis. Et si abbas non venerit

facient finem cum celerario si voluerit vel cum alii quem Abbas

nomine Suo miserit ad minus 20 solidis. Et si is qui nomine

Abbatis missus ibidem fuit et finem recusault, procurabitur ut

premittitur. Et si aliquid de necessariis in administrando

defuerit, omnes tenentes qui comestum contribuere debent die

crastino in plena curia super necessariorum defectu per

senescallum calumpniabuntur et graviter amerciabuntur. Et talis

fuit consuetudo ab antiquo et habetur quolibet anno pro certo

redditu, et de quo Petrus de Thedingworth quondam Abbas de

Osoluestone et predecessores sui a tempore quo non extat memoria

sub forma predicta fuerunt seisiti.'



99. See about this point, Hale's Introduction. It is generally

very good on the subject of the farm.



100. Domesday of St. Paul's, 21: 'Potest wainagium fieri cum

tribus caruciis octo capitum cum consuetudinibus villate.'



101. The Templar's Book of 1185 at the Record Office (Q. R. Misc.

Books, N. 16) is already a rental in substance.



102. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 117: 'Nigellus capellanus

tenet unam vir. gatam, sed illa virgata non solet ad operacionem

redigi. Cum dominus voluerit operabitur sicut alie.' Rot. Hundr.

ii. 815, a: '... dabit 8 solidos per annum pro operibus suis qui

solidi poterunt mutari in aliud servicium ad valorem pro

voluntate domini.'



103. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 29: 'G. de P. (tenet) unum

mesuagium et tres acras et dimidiam pro 2 solidis et facit sicut

homines de Mera quando sunt ad gabulum. Hoc tenementum non solet

esse ad opus.' 116: 'Leviva vidua tenet dimidiam hidam; Unam

virgatam tenet eodem servitio; aliam tenet pro gabulo et non

potest ad operationem poni sicut alia.'



104. Bury St. Edmund's Reg., Harl. MSS. 3977, f 82, d: 'Omnes

liberi et non liberi dabunt festivales exceptis illis liberis qui

habent residentes sub illos.' Glastonbury Cart, Wood MSS. i. f

176, b: 'Abbas et conventus remiserunt R. de W.... omnia

carriagia... nec non et illas custodias quae predictus R. et

antecessores sui personaliter facere consueverunt cum virga sua

super bederipas ipsorum... et super arruras precarias que ei

fieri debent in manerio de Pultone.'



105. Custumals of Battle Abbey (Camd. Soc.), p. 122



106. Black Book of Peterborough (Camden Ser.), 164: 'In Scotere

et Scaletoys sunt undecim carrucatae ad geldum Regis et 24

plenarii villani... Plenarii villani operantur duobus diebus in

ebdomada... Et ibi sunt 29 sochemanni et operantur uno die in

ebdomada pertotum annum et in Augusto duobus diebus. Et isti

villani et omnes sochemanni habent 21 carrucas et omnes arant una

vice ad hyvernage et una ad tremeis.'



Chapter 4



The Lord, His Servants and Free Tenants



    Descriptions of English rural arrangements in the age we are

studying always suppose the country to be divided into manors,

and each of these manors to consist of a central portion called

the demesne, and of a cluster of holdings in different tributary

relations to this central portion. Whether we take the Domesday

Survey, or the Hundred Rolls, or the Custumal of some monastic

institution, or the extent of lands belonging to some deceased

lay lord, we shall again and again meet the same typical

arrangement. I do not say that there are no instances swerving

from this beaten track, and that other arrangements never appear

in our records. Still the general system is found to be such as I

have just mentioned, and a very peculiar system it is, equally

different from the ancient latifundia or modern plantations

cultivated by gangs of labourers working on a large scale and for

distant markets, from peasant ownership scattered into small and

self-dependent households, and even from the conjunction between

great property and farms taken on lease and managed as separate

units of cultivation.

    The characteristic feature of the medieval system is the

close connexion between the central and dominant part and the

dependent bodies arranged around it. We have had occasion to

speak in some detail of these tributary bodies -- it is time to

see how the lord's demesne which acted as their centre was

constituted.

    Bracton mentions as the distinguishing trait of the demesne,

that it is set aside for the lord's own use, and ministers to the

wants of his household.(1*) Therefore it is sometimes called in

English 'Board Lands.' The definition is not complete, however;

because all land occupied by the owner himself must be included

under the name of demesne, although its produce may be destined

not for his personal use, but for the market. 'Board lands' are

only one species of domanial land, so also are the 'Husfelds'

mentioned in a charter quoted by Madox.(2*) This last term only

points to its relation to the house, that is the manorial house.

And both denominations are noteworthy for their very

incompleteness, which testifies indirectly to the restricted area

and to the modest aims of domanial cultivation. Usually it lies

in immediate connexion with the manorial house, and produces

almost exclusively for home consumption.

    This is especially true as to the arable, which generally

forms the most important part of the whole demesne land. There is

no exit for a corn trade, and therefore everybody raises corn for

his own use, and possibly for a very restricted local market.

Even great monastic houses hold only 300 or 400 acres in the home

farm; very rarely the number rises to 600, and a thousand acres

of arable in one manor is a thing almost unheard of.(3*)

Husbandry on a large scale appears only now and then in places

where sheep-farming prevails, in Wiltshire for instance.

Exceptional value is set on the demesne when fisheries are

connected with it or salt found on it.(4*)

    The following description of Bockyng in Essex,(5*) a manor

belonging to the Chapter of Christ Church, Canterbury, may serve

as an example of the distribution and relative value of demesne

soil. The cartulary from which it is drawn was compiled in 1309.

    The manorial house and close cover five acres. The grass

within its precincts which may serve as food for cattle is valued

at 8d. a year. Corn is also sold there to the value of 12d. a

year, sometimes more and sometimes less, according to the

quantity sown. The orchard provides fruit and vegetables worth

13s. 4d. a year; the duty levied from the swine gives 6d.

    The pigeon-house is worth 4d.

    Two mills, 7l. Is. 8d

    A fishery, 12d.

    A wood called Brekyng Park, containing 480 acres, and the

brushwood there is worth 40s.

    Grass in the wood 12d., because it grows only in a few

places.

    Pannage duty from the swine, 10s.

    Another wood called Le Flox contains 10 acres, and the

brushwood is worth 6d.

    Pannage from the swine, 6d.

    Grass, 6d.

    Arable, in all fields, 510 acres, the acre being assessed at

6d. all round.

    Each plough may easily till one acre a day, if four horses

and two oxen are put to it.

    Two meadows, one containing eight acres, of which every

single acre yields 4s. a year; the other meadow contains seven

acres of similar value.

    Pasture in severalty -- 30 acres, at 12d. an acre.

    Of these, 16 acres are set apart for oxen and horses, and 14

for cows.

    Some small particles of pasture leased out to the tenants,

4s.

    The prior and the convent are lords of the common pasture in

Bockyng, and may send 100 sheep to these commons, and to the

fields when not under crop. Value 20s.

    As important an item in the cultivation of the home farm as

the soil itself is afforded by the plough-teams. The treatises on

husbandry give very minute observations on their composition and

management. And almost always we find the manorial teams

supplemented by the consuetudines villae, that is by the

customary work performed on different days by the peasantry.(6*)

As to this point the close connexion between demesne and

tributary land is especially clear; but after all that has been

said in the preceding chapter it is hardly necessary to add that

it was not only the ploughing-work that was carried on by the

lord with the help of his subjects.

    As a matter of fact, villages without a manorial demesne or

without some dependence from it are found only exceptionally and

in those parts of England where the free population had best kept

its hold on the land, and where the power of the lord was more a

political than an economical one (Norfolk and Suffolk, Lincoln,

Northumberland, Westmoreland, etc.(7*)). And there are hardly any

cases at all of the contrary, that is of demesne land spreading

over the whole of a manor. Tillingham, a manor of St. Paul's,

London, comes very near it:(8*) it contains 300 acres as home

farm, and only 30 acres of villain land. But as a set-off, a

considerable part of the demesne is distributed to small

leaseholders.

    It must be noted that, as a general rule, the demesne arable

of the manor did not lie in one patch apart from the rest, but

consisted of strips intermixed with those of the community.(9*)

This fact would show by itself that the original system,

according to which property and husbandry were arranged in

manorial groups, was based on a close connexion between the

domanial and the tributary land. We might even go further and

point out that the mere facilities of intercourse and joint work

are not sufficient to account for this intermixture of the strips

of the lord and of the homage. The demesne land appears in fact

as a share in the association of the village, a large share but

still one commensurate with the other holdings. In two respects

this subjection to a higher unit must necessarily follow from the

intermixture of strips: inasmuch as the demesne consists of plots

scattered in the furlongs of the township, it does not

appropriate the best soil or the best situation, but has to

gather its component parts in all the varied combinations in

which the common holdings have to take theirs. And besides this,

the demesne strips were evidently meant to follow the same course

of husbandry as the land immediately adjoining them, and to lapse

into undivided use with such land when the 'defence' season was

over. Separate or private patches exempted from the general

arrangement are to be found on many occasions, but the usual

treatment of demesne land in the thirteenth century is certainly

more in conformity with the notion that the lord's land is only

one of the shares in the higher group of the village community.

    The management of the estate, the collection of revenue, the

supervision of work, the police duties incumbent on the manor,

etc., required a considerable number of foremen and workmen of

different kinds.(10*) Great lords usually confided the general

supervision of their estates to a seneschal, steward or head

manager, who had to represent the lord for all purposes, to

preside at the manorial courts, to audit accounts, to conduct

sworn inquests and extents, and to decide as to the general

husbandry arrangements. In every single manor we find two persons

of authority. The bailiff or beadle was an outsider appointed by

the lord, and had to look to the interests of his employer, to

collect rents and enforce duties, to manage the home farm, to

take care of the domanial cattle, of the buildings, agricultural

implements, etc. These functions were often conferred by

agreement in consideration of a fixed rent, and in this case the

steward or beadle took the name of firmarius.(11*) By his side

appears the reeve, or praepositus, nominated from among the

peasants of a particular township, and mostly chosen by

them.(12*) Manorial instructions add sometimes that no villain

has a right to hold aloof from such an appointment, if it is

conferred on him.(13*) The reeve acts as the representative of

the village community, as well in regard to the lord as on public

occasions. He must, of course, render help to the steward in all

the various duties of the latter. The reeve has more especially

to superintend the performance of labour imposed on the

peasantry. Manorial ploughings, reapings, and the other like

operations are conducted by him, sometimes with the help of the

free tenants in the place. Of the public duties of the reeve we

have had occasion to speak. Four men, acting as representatives

of the village, accompany him.

    Next after the reeve comes, on large estates, the messor, who

takes charge of the harvest, and sometimes acts as collector of

fines imposed for the benefit of the lord.(14*) The akermanni or

carucarii are the leaders of the unwieldy ploughs of the

time,(15*) and they are helped by a set of drivers and boys who

have to attend to the oxen or horses.(16*) Shepherds for every

kind of cattle are also mentioned,(17*) as well as keepers and

warders of the woods and fences.(18*) In the Suffolk manors of

Bury St. Edmund's we find the curious term kurard to designate a

person superintending the hay harvest.(19*)

    By the side of a numerous staff busy with the economic

management of the estate, several petty officers are found to be

concerned with the political machinery of the manor. The duty to

collect the suitors of the hundred and of the county court is

sometimes fulfilled by a special 'turn-bedellus.'(20*) A

'vagiator' (vadiator?) serves writs and distrains goods for

rents.(21*) The carrying of letters and orders is very often

treated as a service imposed on particular tenements. It must be

noted that sometimes all these duties are intimately connected

with those of the husbandry system and imposed on all the

officers of the demesne who own horses.(22*)

    A third category is formed by the house-servants, who divide

among themselves the divers duties of keeping accounts, waiting

on the lord personally, taking charge of the wardrobe, of the

kitchen, etc. The military system and the lack of safety called

forth a numerous retinue of armed followers and guards.

All-in-all a mighty staff of ministeriales, as they were called

in Germany, came into being. In England they are termed sergeants

and servants, servientes. In Glastonbury Abbey there were

sixty-six servants besides the workmen and foremen employed on

the farm.(23*) Such a number was rendered necessary by the grand

hospitality of the monastery, which received and entertained

daily throngs of pilgrims. In Bury St. Edmund's the whole staff

was divided into five departments, and in each department the

employments were arranged according to a strict order of

precedence.(24*)

    The material for the formation of this vast and important

class was supplied by the subject population of the estates. The

Gloucester manorial instruction enjoins the stewards to collect

on certain days the entire grown-up population and to select the

necessary servants for the different callings. It is also enacted

that the men should not be left without definite work, that in

case of necessity they should be moved from one post to the

other,(25*) etc. The requirements of the manorial administration

and of the lord's household opened an important outlet for the

village people. Part of the growing population thus found

employment outside the narrow channel of rural arrangements. The

elder or younger brothers, as it might be, took service at the

lord's court. The husbandry treatises of the thirteenth century

go further and mention hired labourers as an element commonly

found on the estate. We find, for instance, an elaborate

reckoning of the work performed by gangs of such labourers hired

for the harvest.(26*) In documents styled 'Minister's Accounts'

we may also find proof, that from the thirteenth century

downwards the requirements of the lord's estate are sometimes met

by hiring outsiders to perform some necessary kind of work. These

phenomena have to be considered as exceptional, however, and in

fact as a new departure.

    The officers and servants were remunerated in various ways.

Sometimes they were allowed to share in the profits connected

with their charges. The swine-herd of Glastonbury Abbey, for

instance, received one sucking-pig a year, the interior parts of

the best pig, and the tails of all the others which were

slaughtered in the abbey.(27*) The chief scullion (scutellarius)

had a right to all remnants of viands, -- but not of game, -- to

the feathers and the bowels of geese.(28*) Again, all the

household and workmen constantly employed had certain quantities

of food, drink, and clothing assigned to them.(29*) Of one of the

Glastonbury clerks we hear that he received one portion

(liberacio) as a monk and a second as a servant, and that by

reason of this last he was bound to provide the monastery with a

goldsmith.(30*)

    Those of the foremen and labourers of estates who did not

belong to the immediate following of the lord and did not live in

his central court received a gratification of another kind. They

were liberated from the labour and payments which they would have

otherwise rendered from their tenements.(31*) The performance of

the specific duties of administration took the place of the

ordinary rural work or rent, and in this way the service of the

lord was feudalised on the same principle as the king's service

-- it was indissolubly connected with land-holding.

    In manorial extents we come constantly across such exempted

tenements conceded without any rural obligations or with the

reservation of a very small rent. It is important to notice, that

such exemptions, though temporary and casual at first, were

ultimately consolidated by custom and even confirmed by charters.

A whole species of free tenements, and a numerous one, goes back

to such privileges and exemptions granted to servants.(32*) And

so this class of people, in the formation of which unfree

elements are so clearly apparent, became one of the sources in

the development of free society. Such importance and success are

to be explained, of course, by the influence of this class in the

administration and economic management of the estates belonging

to the secular and ecclesiastical aristocracy. It is very

difficult at the present time to realise the responsibility and

strength of this element. We live in a time of free contract,

credit, highly mobilised currency, easy means of communication,

and powerful political organisation. There is no necessity for

creating a standing class of society for the purpose of mediating

between lord and subject, between the military order and the

industrial order. Every feature of the medieval system which

tended to disconnect adjoining localities, to cut up the country

into a series of isolated units, contributed at the same time to

raise a class which acted as a kind of nervous system, connecting

the different parts with a common centre and establishing

rational intercourse and hierarchical relations. The libertini

had to fu1fil kindred functions in the ancient world, but their

importance was hardly so great as that of medieval sergeants or

ministeriales. We may get some notion of what that position was

by looking at the personal influence and endowments of the chief

servants in a great household of the thirteenth century. The

first cook and the gatekeeper of a celebrated abbey were real

magnates who held their offices by hereditary succession, and

were enfeoffed with considerable estates.(33*) In Glastonbury

five cooks shared in the kitchen-fee.(34*) The head of the

cellar, the gatekeeper, and the chief shepherd enter into

agreements in regard to extensive plots of land.(35*) They appear

as entirely free to dispose of such property, and at every step

we find in the cartularies of Glastonbury Abbey proofs of the

existence of a numerous and powerful 'sergeant' class. John of

Norwood, Abbot of Bury St. Edmund's, had to resort to a regular

coup d'tat in order to displace the privileged families which

had got hold of the offices and treated them as hereditary

property.(36*) In fact the great 'sergeants' ended by hampering

their lords more than serving them. And the same fact of the rise

of a 'ministerial' class may be noticed on every single estate,

although it is not so prominent there as in the great centres of

feudal life. The whole arrangement was broken by the substitution

of the 'cash nexus' for more ancient kinds of economic

relationship, and by the spread of free agreements: it is not

difficult to see that both these facts acted strongly in favour

of driving out hereditary and customary obligations.

    We have considered the relative position of the unfree

holdings, of the domanial land around which they were grouped,

and of the class which had to put the whole machinery of the

manor into action. But incidentally we had several times to

notice a set of men and tenements which stood in a peculiar

relation to the arrangement we have been describing: there were

in almost every manor some free tenants and some free tenements

that could not be considered as belonging to the regular fabric

of the whole. they had to pay rents or even to perform labour

services, but their obligations were subsidiary to the work of

the customary tenants on which the husbandry of the manorial

demesne leaned for support. From the economic point of view we

can see no inherent necessity for the connexion of these

particular free tenements with that particular manorial unit. The

rent, large or small, could have been sent directly to the lord's

household, or paid in some other manor without any perceptible

alteration in favour of either party; the work, if there was such

to perform, was without exception of a rather trifling kind, and

could have been easily dispensed with and commuted for money.

Several reasons may be thought of to explain the fact that free

tenements are thus grouped along with the villain holdings and

worked into that single unit, the manor. It may be urged that the

division into manors is not merely and perhaps not chiefly an

economic one, but that it reflects a certain political

organisation, which had to deal with and to class free tenants as

well as servile people. It may be conjectured that even from the

economic point of view, although the case of free tenants would

hardly have called the manorial unit into existence, it was

convenient to use that class when once created for the grouping

of villain land and work: why should the free tenants not join

the divisions formed for another purpose but locally within easy

reach and therefore conveniently situated for such intercourse

with the lord as was rendered necessary by the character of the

tenement? Again, the grouping of free tenants may have originated

in a time when the connexion with the whole was felt more

strongly than in the feudal period; it may possibly go back to a

community which had nothing or little to do with subjection, and

in which the free landowners joined for mutual support and

organisation. It is not impossible to assume, on the other hand,

that in many cases the free tenant was left in the manorial group

because he had begun by being an unfree and therefore a necessary

member of it. All such suppositions seem prima facie admissible

and reasonable enough, and at the same time it is clear, that by

deciding in favour of one of them or by the relative importance

assigned to each we shall very materially influence the solution

of interesting historical problems, in order to appreciate

rightly the position of the free tenements in the manor we have

to examine whether these tenements are all of one and the same

kind or not, and this must be done not from the legal standpoint

whence it has already been reviewed, but in connexion with the

practical management of the estate. I think that a survey of the

different meanings which the term bears in our documents must

lead us to recognise three chief distinctions: first there is

free land which once formed part of the demesne but has been

separated from it; then there is the land held by villagers

outside the regular arrangements of the rural community, and

lastly there are ancient free holdings of the same shape as the

servile tenements, though differing from the latter in legal

character. Each class will naturally fall into subdivisions.(37*)

    Under the first head it is to be observed that domanial land

very often lost its direct connexion with the lord's household,

and was given away to dependent people on certain conditions. One

of the questions addressed to the juries by the Glastonbury

inquest of 1189 was prompted by this practice: it was asked what

demesne land had been given out under free agreement or servile

conditions, and whether it was advantageous to keep to the

arrangement or not. One of the reasons which lay at the root of

the process has been already touched upon. Grants of domanial

land occur commonly in return for services rendered in the

administration of the manor: reeves, ploughmen, herdsmen,

woodwards are sometimes recompensed in this manner instead of

being liberated from the duties incumbent on their holding. A

small rent was usually affixed to the plot severed from the

demesne, and the whole arrangement may be regarded as very like

an ordinary lease. An attenuated form of the same thing may be

noticed when some officer or servant was permitted to use certain

plots of domanial land during the tenure of his office. It

happened, for instance, that a cotter was entrusted to take care

of a team of oxen belonging to the lord or obliged to drive his

plough. He might be repaid either by leave to use the manorial

plough on his own land on specified occasions, or else by an

assignment to him of the crop on certain acres of the home

farm.(38*) Such privileges are sometimes granted to villagers who

do not seem to be personally employed in the manorial

administration, but such cases are rare, and must be due to

special reasons which escape our notice.

    It is quite common, on the other hand, to find deficiencies

in the normal holdings made up from the demesne, e.g. a group of

peasants hold five acres apiece in the fields, and one of the set

cannot receive his full share: the failing acres are supplied by

the demesne. Even an entire virgate or half-virgate may be formed

in this way.(39*) Sometimes a plot of the lord's land is given to

compensate the bad quality of the peasant's land.(40*) Of course,

such surrenders of the demesne soil were by no means prompted by

disinterested philanthropy. They were made to enable the

peasantry to bear its burdens, and may-be to get rid of patches

of bad soil or ground that was inconveniently situated.(41*) In a

number of cases these grants of demesne are actual leases, and

probably the result of hard bargains.

    However this might be, we find alongside of the estate farmed

for the lord's own account a great portion of the demesne

conceded to the villagers. The term 'inland,' which ought

properly to designate all the land belonging directly to the

lord, is sometimes applied to plots which have been surrendered

to the peasantry, and so distinguishes them from the regular

customary holdings.(42*) Such concessions of demesne land were

not meant to create freehold tenements. Their tenure was

precarious, the right of resumption was more expressly recognised

in the case of such plots than in that of any other form of rural

occupation, but the rights thus acquired tended to become

perpetual, like everything else in this feudal world; and as they

were founded on agreement and paid for with money rents, their

transformation into permanent tenures led to an increase of free

tenements and not of villainage. We catch a glimpse of the

process in the Domesday of St. Paul's. In 1249 a covenant was

made between the Chapter of the Cathedral and its villagers of

the manor of Beauchamp in Essex: in consequence of the agreement

all the concessions of demesne land which had been made by the

farmers were confirmed by the Chapter. The inquests show that

those who farmed the estates had extensive rights as to the use

of domanial land, but their dealings with the customary tenants

were always open to a revision by the landlords. A confirmation

like this Beauchamp one transferred the plot of demesne land into

the class of free tenements, and created a tenure defensible at

law.(43*) All such facts increase in number and importance with

the increase of population: under its pressure the area of direct

cultivation for the lord is gradually lessened, and in many

surveys we find a sort of belt formed around the home farm by the

intrusion of the dependent people into the limits of the

demesne.(44*) The Domesday of St. Paul's is especially

instructive on this point. Every estate shows one part of the

lord's land in the possession of the peasants; sometimes the

'dominicum antiquitus assisum' is followed by 'terrae de novo

traditae.'(45*)

    A second group of free tenements consists of plots which did

not belong either to the demesne or to the regular holdings in

the fields, but lay by the side of these holdings and were

parcelled out in varying quantity and under various conditions.

We may begin by noticing the growth of leases. There is no doubt

that the lease-system was growing in the thirteenth century, and

that it is not adequately reflected in our documents. An indirect

proof of this is given by the fact, that legal practice was

labouring to discover means of protection for possession based on

temporary agreement. The writ 'Quare ejecit infra terminum'

invented by William Raleigh between 1236 and 1240 protected the

possession of the 'tenant for term of years' who formerly had

been regarded as having no more than a personal right enforceable

by an action of covenant.(46*)

    Manorial extents are sparing in their notices of leases

because their object is to picture the distribution of ownership,

and temporary agreements are beyond their range. But it is not

uncommon to find a man holding a small piece of land for his life

at a substantial rent. In this case his tenure is reckoned

freehold, but still he holds under what we should now call a

lease for life; the rent is a substantial return for the land

that he has hired. That English law should regard these tenants

under leases for life as freeholders, should, that is, throw them

into one great class with tenants who have heritable rights, who

do but military service or nominal service, who are in fact if

not in name the owners of the land, is very remarkable; hirers

are mingled with owners, because according to the great

generalisation of English feudalism every owner is after all but

a hirer. Still we can mark off for economic purposes a class of

tenants whom we may call 'life-leaseholders,' and we can see also

a smaller class of leaseholders who hold for terms of years.(47*)

They often seem to owe their existence to the action of the

manorial bailiffs or the farmers to whom the demesne has been

let. We are told that such and such a person has 'entered' the

tenement by the leave of such and such a farmer or bailiff, or

that the tenement does not belong to the occupier by hereditary

right, but by the bailiff's precept.(48*) Remarks of that kind

seem to mean that these rent-paying plots, liberated from servile

duties, were especially liable to the interference of manorial

officers. Limits of time are rarely mentioned, and leases for

life seem to be the general rule.(49*) The tenure is only in the

course of formation, and by no means clearly defined. One does

not even see, for instance, how the question of implements and

stock was settled -- whether they were provided by the landlord

or by the tenant.

    We feel our way with much greater security in another

direction. The fields of the village contain many a nook or odd

bit which cannot be squeezed into the virgate arrangement and

into the system of work and duties connected with it. These

'subsecivae,' as the Romans would have said, were always

distributed for small rents in kind or in money.(50*) The

manorial administration may also exclude from the common

arrangement entire areas of land which it is thought advantageous

to give out for rent. Those who take it are mostly the same

villagers who possess the regular holdings, but their title is

different; in one case it is based on agreement, in the other on

custom.(51*) Plots of this kind are called forlands.(52*) In

close connexion with them we find the essarts or assarts-land

newly reclaimed from the waste, and therefore not mapped out

according to the original plan of possession and service. The

Surveys often mark the different epochs of cultivation -- the old

and the new essarts.(53*) The documents show also that the spread

of the area under cultivation was effected in different ways;

sometimes by a single settler with help from the lord,(54*) and

sometimes by the entire village, or at any rate by a large group

of peasants who club together for the purpose.(55*) In the first

case there was no reason for bringing the reclaimed space under

the sway of the compulsory rotation of crops or the other

regulations of communal agriculture. In the second, the

distribution of the acres and strips among the various tenants

was proportioned to their holdings in the ancient lands of the

village. The rents on essart land seem very low, and no wonder:

everywhere in the world the advance of cultivation has been made

the starting-point of privileged occupation and light taxation.

The Roman Empire introduced the emphyteusis as a contract in

favour of the pioneers of cultivation, the French feudal law

endowed the hotes (hospites) on newly reclaimed land with all

kinds of advantages. English practice is not so explicit on this

point, but it is not difficult to gather from the Surveys that it

was not blind to the necessity of patronising agricultural

progress and encouraging it by favourable terms.

    Of mol-land I have already spoken in another chapter. I will

only point out now that this class of tenements appears to have

been a very common one. Thirteenth century surveys often describe

certain holdings in two different ways-on the supposition of

their paying rent, and also on that of their rendering

labour-services; when they pay rent they pay so much, when they

supply labour they supply so much. By the side of such holdings,

which are wavering, as it were, between the two systems, we find

the terra assisa or ad censum. This class, to which molland

evidently belongs, is distinguished from free tenure by the fact

that its rent is regarded as a manorial arrangement; there is no

formal agreement and no charter, and therefore no action before

the king's courts to guard against disseisin or increase of

services. In practice the difference is not felt very keenly, and

these tenements gradually came to be regarded as 'free' in every

sense. A characteristic feature of the movement may be noticed in

the terms 'Socagium ad placitum' and 'Socagium villani'.(56*)

These expressions occur in the documents, although they are not

very common. It would be hard to explain them otherwise than from

the point of view indicated just now. The tenement is paying a

fixed and certain rent and therefore socage, but it is not

defended by feoffment and charter. It is not recognised by law,

and therefore it remains at the will of the lord and unfree.(57*)

The grant of a charter would raise it to the legal standing of

free land.

    Every student of manorial documents will certainly be struck

by one well-marked difference between villain tenements and free

tenements as described in the extents and surveys. The tenants in

villainage generally appear arranged into large groups, in which

every man holds, works, and pays exactly as his fellows; so that

when the tenement and services of some one tenant have been

described we then read that the other tenants hold similar

tenements and owe similar services. On the other hand, the

freeholds seem scattered at random without any definite plan of

arrangement, parcelled up into unequal portions, and subjected to

entirely different duties. One man holds ten acres and pays three

shillings for them; another has eight and a half acres and gives

a pound of pepper to his lord; a third is possessed of

twenty-three acres, pays 4s. 6d., and sends his dependants to

three boonworks; a fourth brings one penny and some poultry in

return for his one acre. The regularity of the villain system

seems entirely opposed to the capricious and disorderly phenomena

of free tenure.

    And this fact seems naturally connected with some remarkable

features of social organisation. No wonder that free land is cut

up into irregular plots: we know that it may be divided and

accumulated by inheritance and alienation, whereas villain land

is held together in rigid unity by the fact that it is, properly

speaking, the lord's and not the villain's land. Besides, all the

variations of free tenure which we have discussed hitherto have

one thing in common, they are produced by express agreement

between lord and tenant as to the nature and amount of services

required from the tenant. Whether we take the case of a villain

receiving a few acres in addition to his holding, or that of a

servant recompensed by the grant of a privileged plot, or that of

a peasant confirmed in the possession of soil newly reclaimed

from the waste, or that of a bondman who has succeeded in

liberating his holding from the burdensome labour service of

villainage, in all these instances we come across the same

fundamental notion of a definite agreement between lord and

tenant. And again, the capricious aspect of free tenements seems

well in keeping with the fact that they are produced by separate

and private agreements, by consecutive grants and feoffments,

while the villain system of every manor is mapped out at one

stroke, and managed as a whole by the lord and his steward. This

contrast between the two arrangements may even seem to widen

itself into a difference between a communal organization which is

servile, and a system of freeholding which is not communal. All

these inferences are natural enough, and all have been actually

drawn.

    A close inspection of the Surveys will, however, considerably

modify our first impressions, and suggest conclusions widely

different from those which I have just now stated. The importance

of the subject requires a detailed discussion, even at the risk

of tediousness. I shall take my instances from the Hundred Rolls,

as from a survey which reflects the state of things in central

counties and gives an insight into the organisation of secular as

well as ecclesiastical estates.

    We need not dwell much on the observation that the servile

tenements sometimes display no perfect regularity. Sometimes the

burdens incumbent on them are not quite equal. Sometimes again

the holdings themselves are not quite equal. In Fulborne,

Cambridgeshire, e.g., the villains of Alan de la Zuche are

assessed very irregularly,(58*) although their tenements are

described as virgates and halfvirgates. Of course, the general

character of the virgate system remains unaltered by these

exceptional deviations, which may be easily explained by the

consideration that the social order was undergoing a process of

change. The disruption of some of the villain holdings and the

modification of certain duties are perhaps less strange than the

fact that such alterations should be so decidedly exceptional.

Still, the occurrence of irregularities even within the range of

villainage warns us not to be too hasty in our inferences about

free tenements; it shows, at any rate, that irregularities may

well arise even where there has once been a definite plan, and

that it is worth while to enquire whether some traces of such an

original plan may not still be discovered amidst the apparent

disorder of free tenements.

    And a little attention will show us many cases in which free

tenements are arranged on the virgate system. There is hardly any

need for quotations on this point: the Hundred Rolls of all the

six counties of which we possess surveys, supply an unlimited

number of instances. True, fundamental divisions of land and

service may often be obscured and confused by the existence of

plots which do not fit into the system; but as in the case of

servile tenements we occasionally find irregularities, so in the

case of free tenements we often see that below the superficial

irregularities there lie traces of an ancient plan. The manor of

Ayllington (Elton), Huntingdonshire, belonging to the Abbey of

Ramsey, presents a good example in point.(59*) It is reckoned to

contain thirteen hides and a half, each hide comprising six

virgates, and each virgate twenty-four acres. The actual

distribution of the holdings squares to a fraction with this

computation, if we take into the reckoning the demesne, the free

and the villain tenements. Three hides are in the lord's hand,

one is held by a large tenant, John of Ayllington, eleven

virgates and a half by other freeholders, forty-two virgates and

a half by the villains; the grand total being exactly thirteen

hides. The numerous cotters are not taken into account, and

evidently left 'outside the hides' (extra hidam); this is a very

common thing in the Surveys. If we neglect them, and turn to the

holdings in the 'hidated' portion of the manor, we shall notice

that the greater part of the free tenements are arranged on the

same system as the servile tenements. We find six free tenants

with a virgate apiece, one with half a virgate, three with a

virgate and a half, and three jointly possessed of two virgates.

In contrast with this principal body of tenants stand several

small freeholders endowed with irregular plots reckoned in acres

and so much varying in size that it is quite impossible to

arrange them according to any plan, not to speak of the virgate

system. But these small tenants are all sub-tenants enfeoffed by

the principal freeholders whose own tenements are distributed

into regular agrarian unity. It is easy to see that even when the

stock of free tenancies stood arranged according to a definite

plan, deviations from this plan would easily arise owing to new

feoffments made by the lord out of the demesne land or out of the

waste.(60*) What I am concerned to say is, not that the Hundred

Rolls show a distribution of free holdings quite as regular as

that of the servile tenements, but that amidst all the

irregularities of the freehold plots we frequently come across

unmistakable traces of a system similar to that which prevailed

on villain soil. These traces are not always of the same kind,

and present various gradations. In a comparatively small number

of instances the duties imposed on the shareholders are equal, or

nearly so; much more often the rent and labour rendered by them

to the lord vary a great deal, although their tenements are

equal. The Ayllington instance, quoted above, belongs to the

former class, but the proportionate distribution of duties is

somewhat obscured by the fact that part of them is reckoned in

labour. The normal rent is computed at six shillings per

virgate,(61*) though there are a few noticeable exceptions, but

the duty of ploughing is imposed according to two different

standards, and it is not easy to reduce these to unity. The

freeholders of one group have to plough eight acres per virgate

for the lord, while for the members of the other group the

ploughing work is reckoned in the same way as in the case of the

villains, each placing his team at the disposal of the lord one

day of every week from Michaelmas to the 1st of August, four

weeks being excepted in honour of Christmas, Easter, and

Trinity.(62*) Ravenston, in Buckinghamshire, is a much clearer

example. Twelve villains hold of the Prior of Ravenston twelve

acres each, and their service is worth eighteen shillings per

holding; four villains hold six acres each, and their service is

valued at nine shillings. One free tenant has twelve acres and

pays sixteen shillings; six have six acres each, and pay seven

shillings. There are three other tenants whose duties cannot be

brought within the system.(63*) The portion of Fulborne, in

Cambridgeshire, belonging to Baldwin de Maneriis, may also serve

as an illustration of an almost regular distribution of land and

service among the freeholders.(64*) Instances in which the

duties, although not exactly, are still very nearly equal, are

very frequent. In Radewelle, Bedfordshire, the mean rent of the

six is two shillings per half-virgate, although the villains

perform service to the amount of eight shillings per

virgate.(65*) Bidenham, Bedfordshire, also presents an assessment

of four shillings per free virgate.(66*) In that part of Fulborne

which is owned by Alan de la Zuche the virgates and half-virgates

of the free holders are variously rented; but twelve shillings

per half-virgate is of common occurrence(67*) while in the fee of

Maud Passelewe we find only four and five shillings as the rent

for the half-virgate.(68*) Papworth Anneys exhibits a ferdel of

seven and a half acres, for which ten to twelve shillings are

paid.(69*) As to the cases in which the service varies a great

deal, although the land is held in shares, I need not give

quotations because they are to be found on every page of the

printed hundred Rolls. We may say, in conclusion, that the

process of disruption acts much more potently in the sphere of

free holding than it does in regard to villainage; but that it

has by no means succeeded in destroying all regularity even

there.

    Thus, even among the freeholders, landholding is often what I

shall take leave to call 'shareholding.' Now, whatever ultimate

explanation we may give of this fact, it has one obvious meaning.

That part of the free population which holds in regular shares is

not governed entirely by the rules of private ownership, but is

somehow implicated in the village community. Bovates and virgates

exist only as parts of carucates or hides, and the several

carucates or hides themselves fit together, inasmuch as they

suppose a constant apportionment of some kind. Two sets of

important questions arise from this proposition, both intimately

connected with each other, although they suggest different lines

of enquiry. We may start from an examination of the single

holding, and ask whether its regular shape can be explained by

the requirements of its condition or by survivals of a former

condition. Or again, we may start from the whole and inquire

whether the equality the elements of which we detect is equality

in ownership or equality in service. Let us take up the first

thread of the inquiry.

    How can we account for the occurrence of regular

'shareholding' among the freeholders? Two possibilities have to

be considered: the free character of the tenements may be newly

acquired and the 'shareholding' may be a relic of a servile past;

or, on the other hand, the freehold character of the tenements

may be coeval with the 'shareholding,' and in this latter case we

shall have to admit the existence of freeholds which from of old

have formed an element in the village community. In the first of

these cases again we shall have to distinguish between two

suppositions: -- Servile tenements have become free; this may be

due either to some general measure of enfranchisement, a lord

having preferred to take money rents in lieu of the old labour

services, and these money rents being the modern equivalent for

those old services, or else to particular and occasional

feoffments made in favour of those who, for one reason or

another, have earned some benefit at the lord's hand. To put it

shortly, we may explain the phenomenon either by a process of

commutation such as that which turned 'workland' into 'molland,'

or by special privileges which have exempted certain shares in

the land from a general scheme of villainage; or, lastly, by the

existence of freeholds as normal factors in the ancient village

community.

    Let us test these various suppositions by the facts recorded

in our surveys. At first sight it may seem possible to account

for the freehold virgates by reference to the process which

converted 'workland' into 'molland.' We have seen above that if a

lord began to demand money instead of work, the result might, in

some cases, be the evolution of new tenures which gradually lost

their villain character and became recognised as genuine

freeholds. And no doubt one considerable class of cases can be

explained by this process. But a great many instances seem to

call for some other explanation. To begin with, the mere

acceptance of rent in lieu of labour did not make the tenement a

freehold; servile tenements were frequently put ad censum,(70*)

and it seems difficult to believe that many lords allowed a

commutation of labour for rent to have the effect of turning

villainage into freehold. Another difficulty is found on the

opposite side. What force kept the shares together when they had

become free? Why did they not accumulate and disperse according

to the chances of free development? It may be thought that

custom, and express conditions of feoffment, must have acted

against disruption. I do not deny the possibility, but I say that

it is not easy to explain the very widely diffused phenomenon of

free shareholding by a commutation which tended to break up the

shares and to make them useless for the purposes of assessment.

Still I grant that these considerations, though they should have

some weight, are not decisive, and I insist chiefly on the

following argument.

    The peculiar trait which distinguishes 'molland' is the

transition from labour service to money rent, and the rent is

undoubtedly considered as an equivalent for the right to labour

services which the lord abandons. It must be admitted that in

some cases the lord may have taken less than the real equivalent

in order to get such a convenient commodity as money, or because

for some reason or another he was in need of current coin. Still

I am not afraid to say that, in a general way, commutation

supposes an exchange against an equivalent. Indeed the demand for

money rents was considered rather as increasing than as

decreasing the burden incumbent on the peasantry.(71*) Now,

although it would be preposterous to try and make out in every

single case whether the rent of the free virgate is an adequate

equivalent for villain services or not, there is a very

sufficient number of instances in which a rough reckoning may be

made without fear of going much astray.(72*) And if we attempt

such a reckoning we shall be struck by the number of cases in

which the rent of the free virgate falls considerably short of

what it yielded by the virgate of the villain. We have seen that

in Ravenston, Bedfordshire, the villain service is valued at

eight shillings per virgate, and that the free assessment amounts

only to four shillings. In Thriplow, Cambridgeshire, the villains

perform labour duties valued at 9s. 4d. per bovate, the

freeholders are assessed variously; but there is a certain number

among them which forms, as it were, the stock of that class, and

their average rent is 5s. 6d. per bovate.(73*) In Tyringham,

Buckinghamshire, the villain holding is computed at six acres and

one rood, and its service at five shillings; the free virgates

have a like number of acres and pay various rents, but almost

without exception less than the villains.(74*) In Croxton,

Cambridgeshire, there are customers with twenty acres, and others

with ten acres; the first have to pay ten shillings and to assist

at four boonworks. The free holders are possessed of plots of

irregular size, and their rent is also irregular; but on the

average much lower than that of the customers.(75*) Let it be

noted that the customary tenants have commuted their labour

services into money payments, and. in fact, they are to be

considered as molmen in the first stage of development. Still,

their payments are computed on a different scale from those of

the free.

    In Brandone, Warwickshire, the typical villain, William

Bateman, pays for his virgate 5s. 3d., and sends one man to work

twice a week from the 29th of June until the ist of August, and

thence onward his man has to work two days one week and three

days the next. The free half-virgate merely pays five shillings,

and does suit to the manorial court. This last point makes no

difference, because the villain had to attend the manorial court

quite as regularly as the freeholder, and indeed more regularly ,

because he was obliged to serve on inquests.(76*) In Bathekynton,

Warwickshire, the difference in favour of the free is also

noticeable, but not so great.(77*) And these are by no means

exceptional cases. Nothing is more common than to find free

tenements held by trifling services, and whatever we may think of

single cases, it would be absurd to explain such arrangements in

the aggregate as the results of a bargain between lord and serfs.

It is evident, therefore, that a reference to 'molland,' to a

commutation of labour into rent, does not suit these cases.(78*)

    Can we explain these cases of 'free shareholding' by

feoffments made to favoured persons? We have seen that the lord

used to recompense his servants by grants of land and that he

favoured the spread of cultivation by exacting but a light rent

from newly reclaimed land. Such transactions would undoubtedly

produce free tenements held on very advantageous terms, but still

they seem incapable of solving our problem. Tenements created by

way of beneficial feoffment are in general easily recognised. The

holdings of servants and other people endowed by favour are

always few and interspersed among the plots of the regular

occupiers of the land, be they free or serfs. The 'essarted'

fields are sometimes numerous, but usually cut up into small

strips and as it were engrafted on the original stock of

tenements. Altogether privileged land mostly appears divided into

irregular plots and reckoned by acres and not by shares. And what

we have to account for is a vast number of instances in which

what seem to be some of the principal and original shares in the

land are held freely and by comparatively light services. I do

not think that we can get rid of a very considerable residue of

cases without resorting to the last of the suppositions mentioned

above. We must admit that some of the freeholders in the Hundred

Rolls are possessed of shares in the fields not because they have

emerged from serfdom, but because they were from the first

members of a village community over which the lord's power

spread. it would be very hard to draw absolute distinctions in

special cases, because the terminology of our records does not

take into account the history of tenure and only indicates net

results. But a comparison of facts en bloc points to at least

three distinct sources of the freehold virgates. Some may be due

to commutation, others to beneficial feoffments, but there are

yet others which seem to be ancient and primitive. The traits

which mark these last are 'shareholding' and light rents. The

light rents do not look like the result of commutation, the

'shareholding' points to some other cause than favours bestowed

by the lord.

    We shall come to the same conclusion if we follow the other

line of our inquiry. It may be asked, whether the community into

which the share is made to fit should be thought of primarily as

a community in ownership or a community in assessment, whether

the shares are constructed for the purpose of satisfying equal

claims or for the purpose of imposing equal duties? The question

is a wide one, much wider than the subject immediately in hand,

but it is connected with that subject and some of the material

for its solution must be taken up in the course of our present

inquiry.

    I have been constantly mentioning the assessment of free

tenements, their rents and their labour services. The question of

their weight as compared with villain services has been

discussed, but I have not hitherto taken heed of the varying and

irregular character of these rents and services. But the variety

and irregularity are worthy of special notice. One of the most

fundamental differences between the free and servile systems is

to be found in this quarter. The villains are equalised not only

as regards their shares in the fields, but also as regards their

duties towards the lord; indeed, both facts appear as the two

sides of one thing. The virgate of the villain is quite as much,

if not more, a unit of assessment as it is a share of the soil.

Matters look more complex in the case of free land. As I have

said before, there are instances in which the free people are not

only possessed of equal shares but also are rented in proportion

to those shares. In much the greater number of instances, however

, there is no such proportion. All may hold virgates, but one

will pay more and the other less; one will perform labour duties,

and the other not; one will pay in money, and the other bring a

chicken, or a pound of pepper, or a flower. Whatever we may think

of the gradual changes which have distorted conditions that were

originally meant to be equal, it is impossible to get rid of the

fact that, in regard to free tenements, equal shares do not imply

equal duties or even duties of one and the same kind.

    One of two things, either the shares exist only as a survival

of the servile arrangement out of which the free tenements may

have grown, or else they exist primarily for the purpose not of

assessing duties but of apportioning claims. In stating these

possibilities I must repeat what I said before, that it would be

quite wrong to bring all the observed phenomena under one head. I

do not intend in the least to deny that the freer play of

economic and legal forces within the range of free ownership must

have produced combinations infinitely more varying, irregular and

complicated than those which are to be found in villainage. A

large margin must be allowed for such modifications which

dispersed and altered the duties that were originally

proportioned to shares. But a few simple questions will serve to

show that other elements must be brought into the reckoning. Why

should the disruptive tendency operate so much more against

proportionate assessment than against the distribution into

shares itself; in other words, why are equal tenements so much

commoner than equal rents? If shareholding and equal rents were

indissolubly connected as the two sides of one thing, or even as

cause and effect, why should one hold its ground when the other

had disappeared, and how could the dependent element remain

widely active when the principal one had lost its meaning? If the

discrepancies between rent and shares had been casual, we might

try to explain them entirely by later modifications. But these

discrepancies are a standing feature of the surveys, and it seems

to me that we can hardly escape the inference that shareholding

has its raison d'etre quite apart from the duties owed to the

lord, and in this case we have to look to the communal

arrangement of proprietary rights for its explanation; it was a

means of giving to every man his due. If this principle is

granted, all the observable facts fall into their right places.

One can easily imagine how free holdings came to exist within the

village community in spite of their loose connexion with the

manor. In regard to duties, they were practically outside the

community; not so as to proprietary rights and the agricultural

arrangements proceeding from them, for example such arrangements

as affected the rotation of crops, the use of commons and fallow

pasture, the setting up of hedges, the repair of dykes, etc.

There is no real contradiction between the facts, that in

relation to the lord every free shareholder was, as it were,

bound by a separate and private agreement, while in relation to

the village he had to conform to communal rule.

    This last remark may require some further development. The

striking differences between the duties of the several

freeholders of one manor seem to show that these people were not

enfeoffed by the lord at the same time and under the same

conditions. If A is in every respect a fellow of B, and still has

to pay twice as much as B, it is clear that his relation to the

lord has been settled under different circumstances from those

which governed the settlement of B's position. Now, from the

point of view of later law this meant that the two freeholds were

created each by a special feoffment. But this would be a very

formal and inadequate way of considering the case. Very often the

differences might be produced by subsequent arrangements which,

though not giving rise to new title, destroyed the original

uniformity of condition. Often again we may suspect that the

relation between lord and tenant had its origin not really in a

gift of land made by the former to the latter but in a submission

made by the latter to the former. I make bold to prefer this

view, chiefly on account of those trifling and indeed fictitious

duties which are constantly found in the Surveys.(79*) They can

only have one meaning -- that of 'recognitions'.(80*) Trifling in

themselves, they establish the subordinate relation of one owner

to the other; and although their imposition must be considered

from the formal standpoint of feudal law as the result of a

feoffment, it is clear that their real foundation must often have

been a submission to patronage. The subject is a wide one and

includes all kinds of free tenure, communal as well as other.

When a knight was enfeoffed by a monastery in consideration of

some infinitesimal payment, there might be several reasons for

such a transaction. The abbot may have thought it good policy to

acquire the support of a considerable person, he may have been

forced to give the land and only glad to obtain some recognition,

however trifling, of the gift; or again, he may have made a

beneficial feoffment in return for a sum of ready money paid by

way of gersuma or fine, but he may also have extended his

supremacy over a piece of land which did not belong to him

originally at all. Even in feudal times this could be done by

means of a fictitious lawsuit ending in 'a final concord'; or

even simply by an instrument of quit claim and feoffment without

any suit.(81*) At the time when feudalism was only settling

itself, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, this must have

been a common thing, even if we do not take into account the

Saxon practice of 'commendation.' However this may be, the

trifling duties imposed on freeholds lead to the inference that

the agreement between lord and tenant had been made on the basis

of the latter's independent right, and not on that of the lord's

will and power. They testify to a subjection of free people and

not to the liberation of serfs. And as they are found constantly

allied with shareholding, we have to say that they imply manorial

relations superimposed on a community which, if not entirely

free, contained free elements within it. The manorial duties are

more varied and capricious than are the shares just because they

are a later growth.

    I should not like to leave this intricate inquiry without

testing its results by yet another standard. I have been trying

to prove two things : that some of the feudal freeholds are

ancient freeholds, not liberated from servitude but originally

based on the recognised right of the holders; that such ancient

freeholds were included in the communal arrangement of ownership,

although the assessment of their duties was not communal. To what

extent are these propositions supported by an analysis of that

admittedly ancient tenure, the tenure of the socmen? We must look

chiefly to the 'free' socmen; but I may be allowed, on the

strength of the chapter on Ancient Demesne, to take the bond

socmen also into account.

    Let us take the manor of Chesterton, in Cambridgeshire.(82*)

It is royal, but let out in feefarm to the Prior of Barnwell, and

its men make use of the parvum breve de rec to. There is one free

tenant of eighty-eight acres holding de antiquitate and the

Scholars of Merton hold forty-four acres freely. They have

clearly taken the place of some freeman, whether by purchase or

by gift I do not know; they are bound to perform ploughings and

to carry corn. Both tenements are worthy of notice because

charters are not mentioned and still the holdings are set apart

from the rest. In the one case the tenure is expressly stated to

be an ancient one, and presumably the title of the other tenement

is of the same kind. The number of acres is peculiar and points

to some agrarian division of which eighty-eight and forty-four

were fractions or multiples. The bulk of the population are

described as customers. They used to hold half-virgates, it is

said, but some of them have sold part of their land according to

the custom of the manor. And so their tenements have lost their

original regularity of construction, although it seems possible

to fix the average holdings at twelve or fifteen acres. Anyhow,

it is impossible to reduce them to fractions of eighty-eight; for

some reason or another, the reckoning is made on a different

basis. The duties vary a good deal, and it would be even more

difficult to conjecture what the original services may have been

than to make out the size of the virgate.

    The example is instructive in many ways. It is a

stepping-stone from villainage to socage, or rather to socman's

tenure. There can be no question of differences of feoffment. The

manorial power is fully recognised, and on the other hand the

character of ancient demesne is also conspicuous with its

protection of the peasantry. And still the whole fabric is giving

way -- the holdings get dispersed and the service loses its

uniformity. All these traits are a fair warning to those who

argue from the irregularity of free tenements and the inequality

of their rents against the possibility of their development out

of communal ownership. Here is a well-attested village community;

its members hold by custom and have not changed their condition

either for the better or for the worse in point of title. Later

agencies are at work to distort the original arrangement -- a few

steps more in that direction and it would be impossible to make

out even the chief lines of the system. Stanton, in

Cambridgeshire, is a similar case.(83*) I would especially direct

the attention of the reader to the capricious way in which the

services are assessed. And still the titles of the tenants are

the result not of various grants but of manorial custom applied

to the whole community. I repeat, that irregularity in the size

of holdings and in the services that they owe is no proof that

these holdings have not formed part of a communal arrangement or

that their free character (if they have a free character) must be

the result of emancipation; these irregularities are found on the

ancient demesne where there has been no enfranchisement or

emancipation, and where on the other hand the tenants have all

along been sufficiently 'free' to enjoy legal protection in their

holdings.

    If we have to say so much with regard to ancient demesne and

bond socmen, we must not wonder that free socmen are very often

placed in conditions which it would be impossible to reduce to a

definite plan. On the fee of Robert le Noreys, in Fordham,(84*)

we find some scattered free tenants burdened with entirely

irregular rents, four villains holding eighteen acres each and

subjected to heavy ploughing work, three socmen of twenty acres

each paying a rent of 4s. 2d. per holding, and obliged to assist

at reaping and to bring chicken, one socman of nine acres paying

10d., one of seven acres also assessed at 10d., two of eleven

acres paying 15d., etc, it is no cause for wonder that such

instances occur at the end of the thirteenth century. It is much

more wonderful that, in a good many cases, we are still well able

to perceive a great deal of the original regularity. Swaffham

Prior, in Cambridgeshire, is a grand example of an absolutely

regular arrangement in a community of free socmen.(85*) The Prior

of Ely holds it for three hides and has 220 acres on his

home-farm. The rest is divided among sixteen free socmen paying

5s. each and performing various labour services. These services

have been considerably increased by the Prior. Mixed cases are

much more usual -- I mean cases in which the original regularity

has suffered some modifications, though a little attention will

discover traces of the ancient communal arrangement.(86*)

    On the whole, I think that the notices of socmen's tenure in

the Hundred Rolls are especially precious, because they prove

that the observations that we have made as regards freehold

generally are not merely ingenious suggestions about what may

conceivably have happened. There is undoubtedly one weak point in

those observations, which is due to the method which we are

compelled to adopt. It is difficult, if not impossible, to

classify the actual cases which come before us, to say-in this

case freehold is the result of commutation, in that case the lord

has enfeoffed a retainer or a kinsman, while in this third case,

the freehold virgate has always been freehold. The edge of the

inquiry is blunted, if I may so say, by the vagueness of

terminological distinctions, and we must rely upon general

impressions. The socman's tenure, on the contrary, stands out as

a clear case, and a careful analysis of it abundantly verifies

the conclusions to which we have previously come by a more

circuitous route.

    It seems to me that the general questions with which we

started in our inquiry may now be approached with some

confidence. The relation of free tenancies to the manorial system

turns out to be a complex one. The great majority of such

tenements appears as a later growth engrafted on the system when

it was already in decay. Commutation of services, the spread of

cultivation over the waste, and the surrender of portions of the

demesne to the increasing dependent population, must largely

account for the contrast between Domesday and the Hundred Rolls.

But an important residue remains, which must be explained on the

assumption that in many cases the shares of the community were

originally distributed among free people who had nothing or

little to do with manorial work.

    Three conclusions have been arrived at in this chapter.

    1. The home-farm, though the necessary central unit of the

manorial group, did not, as a rule, occupy a large area, and the

break-up of feudalism tended to lessen its extension in favour of

the dependent population.

    2. The peculiar feature of medieval husbandry -- the grouping

of small households round an aristocratic centre -- entailed the

existence of a large class engaged in collecting revenue,

superintending work, and generally conducting the machinery by

which the tributary parts were joined with their centre.

    3. The position of free tenements within the manor may be

ascribed to one of three causes: (a) they have been the tenements

of serfs, but, in consequence either of some general commutation

or of special feoffments, they have become free; or (b) their

connexion with the manor has all along been rather a matter of

jurisdiction than a matter of proprietary right, that is to say,

they form part of the manor chiefly because they are within the

scope of the manorial court; or (c) they represent free shares in

a village community upon which the manorial structure has been

superimposed.



NOTES:







1. Bracton, iv. 9. 5, f. 263: 'Est autem dominicum quod quis

habet ad mensam suam et proprie, sicut sunt Bordlands Anglice.'



2. Madox, History of the Exchequer, i. 407.., Concessisse unam

virgatam terrae in Husfelds, scilicet 20 acras uno anno et 20

acras alio.'



3. In Beauchamp, a manor of St. Paul's, London, the home farm is

one of the largest. Domesday of St. Paul's, 28: 'In dominico tam

de wainagio veteri quam de novo essarto 676 acre terre arabilis

et de prato 18 acre et de pastura 8 acras [sic] et in magno bosco

bene vestito quinquies 20 acre et in duabus granis Dorile et

Langele 16 acras.'



4. As to the economic aspects of the subject, see Thorold Rogers,

History of Agriculture and Prices; Ashley, Introduction to the

Study of Economic History; and Cunningham, Growth of Industry and

Commerce (2nd ed.).



5. Harl. MSS. 1006, f 2.



6. Ramsey Cart. (Rolls Series), i. 282: 'Quae culture coli

possunt sufficienter cum tribus carucis propriis et consuetudine

carrucarum ville et duabus precariis carucis (corr. carucarum?),

quae consuetudo ad valentiam trium carucarum aestimatur.'

Domesday of St. Paul's, 13, 14: 'Potest ibidem fieri wainagium

cum 5 carucis quarum tres habent 4 boves et 4 equos et due

singule 6 equos cum consuetudinibus villate propter (corr.

praeter?) dominicum de Luffehale et alia quae remota sunt, que

tamen sunt in dispositione firmarii.' Cf Glastonbury Inqu. of

1189, pp. 28, 107.



7. As an instance, Bury St. Edmund's Register, Harl. MSS. 743, f

194: '(Bucham) abbas Sti Edmundi capitalis dominus... tenet in

eadem villa preter homagium liberorum nihil.'



8. Domesday of St. Paul's, 58.



9. Eynsham Inqu., Chapter of Christ Church, Oxford, N. 27, f 5,

a: 'Robertus Clement... tenet de dominicis superius mensuratis

dum domino placet unam selionem apud Weylond atte Wyche, unam

selionem apud Blechemanfurlong, tres seliones in Wellefurlong, et

unam selionem apud Groueacres pro 11 solidis per annum.'



10. It is well known that the second book of Fleta contains a

sketch of the functions of manorial officers. In

thirteenth-century MSS. we find also a special tract on the

matter entitled de Senescalcia. See Cunningham, Growth of

Industry and Commerce (2nd ed.), p. 222. Let it be understood

that I do not attempt an exhaustive survey of the subject, but

only a general indication of its bearings.



11. Domesday of St. Paul's, 122; forms of agreement by which the

manors were let to farm in the twelfth century: 'Haec est

conventio inter capitulum Lundoniensis ecclesiae beati Pauli et

Robertum filium Alwini sacerdotis. Capitulum concedit ei Wicham

manerium suum ad firmam quamdiu vixerit et inde bene servierit.

Primo quidem anno pro 58 solidis et 4d. et pro una parva firma

panis et cervisiae cum denariis elemosine. Deinceps vero singulis

annis pro duabus firmis brevibus panis et cervisiae.'



12. Exch. Q. R. Miscell.: 'Consuetudines de Aysle: memorandum

quod homagium debet eligere prepositum et dominus manerii potest

eum retinere.... Et memorandum quod homines debent habere

pastorem ovilis per electionem curie.'



13. The duty of serving as reeve is therefore often treated as

one of the characteristic marks of serfdom; e.g. Cambr. Univ.,

Gg. iv. 4, f. 26.



14. Harl. MSS. 1006, f. 18: 'Debet esse messor ad frumentum et

amerciamenta domini colligendum.'



15. Shaftesbury Inqu., Harl. MSS. 61, f 60: 'Arator... debet

invenire omnia instrumenta aratri ante rotas.'



16. Ibid., f 54: 'Bubulci et gadince.' Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189:

'Petras bovarius... custodit boves domini et vadit ad aratrum.'



17. 'Hereward,' Glastonbury Inqu., 24, 105, etc.; Domesday of St.

Paul's, 53.



18. Cartul. of Battle (Camden Ser.), f 39, b: 'wodeward.'



19. Bury St. Edmund's Reg., Cambr. Univ., Gg. Iv. 4, f. 322, a:

'Ad istud pertinet tenementum falcacio claustri sed cum falce

lurardi.'



20. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 36: 'Reginaldus thernebedellus

tenet dimidiam virgatam terre et summonet homines ad comitatum et

hundredum.'



21. Ibid., 7; cf. 156.



22. Ely Cart., Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi, f 15, d., Debet

namiare cum bedello et ceteris avermannis, (men provided with

horses). Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 31: 'Robertus de Eadwic

sequitur hundredum et comitatum ad suum costum... Custodit preces

arature et messis et debet adjuvare ad namia capienda infra

hundredum et est quietus de pannagio.'



23. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., i. f 92, 93; Compoti of

Nicholas de Wedergrave, who had charge of the monastery from the

21st of November, 16 Edward II, till the 12th of March, 16 Edw.

II, as to the liberaciones et couredia servientium: 'Et quod

retinuit et necessarie oportuit retinere in eadem abbathia 60

ministros et servientes pro hospitalitate et aliis obsequiis

faciendis in eadem abbathia.'



24. Bury St. Edmund's Register, Harl. MSS., 743, f. 260:

'Scriptum Johannis Northwold abbatis de quinque servanciis, (A.

D. 1294); f 260, d: '... de minutis officiis.'



25. Gloucester Cart. (Rolls Ser.), iii. 213, 214: 'Hoc intellecto

quod quandocumque placuerit loci ballivo amoveantur ab uno loco

usque ad alium ad commodum domini infra terminum, salvis eisdem

liberationibus et stipendiis prius provisis. Nec aliquis

admittatur ad servitium domini sine saluis plegiis de fideliter

serviendo et de omittenda satisfaciendo. Et moraturi tunc

plaemuniantur quod sibi provideant ad morandum... Item quod

nullus famulus sit in curia cui plenum non deputetur officium.

Ita quod si unum officium suo statui sit insufficiens in alio

suppleatur defectus.'



26. Merton College MSS., 91, f 153: 'Coment hom deyt alower

oueraygnes en feyneson e en aust. Vous purrez bien auer sarcler 3

acres pur un dener e aUer fauche lacre de pre pur 4 deners.... E

vous devez Sauer qe 5 hommes poent bien lyer et syer 2 acres le

iour checune manere de ble qe luns plus e lautre mens... E la ou

les 4 prenent 7 d. ob. le iour e le quint pur ceo qil est lyour

le iour 2 d., donqe devez donner pur lacre 4 den. E pur ceo qen

mouz de pays i ne sevent nient sier par lacre si poet hom sauer

par siours e par les jurnees ceo qil fount. Mesqe vous reteignez

les siours par les eez ceo est a sauer qe 5 hommes ou 5 femmes le

quel qe vous voudrez que home apele 5 home font un eez, e 25

hommes font 5 eez, e poent 25 hommes shyer e lier 10 acres le

iour entiers ouerables.... E si il accunte plus de jurnees qe ne

fiert solon ceste acounte, si ne lor deuez pas alower.'



27. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, 16, 17.



28. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, 14, 15. Cf 13: 'Ernaldus C.

tempore episcopi Henrici habuit de quolibet preposito et quolibet

firmario unum denarium ad natale pro taliis quas inveniet eis et

morsuras candelarum.'



29. Bury St. Edmund's Registrum Album, Canmbr. Univ., Ee. iii.

60, f 169, a: 'Isti habent biscum panem... grangiator, bedellus,

lurard.' Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., I, f 126: 'Et quod

habeat... quolibet anno de tota vita sua unam robam de secta

armigerorum nostrorum et unam robam competentem vel duas marcas

pro uxore sua.' f 142: 'Concessisse Thome de Panis redditum unius

robe annuatim recipiendi apud Glastoniam de secta armigerorum

nostrorum videlicet quartam partem panni cum furrura agnina

precii 2 solidorum uel duos solidos et si aliquo anno armigeris

nostris robas non dederimus, volumus et concedimus... capiat illo

anno... 20 solidos.' f. 146, d: '... tres panes, videlicet unum

panem uocatum priestlof et alterum panem uocatum bastardlof et

tercium panem uocatum seriauntlof de panetria predicti

abbatis.... Et redditum unius robe... videlicet quartam partem

unius panni de lecta officiariorum cum furrura agnina. Et pro

predicta Aluecia uxore sua unam robam videlicet et octo virgas

panni de secta secundorum clericorum cum furrura de scurellis.'



30. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 3. Cf 16: 'Vinitor habet talem

liberacionem sicut prepositus grangie.'



31. Cellaler's Register of Bury St. Edmund's, Cambr. Univ., Gg.

iv. 4, f 49, b: 'Inquisitio generalis dicit quod omnes gersumarii

debent esse prepositi vel heywardi ad voluntatem domini nec se

excusare possint racione alicuius tenementi ut patet in curia

ibidem tenta anno regis Henrici 54to. Et notandum quod quicumque

est prepositus aule de Bertone magna habebit infra manerium unum

equum sumptibus domini cum una stotte et dimidiam acram ordei de

meliore post terram compostatam et habebit stipulam pisei vel

fabarum sine diminucione. Et si tenet duas terras custumarias

plenas erit quietus pro opcribus suis pro una terra et habebit ad

natale domini 1 den. ad oblacionem, die purificacionis unam

candelam precii quarterii et ad carnipriuium debet participari

Una perna baconis inter omnes famulos curie et ad pascham habebit

1 d. pro oblacione sua.' Eynsham Inqu. 6: 'Et quis eorum fuerit

prepositus manerii, liber erit et quietus de omnibus servitiis et

consuetudinibus quas facit Johannes Mareys predictus, auxiliis,

pannagiis et denario Sti Petri exceptis.'



32. Suffolk Court Rolls (Bodleian), 3: 'Terra debuit custodiam

clauium conuentus.' Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi. f

26, a: 'Ad idem tenementum pertinet esse coronarium et replegiare

homines episcopi... et facere capciones et disseisinas infra

insulam et extra.' Shaftesbury Cart., Harl, MSS., 61, f 60:

'Iacobus tenet 5 acras et servabit boves excepta pestilencia et

violencia.'



33. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., I, f 126: 'Carta abbatis

Galfridi facta Willelmo Pasturel (pistori) de terris et

tenementis in Glastonia:... reddendo inde per annum nobis et

successoribus nostris unam rosam ad festum nativitatis beati

Johannis baptiste pro omni seruicio saluo seruicio regali quantum

pertinet ad tantam terram et salvo nobis et successoriblls

nostris sectis curiarum nostrarum Glastonie sicut alii liberi

eiusdem uille nobis faciunt.' Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 10:

'Galterus portarius tenet tenementum suum scilicet portam

hereditarie cum his pertinentiis.' Shaftesbury Cart., Harl. MSS.,

61, f 90: 'Maria Dei gratia Abbatissa ecclesie Sti Eadwardi...

Cum dilectus noster Thurstanus portarius portam nostram cum

omnibus ad eam pertinentibus toto tempore vite sue libere et

quiete et iure hereditario possedisset et Robertus filius et

heres eius, dum post eum contigit Thomam heredem eiusdem Roberti

post decessum patris eius eo quod minoris esset etatis in

custodiam nostram deuenire... cumque ipsum diucius tenuissemus in

custodia pensatis predecessorum suorum obsequiis qui nobis

fideliter et laudabiliter ministrauerunt... Iura ad ipsum et ad

heredes eius racione custodie dicte porte pertinencia... presenti

pagina duximus exprimenda.'



34. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 13.



35. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., I, f. 125: 'Carta Muriclle

Pasturel facta Galfrido Abbati Glastoniensi de tenementis et

redditibus pertinentibus (ad) servanciam de la lauandrie.'



36. Bury St. Edmund's Reg., Harl. MSS., 743, f 270 sqq.: '....

Ita tamen quod nullus obedienciariorum predictorum potestatem

habeat seu auctoritatem conferendi aliquod officium seu

servanciam alicui ad terminum vite nec statum liberi tenementi

alicui in premissis de cetero concedendi, set huiusmodi

seruientes officia predicta necessaria ex collacione predictorum

obedienciariorum habentes ad voluntatem obedienciariorum

predictorum removeantur quociens necesse fuerit (A.D. 1294).'



37. A fourth class would be composed of tenements belonging to

people personally strange to the manor. Such 'forinsec' tenants

were often high and mighty persons who had nothing to do with the

agrarian arrangements of the place. I do not speak of this class,

because its position is evidently an artificial one and of no

importance for the internal organisation of the manor, though

interesting from the legal point of view.



38. Shaftesbury Inqu , Harl. MSS., 61, f. 45, d: 'Bubulci et

Gadinci habent sabbatum per ordinem carucarum donec eorum aretur

terra.' Glastonbury Inqu of 1189, p. 14: 'Habebit etiam Unam

acram in autumpno Uno anno apud Strete et alio anno aliam acram

apud Waltonam.'



39. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1180, p. 46: 'Stephanus fil. B.... de

dominico 2 acras ad implementum terre sue.' Cf 39: '3 acras ad

perficiendum suas 5 acras.' Ibid. 81: 'Norman de Pola dimidiam

virgatam. Totum tenementum suum est de dominico.'



40. Ibid. 39: 'unam acram pro 4d. ad emendacionem terre sue.'



41. Ibid. 27: 'Robertus prepositus unam acram pro quodam soc quam

magister Alured tenuit, et dicunt juratores sic esse utilius quam

esset in cultura, quia longe est a dominico.'



42. Domesday of St. Paul's, p. 118: 'Anno domini 1240 Hugone de

Sto Eadmundo existente custode manerii de bello campo homines

infrascripti tenentes terras de dominico quas vocant inlandes

sine auctoritate capituli augmentaverunt redditum assizum, ut

auctoritas capituli interveniret.'



43. Ibid, p. 121: 'Ricardus A. non feffatus nisi per firmarium

consuevit dare annuatim 4 solidos; de cetero dabit 4 sol. 7 den.

et ob.' Cf 52: 'Subscripti sunt feffati de pasturis et frutectis

usque ad titulum in proximum.' Add. MSS. 6159, f 70: 'Robertus

Cob tenet 5 acras pro 25 d. per capitulum ut sit perpetuum.'

Domesday of St. Paul's, 60: 'Ricardus Wor 13 acras de terra

arabili et unum mariscum 10 acrarum pro 4 sol. et 10 d. et per

cartam capituli.'



44. Ramsay Inqu., Cotton MSS., Galba E. x. fol. 49: 'De nova

purprestura 50 acras.... quas 4 homines de dominico tenent.' Cf

Domesday of St. Paul's, 7. 20.



45. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, 111: 'Homines tenent septem

virgatas terre de dominico de terra superius nominata, in parte

erat liberata in tempore Henrici episcopi et in parte postea cum

7 acris quas Johannes clericus tenet.' Domesday of St. Paul's,

51: 'Tenentes de dominieo antiquitus assiso.' 53: 'Dieunt ecram

quod terre de dominico de novo tradite satis utiliter tradite

sunt.'



46. Bracton, f 220. See F.W. Maitland in the Harvard Law Review,

iii. 173.



47. Rot. Hundr. ii. 336, a: 'In firmariis Johannes clericus tenet

unam dimidiam virgatam terre ad terminum vitae suae pro 6 solidis

per annum pro omni servicio.' Cf 344, 346. Add. MSS. 6159, p. 70:

'Hanc terram tenuit postmodum Thomas de Retendon et cum esset

conventus a capitulo super ingressu in illa eo quod aliquando

dixisset quod tenuit eam in feodo et non posset illud monstrare

et recognovit se non habere ius in illa et reddidit eam quietam

decano et capitulo qui postmodum concesserunt eandem terram cum

manso ipsi Thomae tenendum de ipsis ad vitam suam tantum pro 2

sol. et 6 d. per annum.' Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., I, 240, a:

'Magister Nicholaus de Malmesburi rector ecclesie de

Cristemalforde... quod cum ego recepissem terram Ricardi de

Leyweye in manerio de Cristemalforde... ad terminum 15 annorum et

uiri religiosi Glastonie se opposuissent dicentes (dicenti?) me

esse infeodatum de terra predicta, presenti scriptura confiteor

me post predictos 18 annos in dicta terra non posse vendicare

feodum nec liberum tenementum.'



48. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 79: 'Johannes clericus... idem

tenet unum cotsetle pro 16 d. pro omni servitio ex presto

firmariorum Reginaldi scilicet de Waltona.' Domesday of St.

Paul's, 94: 'Gilbertus filius N. tenet tres virgatas in quas

Gilbertus avus Suus habuit ingressum per Theodoricum firmarium et

modo reddit pro illis 36 solidos,' etc. Ibid. 40: 'Thomas filius

Godrici 22 acras pro 22 d. cuius medietas quondam Stephani, set

habet cam per Ricardum firmarium.' Ibid. 25: 'Walterus de mora 14

acras pro 4 solidis et 8 d. quondam Elvine, cui non attinet,

cuius ingressus ignoratur.'



49. Warwickshire Hundred Roll, Q. R. Misc. Books, 429, f 13, b:

'Unde Willelmus de Wexton tenet unum cotagium libere ad terminum

vite sue pro 4 solidis metens in autumpno per 1 diem.' A peculiar

case is found in Glastonbury Inqu. of 1 189, p. 69 : 'Godwin

palmer... dimidiam virgatam... ex tempore Roberti Abbatis per

Thomam Cameriarum in cujus custodia fuit tunc manerium.' (Later

hand): 'Iste Godwin dedit Henrico abbati dimidiam marcam et

acrevit gabulum de 12 d. Hec convencio durabit dum dominus Abbas

erit.'



50. Domesday of St. Paul's, 25: 'Robertus filius Roger filii

mercatoris unam acram et dimidiam pro 6 d. Item paruum augmentum

pro 1 d.'



51. Rot. Hundr. i. 451: 'Item Andreas prepositus tenet tantum

terre sicut dictus Goscelinus villanus in omnibus. Et preter hoc

tenet 3 acras pro libra cimini. Item Rogerus Doning facit sicut

dictus Goscelinus in omnibus et debet domino suo pro uno

seillione terre 6 d. per annum. Willelmus Mathew tenet eodem modo

et preter hoc dat domino suo pro una acra 4 capones precii 6

den.'



52. Worcester Cart., 27, a: 'de forlandis. De Thoma de G. pro 5

acris... De acra quam Symon Carpenter tenuit. De Alicia vidua pro

dimidia acra. De J ohanne Roberti pro 4 buttis in crofta,' etc.



53. Domesday of St. Paul's, p. 7 sqq.: '(Kenesworthe) isti tenent

de dominico et de essarto.' 21 sqq.: '(Erdelege) isti tenent de

essarto veteri.' 75: '(Nastox) nova essarta.'



54. Worc. Cart., 13: 'Idem tenet assartum pro medietate fructus

et Prior invenit medietatem seminis.'



55. The essarts of St. Paul, London, are divided into small

portions among the peasantry, and the same men own them who are

possessed of the regular holdings all indications that the

clearing was made according to a general plan and by the whole

village.



56. Worcester Cart., 47, 48: 'de soccagiis et forlandis

villanorum.' Cf 49.



57. A curious species of land tenure is the so-called rofliesland

(rough lease?). Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, 29: 'W. de W. tenet

unum Rofliesland eodem servicio; tota terra est in voluntate

domini.' 65: 'W. tenet 5 acras et filius suus 5 acras; unus eorum

tenet carucam domini, alter fugat boves. Terra quam filius eius

tenet est Rofles.' 66: 'R. fil. A. tenet unum ferdel de

Rofliesland pro 2 solidis pro omni servicio per camerarium.' 90:

'Idem tenet dimidiam virgatam de rofliesland pro duobus solidis,

quod utilius esset edificari.' Cf 164, sub voce Roflesland. The

name is found often in old leases in Wilts and Somerset as a

'Rough lease' or 'Rowlease.' I think the term must indicate one

of those informal agreements of which I speak in the text. See

also Reg. Malmesbur. ii. 9, 10.



58. Rot. Hundr. ii. 437: 'Symon et Petrus... tenent de eodem

Alano unam virgatam terre et solvunt per annum 8 s. et debent

arare tres dimidias acras terre... Adam Swetcoc tantum tenet de

predicto Alano et solvit 9 sol. 3 d. et facit per omnia sicut

predicti Simon et Petrus et tantum plus quod debet metere...

Thomas Alwyne tantum tenet de predicto Alano et solvit 8 s. et

debet arare 3 acras avene et metere duas acras,' etc. Cf. 446,

473.



59. Rot. Hundr. ii. 656.



60. In Sawtrey le Moyne and Sawtrey Beaumeys (659, 660) the free

tenants are partly virgaters and half virgaters, partly holders

of small plots. I need not say that all my quotations are of

cases which might be multiplied to any extent.



61. The undated Survey of the Ramsey Cartulary (ii. 487) has a

different reckoning: 'Item omnes positi ad censum qui tenent

virgatam, vel dimidiam virgatam, dabunt per annum pro virgata

octo solidos, vel pro dimidia virgata quatuor solidos.' There are

several other small discrepancies with the Hundred Roll

description. The document endorsed in the Cartulary seems the

earlier one, and the differences have to be explained in all

probability by some attempt on the part of the Monastery to set

up a higher rent at the time of its compilation. One does not see

the slightest ground for any reduction of the rent in process of

time. Generally speaking, the conditions described in the Hundred

Roll are more irregular than those mentioned in the Cartulary.



62. The Ramsey Cartulary has simply: 'Et virgatarius arabit et

herciabit qualibet septimana per unum diem sicut operarius.'



63. Rot. Hundr. ii. 348.



64. Ib. 443, 444. Isabel, the daughter of William le Frend, is

taken as a typical half-virgater.



65. Rot. Hundr. ii. 326.



66. Ib. ii. 327.



67. lb. ii. 436.



68. Ib. ii. 438.



69. Ib. ii. 473.



70. Rot. Hundr. 470: '(villani) quilibet istorum tenet dimidiam

virgatam terre de predicta Elena de quibus xxx et 1 operantur in

uno anno et alii xxxij operantur in alio anno et in eodem anno

quo operantur dant domine per annum 8d. et alii qui non operantur

dant per annu quilibet dimidius virgatarius 2s. 10d. et auxilium

Vicecomitis 1d. obolum et quilibet dat obolum, quadrantem ad

festum St. Michaelis.'



71. Maitland, Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, vol. i. 95: A

reeve complains that Richer Jocelin's Son and Richard Reeve and

his wife have insulted him, by saying among other things'... quod

cepisse debuit munera de divitibus ne essent censuarii et

pauperes ad censum posuisse debuit.'



72. It might perhaps be objected that the difference in favour of

the free people ought to be explained by a depreciation of money

which in process of time lowered the value of quit rents. But the

explanation would hardly suit the age in which the Hundred Rolls

were compiled. The phenomenon mentioned in the text may be

observed in all the Cartularies, and there is no reason to think

that the free rents which occur in them are already antquated

survivals of agreements which had lost their economic sense.



73. Rot. Hundr. ii. 542.



74. Ib. 348.



75. Ib. 508.



76. Exch. Q. R. Misc. Books, N 29, f 11 a.



77. Exch. Q. R. Misc. Books, N 29, f. 12: 'Idem Thomas habet

ibidem 12 villanos tenentes 4 virgatas terre et dimidiam in

villenagio, unde Johannes Aylind tenet dimidiam virgatam terre

pro 5s. 8d. faciens fenum domini per Unum diem cum uno homine,

metens blada eiusdem domini per 1 diem eum Uno homine, etc. Idem

Thomas habet ibidem 11 liberos tenentes 11 virgatas terre et

dimidiam. Unde Willelmus en la Nurne tenet dimidiam virgatam et 4

acras terre pro 4 solidis faciens sectam ad curiam de Bathekynton

bis per annum pro omni demanda.'



78. Bodekesham, Cambs. (R. H. ii. 487), is probably a case of

molland. The often-quoted instance of Ayllington is doubtful,

although the Ramsey Cartulary speaks of the liber tenentes as

malmanni. The expression was probably in use for all rent-paying

people, although properly a designation of those who had commuted

their services. See Appendix XV.



79. R. H. ii. 349, 350: 'In Weston, Bucks, the service of the

villain virgater is estimated at 5s. 2d.... Elyas Clericus tenet

dim. virgatam et reddit Johanni de Patishull 1d. Willelmus fil.

Willelmi de Ravenestone tenet dim. virgatam de eodem feodo et

reddit per annum 1 d. Thomas Acpelard tenet dimidiam virgatam

terre et reddit dicto Willelmo de Nodaris 3 d. Stephanus Elys

tenet dimidiam virgatam et solvit eodem Willelmo 2d. Thomas

Thebaud tenet dimidiam virgatam et reddit eidem Willelmo 1d....

Item Robertus le Cobeler tenet dimidiam virgatam terre et solvit

eodem 1 libram cimini. Omnes isti prescripti dant per annum

forinsecum et scutagium domino Willelmo de Nodaris quando

currit.' Cf Torrington, Bucks, R. H. ii. 352.



80. R. H. ii. 713 (Stanton, Oxon.): 'ad alternacionem cujuslibet

domini de Stanton debet recognoscere eundem dominum de uno

spervario et dabit dimidiam marcam eidem domino.'



81. See e. g. Ramsey Cartul. i. 138, 142.



82. R. H. ii. 402, 403.



83. R. H. ii. 466. Cf 609.



84. R. H. ii. 502.



85. R. H. ii. 484, 485.



86. R. H. 469, 470, 475.





Chapter 5



The Manorial Court





    The communal organisation of the village is made to subserve

the needs of manorial administration. We feel naturally inclined

to think and to speak of the village community in opposition to

the lord and to notice all points which show its self-dependent

character. But in practice the institution would hardly have

lived such a long life and played such a prominent part if it had

acted only or even chiefly as a bulwark against the feudal owner.

Its development has to be accounted for to a great extent by the

fact that lord and village had many interests in common. They

were natural allies in regard to the higher manorial officers.

The lord had to manage his estates by the help of a powerful

ministerial class, but there was not much love lost between

employers and administrators, and often the latent antagonism

between them broke out into open feuds. If it is always difficult

to organise a serviceable administration, the task becomes

especially arduous in a time of undeveloped means of

communication and of weak state control. It was exceedingly

difficult to audit accounts and to remove bad stewards. The

strength and self-government of the village group appeared, from

this point of view, as a most welcome help on the side of the

owner.(1*) He had practically to surrender his arbitrary power

over the peasant population and their land, he had to conform to

fixed rules as to civil usage, manorial claims and distribution

of territory; but the common standards established by custom did

not only hamper his freedom of disposition, they created a basis

on which he could take his stand above and against his stewards.

He had precise arrangements to go by in his supervision of his

ministers, and there was something more than his own interest and

energy to keep guard over the maintenance of these forms: the

village communities were sure to fight for them from beneath. The

facilities for joint action and accumulation of strength derived

from communal self-government vouched indirectly for the

preservation of the chief capital invested by the lord in the

land: it was difficult for the steward to destroy the economic

stays of the villainage.

    There are many occasions when the help rendered by the

village communities to the lord may be perceived directly. I need

hardly mention the fact that the surveys, which form the chief

material of our study, were compiled in substance by sworn

inquests, the members of which were considered as the chief

representatives of the community, and had to give witness to its

lore. The great monastic and exchequer surveys do not give any

insight into the mode of selection of the jurors: it may he

guessed with some probability that they were appointed for the

special purpose, and chosen by the whole court of the manor. In

some cases the ordinary jurors of the court, or chief pledges,

may have been called upon to serve on the inquest. There is

another point which it is impossible to decide quite

conclusively, namely, whether questions about which there was

some doubt or the jurors disagreed were referred to the whole

body of the court. But, although we do not hear of such instances

in our great surveys, it is surely an important. indication that

the extant court-rolls constantly speak of the whole court

deciding questions when the verdict of ordinary jurors seemed

insufficient. And such reserved cases were by no means restricted

to points of law; very often they concerned facts of the same

nature as those enrolled in the surveys.(2*)

    On a parallel with the stewards and servants appointed by the

lord, although in subordination to them, appear officers elected

by the village. As we have seen, the manorial beadle was matched

by the communal reeve, and a like contrast is sometimes found on

the lower degrees.(3*) In exceptional cases the lord nominates

the reeve, although he still remains the chief representative of

village interests and the chief collector of services. But in the

normal course the office was elective, and curious intermediate

forms may be found. For instance, the village selects the

messarius (hayward), and the lord may appoint him reeve.(4*) This

is a point, again, which shows most clearly the intimate

connexion between the interests of the lord and those of the

village. The peasants become guarantors for the reeve whom they

chose. A formula which comes from Gloucester Abbey requires, that

only such persons be chosen as have proved their capacity to

serve by a good conduct of their own affairs: all shortcomings

and defects are to be made good ultimately by the rural community

that elected the officer, and no excuses are to be accepted

unless in cases of exceptional hardship.(5*) The economic tracts

of the thirteenth century state the same principle in even a more

explicit manner.

    From the manorial point of view the whole village is

responsible for the collection of duties. There are payments

expressly imposed on the whole. Such is the case with the yearly

auxilium or donum. The partition of these between the

householders is naturally effected in a meeting of the

villagers.(6*) Most services are laid on the virgaters

separately. But they are all held answerable for the regularity

and completeness with which every single member of the community

performs his duties. As to free holdings, it is sometimes noticed

especially to what extent they are subjected to the general

arrangement: whether they participate with the rest in payments,

and whether the tenants have to work in the same way as the

villains.(7*) Very often the documents point out that such and

such a person ought to take part in certain obligations but has

been exempted or fraudulently exempts himself, and that the

village community has to bear a relative increase of its

burdens.(8*) A Glastonbury formula orders the steward to make

inquiries about people who have been freed from the performance

of their services in such a way that their responsibility has

been thrown on the village.(9*)

    But it would be very wrong to assume that the rural community

could act only in the interest of the lord. Its solidarity is

recognised in matters which do not concern him, or even which

call forth an opposition between him and the peasantry.

    I have already spoken of the curious fact that the village is

legally recognised as a unit, separated from the manor although

existing within it. When the reeve and the four men attend the

sheriff's tourn or the eyre, they do not represent the lord only,

but also the village community. Part of their expenses are borne

by the lord and part by their fellow villagers.(10*) The

documents tell us of craftsmen who have to work for the village

as well as for the lord.(11*) On a parallel with services due to

the landowner, we find sometimes kindred services reserved for

the village community.(12*) If a person has been guilty of

misdemeanours and is subjected to a special supervision, this

supervision applies to his conduct in regard both to the lord and

to the fellow villagers.(13*) No doubt the relations of the

village to its lord are much more fully described in the

documents than the internal arrangement of the community, but

this could not be otherwise in surveys compiled for the use of

lords and stewards. Even the chance indications we gather as to

these internal arrangements are sufficient to give an insight

into the powerful ties of the village community.

    Indeed, the rural settlement appears in our records as a

'juridical person.' The Court Rolls of Brightwaltham, edited for

the Selden Society by Mr Maitland, give a most beautiful example

of this. The village of Brightwaltham enters into a formal

agreement with the lord of the manor as to some commons. it

surrenders its rights to the lord in regard to the wood of

Hemele, and gets rid in return of the rights claimed by the lord

in Estfield and in a wood called Trendale.(14*) Nothing can be

more explicit: the village acts as an organised community; it

evidently has free disposition as to rights connected with the

soil; it disposes of these rights not only independently of the

lord, but in an exchange to which he appears as a party. We see

no traces of the rightless condition of villains which is

supposed to be their legal lot, and a powerful community is

recognised by the lord in a form which bears all the traits of

legal definition. in the same way the annals of Dunstable speak

of the seisin of the township of Toddington,(15*) and of a

feoffment made by them on behalf of the lord.

    I have only to say in addition to this summing up of the

subject, that the quasi-legal standing of the villains in regard

to the lord appears with special clearness when they stand

arrayed against him as a group and not as single individuals. We

could guess as much on general grounds, but the self-dependent

position assumed by the 'communitas villanorum' of Brightwaltham

is the more interesting, that it finds expression in a formal and

recorded agreement.

    We catch a glimpse of the same phenomenon from yet another

point of view. It is quite common to find entire estates let to

farm to the rural community settled upon them.(16*) In such cases

the mediation of the bailiff might be dispensed with; the village

entered into a direct agreement with the lord or his chief

steward and undertook a certain set of services and payments, or

promised to give a round sum. Such an arrangement was profitable

to both parties. The villains were willing to pay dearly in order

to free themselves from the bailiff's interference with their

affairs; the landowner got rid of a numerous and inconvenient

staff of stewards and servants; the rural life was organised on

the basis of self-government with a very slight control on the

part of the lord. Such agreements concern the general management

of manors as well as the letting of domain land or of particular

plots and rights.(17*) Of course there was this great

disadvantage for the lord, that the tie between him and his

subjects was very much loosened by such arrangements, and

sometimes he had to complain that the conditions under which the

land was held were materially disturbed under the farmership of

the village. It is certain, that in a general way this mode of

administration led to a gradual improvement in the social status

of the peasantry.

    One great drawback of investigations into the history of

medieval institutions consists in the very incomplete manner in

which the subject is usually reflected in the documents. We have

to pick up bits of evidence as to very important questions in the

midst of a vast mass of uninteresting material, and sometimes

whole sides of the subject are left in the shade, not by the

fault of the inquirer, but in consequence of disappointing gaps

in the contemporary records. Even conveyancing entries,

surrenders, admittances, are of rare occurrence on some of the

more ancient rolls, and the probable reason is, that they were

not thought worthy of enrolment.(18*) As for particulars of

husbandry they are almost entirely absent from the medieval

documents, and it is only on the records of the sixteenth and yet

later centuries that we have to rely when we look for some direct

evidence of the fact that the manorial communities had to deal

with such questions.(19*)

And so our knowledge of these institutions must be based largely

on inference. But even granting all these imperfections of the

material, it must be allowed that the one side of manorial life

which is well reflected in the documents -- the juridical

organisation of the manor -- affords very interesting clues

towards an understanding of the system and of its origins.

    Let us repeat again, that the management of the manor is by

no means dependent on capricious and one-sided expressions of the

lord's will. On the contrary, every known act of its life is

connected with collegiate decisions. Notwithstanding the absolute

character of the lord with regard to his villains taken

separately, he is in truth but the centre of a community

represented by meetings or courts. Not only the free, but also

the servile tenantry are ruled in accordance with the views and

customs of a congregation of the tenants in their divers classes.

There can be no doubt that the discretion of the lord was often

stretched in exceptional cases, that relations based on moral

sense and a true comprehension of interests often suffered from

violence and encroachment. But as a general rule, and with

unimportant exceptions, the feudal system is quite as much

characterised by the collegiate organisation of its parts as by

their monarchical exterior. The manorial courts were really

meetings of the village community under the presidency of the

lord or of his steward.

    It is well known that later law recognises three kinds of

seignorial courts: the Leet, the Court Baron, and the Customary

Court. The first has to keep the peace of the King, the others

are concerned with purely manorial affairs. The Leet appears in

possession of a police and criminal jurisdiction in so far as

that has not been appropriated by the King's own tribunals-its

parallel being the sheriff's tourn in the hundred. The Court

Baron is a court of free tenants entrusted with some of the

conveyancing and the petty litigation between them, and also with

the exercise of minor franchises. The Customary Court has in its

charge the unfree population of the manor. In keeping with this

division the Court Baron consists according to later theory of a

body of free suitors which is merely placed under the presidency

of the steward, while in the Customary Court the steward is the

true and only judge, and the copyholders, customary tenants or

villains, around him are merely called up as presenters.

    The masterly investigations of Mr Maitland, from which any

review of the subject must start, have shown conclusively, that

this latter doctrine, as embodied in Coke, for instance, draws

distinctions and establishes definitions which were unknown to

earlier practice. The Leet became a separate institution early

enough, although its name is restricted to one province --

Norfolk -- even at the time of the Hundred Rolls.(20*) The

foundation of the court was laid by the frank-pledge system and

the necessity of keeping it in working order. We find the Leet

Court sometimes under the names 'Curia Visus franci plegii,' or

'Visus de borchtruning',(21*) and it appears then as a more

solemn form of the general meeting. It is held usually twice a

year to register all the male population from twelve years

upwards, to present those who have not joined the tithings, and

sometimes to elect the heads or representatives of these

divisions -- the 'Capitales plegii,'(22*) Sometimes the tithing

coincides with the township, is formed on a territorial basis, as

it were, so that we may find a village called a tithing.(23*)

This leads to the inference, that the grouping into tens was but

an approximate one, and this view is further supported by the

fact that we hear of bodies of twelve along with those of

ten.(24*)

    As to attending the meeting, a general rule was enforced to

that effect, that the peasantry must attend in person and not by

reason of their tenure.(25*) But as it was out of the question to

drive all the men of a district to the manorial centres on such

days, exceptions of different kinds are frequent.(26*) Besides

the women and children, the personal attendants of the lord get

exempted, and also shepherds, ploughboys. and men engaged in

driving waggons laden with corn. Servants and aliens were

considered as under the pledge of the person with whom they were

staying.

    The aim of its whole arrangement was to ensure the

maintenance of peace, and therefore everybody was bound on

entering the tithing to swear, not only that he would keep the

peace, but that he would conceal nothing which might concern the

peace.(27*) It is natural that such a meeting as that held for

the view of frank-pledge should begin to assume police duties and

a certain criminal jurisdiction. Mr Maitland has shown how, by

its intimate connexion with the sheriff's tourn, the institution

of frank-pledge was made to serve the purpose of communal

accusation in the time of Henry II. The Assize of Clarendon

(1166) gave the impulse in regard to the Sheriff's Court, and

private lords followed speedily on the same line, although they

could not copy the pattern in all its details, and the system of

double presentment described by Britton and Fleta proved too

cumbersome for their small courts with only a few freeholders on

them. In any case the jurisdiction of the Court Leet is

practically formed in the twelfth century, and the Quo Warranto

inquiries of the thirteenth only bring out its distinctions more

clearly.(28*)

    The questions as to the opposition between Court Baron and

Customary Court are more intricate and more important. Mr

Maitland has collected a good deal of evidence to prove that the

division did not exist originally, and that we have before us in

the thirteenth century only one strictly manorial court, the

'halimotum.' I may say, that I came to the same conclusion myself

in the Russian edition of the present work quite independently of

his argument. Indeed a somewhat intimate acquaintance with the

early Court Rolls must necessarily lead to this doctrine. If some

distinctions are made, they touch upon a difference between

ordinary meetings and those which were held under exceptional

circumstances and attended by a greater number of Suitors than

usual. The expression 'libera curia' which meets us sometimes in

the documents is an exact parallel with that of 'free gallows,'

and means a court held freely by the lord and not a court of free

men. Mr Maitland adds, that he has found mention of a court of

villains and one of knights, but that he never came across a

court of barons in the sense given in later jurisprudence to the

term 'Court Baron.' Here I must put in a trifling qualification

which does not affect his main position in the least. The

Introduction to the Selden Society's second volume, which is our

greatest authority on this subject, mentions a case when the

halimot was actually divided on the principle laid down by Coke

and later lawyers generally. I mean the case of Steyning, where

the Abbot holds a separate court for free tenants and another for

his villains. The instance belongs to the time of the Edwards,

but it is marked as an innovation and a bad one.(29*) It shows,

however, that the separation of the courts was beginning to set

in. The Steyning case is not quite an isolated one. I have found

in the Hundred Rolls the expression Sockemanemot to designate a

court attended by free sokemen,(30*) and it may be suggested that

the formation of the so-called Court Baron may have been

facilitated by the peculiar constitution and customs of those

courts where the unfree element was almost entirely absent. The

Danish shires and Kent could not but exercise a certain influence

on the adjoining counties. However this might be, the general

rule is, undoubtedly, that no division is admitted, and that all

the suitors and affairs are concentrated in the one manorial

court -- the halimot.

    It met generally once every three weeks, but it happens

sometimes that it is called together without a definite limit of

time at the pleasure of the lord.(31*) Cases like that of the

manors of the Abbey of Ramsey, in which the courts are summoned

only twice a year, are quite exceptional, and in the instance

cited the fact has to be explained by the existence of an upper

court for these estates, the court of the honour of

Broughton.(32*) The common suitors are the peasants living within

the manor -- the owners of holdings in the fields of the manor.

In important trials, when free men are concerned, or when a thief

has to be hanged, suitors are called in from abroad -- mostly

small free tenants who have entered into an agreement about a

certain number of suits to the court.(33*) These foreign suitors

appear once every six weeks, twice a year, for special trials

upon a royal writ, for the hanging of thieves,(34*) etc. The duty

of attending the court is constantly mentioned in the documents.

It involved undoubtedly great hardships, expense, and loss of

time: no wonder that people tried to exempt themselves from it as

much as possible.(35*) Charters relating to land provide for all

manner of cases relating to suit of court. We find it said, for

instance, that a tenant must make his appearance on the next day

after getting his summons, even if it was brought to him at

midnight.(36*) When a holding was divided into several parts, the

most common thing was that one suit remained due from the

whole.(37*) All these details are by no means without importance,

because they show that fiscal reasons had as much to do with the

arrangement of these meetings as real interests: every court gave

rise to a number of fines from suitors who had made default.

    The procedure of the halimot was ruled by ancient custom. All

foreign elements in the shape of advocates or professional

pleaders were excluded. Such people, we are told by the manorial

instructions, breed litigation and dead-letter formalism, whereas

trials ought to be conducted and judged according to their

substance.(38*) Another ceremonial peculiarity of some interest

concerns the place where manorial courts are held. It is certain

that the ancient gemts were held in the open air, as Mr Gomme

shows in his book on early folk-mots. And we see a survival of

the custom in the meeting which used to be held by the socmen of

Stoneleigh on Motstowehill.(39*) But in the feudal period the

right place to hold the court was the manorial hall. We find

indeed that the four walls of this room are considered as the

formal limit of the court, so that a man who has stept within

them and has then gone off without sufficient reason is charged

with contempt of court.(40*) Indeed, the very name of 'halimot'

can hardly be explained otherwise than as the moot held in the

hall.(41*) The point is of some interest, because the hall is not

regarded as a purely material contrivance for keeping people

protected against the cold and the rain, but appears in close

connexion with the manor, and as its centre and symbol.

    We hear very little of husbandry arrangements made by the

courts,(42*) and even of the repartition of duties and

taxes.(43*) Entries relating to the election of officers are more

frequent,(44*) but the largest part of the rolls is taken up by

legal business of all sorts.

    The entire court, and sometimes a body of twelve jurors,

present those who are guilty of any offence or misdemeanour.

Ploughmen who have performed their ploughing on the lord's land

badly, villains who have fled from the fee and live on strange

soil, a man who has not fulfilled some injunction of the lord, a

woman who has picked a lock appended to the door of her cottage

by a manorial bailiff, an inveterate adulterer who loses the

lord's chattels by being fined in the ecclesiastical courts --

all these delinquents of very different kinds are presented to be

punished, and get amerced or put into the stocks, according to

the nature of their offences. It ought to be noticed that an

action committed against the interests of the lord is not

punished by any one-sided act of his will, or by the command of

his steward, but treated as a matter of legal presentment. The

negligent ploughman is not taken to task directly by the bailiff

or any other overseer, but is presented as an offender by his

fellow-peasants, and according to strict legal formality. On the

other hand, the entries are worded in such a way that the part

played by the court is quite clear only as to the presenting of

misdeeds, while the amercement or punishment is decreed in some

manner which is not specified exactly. We read, for instance, in

a roll of the Abbey of Bec how 'the court has presented that

Simon Combe has set up a fence on the lord's land. Therefore let

it be abated.... The court presented that the following had

encroached on the lord's land, to wit, William Cobbler, Maud

Robins, widow (fined 12d.), John Shepherd (fined 12s.)...

Therefore they are in mercy.'(45*) Who has ordered the fence to

be thrown down, and who has imposed the fines on the delinquents?

The most natural inference seems to be that the penal ties were

imposed by the lord or the presiding officer who represented him

in the court. But it is by no means impossible that the court

itself had to decide on the penalty or the amount of the

amercement after first making the presentment as to the fact. Its

action would merely divide itself into two independent decisions.

Such a procedure would be a necessity in the case of a free

tenant who could not be fined at will; and there is nothing to

show that it was entirely different in regard to the servile

tenantry. When the lord interferes at pleasure this is noted as

an exceptional feature.(46*) It is quite possible, again, that

the amercement was imposed on the advice or by a decision of

certain suitors singled out from the rest as persons of special

credit, as in a case from the same manorial rolls of Bec.(47*) It

is hardly necessary to draw very precise conclusions, as the

functions of the suitors do not appear to have been sharply

defined. But for this very reason it would be wrong to speak of

the one-sided right of the lord or of his representative to

impose the penalty.

    The characteristic mixture of different elements which we

notice in the criminal jurisdiction of the manorial court may be

seen also if we examine its civil jurisdiction. We find the

halimot treating in its humble region all the questions of law

which may be debated in the courts of common law. Seisin,

inheritance, dower, leases, and the like are discussed, and the

pleading, though subject to the custom of the manor, takes very

much the shape of the contentions before the royal judges. Now

this civil litigation is interesting from two points of view: it

involves statements of law and decisions as to the relative value

of claims. In both respects the parties have to refer to the body

of the court, to its assessors or suitors. The influence of the

'country' on the judgment goes further here than in the Common

Law Courts, because there is no independent common law to go by,

and the custom of the manor has generally to be made out by the

manorial tenants themselves. And so a party 'puts himself on his

country', not only in order to decide some issue of fact, but

also in regard to points of customary law. Inquisitions are made

and juries formed quite as much to establish the jurisprudence of

the court as to decide who has the better claim under the said

jurisprudence. Theoretically it is the full court which is

appealed to, but in ordinary cases the decision rests with a jury

of twelve, or even of six. The authority of such a verdict goes

back however to the supposed juridical sense or juridical

knowledge of the court as a body. Now it cannot be contested that

such an organisation of justice places all the weight of the

decision with the body of the suitors as assessors. The presiding

officer and the lord whom he represents have not much to do in

the course of the deliberation. If we may take up the comparison

which Mr Maitland has drawn with German procedure,(48*) we shall

say that the 'Urtheilfinder' have all the best of it in the trial

as against the 'Richter.' This 'Richter' is seemingly left with

the duties of a chairman, and the formal right to draw up and

pronounce a decision which is materially dependent on the ruling

of the court. But a special reserve of equity is left with the

lord, and in consequence of its operation we find some decisions

and sentences altered, or their execution postponed.(49*) I have

to endorse one more point of Mr Maitland's exposition, namely,

his view of the presentment system as of a gradual modification

of the original standing of the manorial suitors as true

assessors of the court. Through the influence of the procedure of

royal courts, on the one hand, of the stringent classifications

of the tenantry in regard to status on the other, the presenters

were gradually debased, and legal learning came to maintain that

the only judge of a customary court was its steward. But a

presentment of the kind described in the manorial rolls vouches

for a very independent position of the suitors, and indeed for

their prevalent authority in the constitution of the tribunal.

    The conveyancing entries, although barren and monotonous at

first sight, are very important, in so far as they show, better

perhaps than anything else, the part played by the community and

by its testimony in the transmission of rights. It has become a

common-place to argue that the practice of surrender and

admittance characterises the absolute ownership that the lord has

in the land held in villainage, and proceeds from the fact that

every holder of servile land is in truth merely an occupier of

the plot by precarious tenure. Every change of occupation has to

be performed through the medium of the lord who 're-enters' the

tenement, and concedes it again as if there had been no previous

occupation at all and the new tenant entered on a holding freshly

created for his use. None the less, a theory which lays all the

stress in the case on the surrender into the hand of the lord,

and explains this act from the point of view of absolute

ownership, is wrong in many respects.

    To begin with the legal transmission of a free holding,

although the element of surrender has as it were evaporated from

it, it is quite as much bound up with the fiction of the absolute

ownership of the lord as is the surrender and admittance of

villains and copyholders. The ceremony of investiture had no

other meaning but that of showing that the true owner re-entered

into the exercise of his right, and every act of homage for land

was connected with an act of feoffment which, though obligatory,

first by custom and then by law, was nevertheless no mere

pageant, because it gave rise to very serious claims of service

and casual rights in the shape of wardship, marriage, and the

like. The king who wanted to be everybody's heir was much too

consequent an exponent of the feudal doctrine, and his successors

were forced into a gentler practice. But the fiction of higher

ownership was lurking behind all these contentions of the upper

class quite as much as behind the conveyancing ceremonies of the

manorial court. And in both cases the fiction stretched its

standard of uniformity over very different elements: allodial

ownership was modified by a subjection to the 'dominium

directum,' on the one hand; leases and precarious occupation were

crystalised into tenure, on the other. It is not my object to

trace the parallel of free and peasant holding in its details,

but I lay stress on the principle that the privileged tenure

involved the notion of a personal concession quite as much as did

the base tenure, and that this fundamental notion made itself

felt both in conveyancing formalities and in practical claims.

    I am even inclined to go further: it seems to me that the

manorial ceremony of surrender and admittance, as considered from

the point of view of legal archaeology, may have gone back to a

practice which has nothing to do with the lord's ownership,

although it was ultimately construed to imply this notion. The

tenant enfeoffed of his holding on the conditions of base tenure

was technically termed tenant by copy of court roll or tenant by

the rod -- par la verge. This second denomination is connected

with the fact that, in cases of succession as well as in those of

alienation, the holding passed by the ceremonial action of the

steward handing a rod to the person who was to have the land.

Now, this formality looks characteristic enough; it is exactly

the same as the action of the 'salman' in Frankish law where the

transmission of property is effected by the handing of a rod

called 'festuca.' The important point is, that the 'salman' was

by no means a representative of lordship or ownership', but the

necessary middleman prescribed by customary law, in order to give

the transaction its consecration against all claims of third

persons. The Salic law, in its title 'de affatomire,' presents

the ceremony in a still earlier stage: when a man wants to give

his property to another, he has to call in a middleman and

witnesses; into the hands of this middleman he throws a rod to

show that he relinquishes all claim to the property in question.

The middleman then behaves as owner and host, and treats the

witnesses to a meal in the house and on the land which has been

entrusted to him. The third and last act is, that this

intermediate person passes on the property to the donee

designated by the original owner, and this by the same formal act

of throwing the rod.(50*) The English practice has swerved from

the original, because the office of the middleman has lapsed into

the hands of the steward. But the Characteristic handing of the

rod has well preserved the features of the ancient

'laisuwerpitio' ('the throwing on to the bosom'), and, indeed, it

can hardly be explained on any other supposition but that of a

survival of the practice. I beg the reader to notice two points

which look decisive to me: the steward when admitting a tenant

does not use the rod as a symbol of his authority, because he

does not keep it -- he gives it to the person admitted. Still

more, in the surrender the rod goes from the peasant-holder to

the steward. Can there be a doubt that it symbolises the plot of

land, or rather the right over the plot, and that in its passage

from hand to hand there is nothing to show that the steward as

middleman represents absolute ownership, while the peasants at

both ends are restricted to mere occupation on sufferance?(51*)

Is it necessary to explain that these ceremonial details are not

trifles from a historical point of view? Their arrangement is not

a matter of chance but of tradition, and if later generations use

their symbols mechanically, they do not invent them at haphazard.

Symbols and ceremonies are but outward expressions of ideas, and

therefore their combinations are ruled by a certain logic and are

instinct with meaning. In a sense their meaning is deeper and

more to be studied than that supplied by theories expressed in so

many words: they give an insight into a more ancient order of

things. It may be asked, in conclusion, why a Frankish form

should be found prevalent in the customary arrangement of the

English manorial system? The fact will hardly appear strange when

we consider, firstly, that the symbolical acts of investiture and

conveyancing were very similar in Old English and Old Frankish

law,(52*) and that many practices of procedure were imported into

England from France, through the medium of Normandy. It is

impossible at the present date to trace conclusively the

ceremonies of surrender and admittance in all their varieties and

stages of development, but the most probable course of progress

seems to have been a passage from symbolical investiture in the

folk-law of free English ceorls through the Frankish practice of

'affatomire,' to the feudal ceremony of surrender and admittance

by the steward.

    And now let us take up the second thread of our inquiry into

the manorial forms of conveyancing. A tenant by the verge is also

a tenant by copy of court roll. The steward who presided at the

court had to keep a record of its proceedings, and this record

had a primary importance for the servile portion of the

community. While the free people could enter into agreements and

perform legal acts in their own name and by charter, the villains

had to content themselves with ceremonial actions before the

court. They were faithful in this respect to old German

tradition, while the privileged people followed precedents which

may be ultimately traced to a Roman origin. The court roll or

record of manorial courts enabled the base tenant to show, for

instance, that some piece of land was his although he had no

charter to produce in proof of his contention. And we find the

rolls appealed to constantly in the course of manorial

litigation.(53*) But the rolls were nothing else than records of

actions in the court and before the court. They could actually

guide the decision, but their authority was not independent; it

was merely derived from the authority of the court. For this

reason the evidence of the rolls, although very valuable, was by

no means indispensable. A claimant could go past them to the

original fount, that is, to the testimony of the court. And here

we must keep clear of a misconception suggested by a first-sight

analysis of the facts at hand. It would seem that the verdict of

neighbours, to which debateable claims are referred to in the

manorial courts, stands exactly on a par with the verdicts of

jury men taken by the judges of the Royal Courts. This is not so,

however. It is true that the striving of manorial officers to

make the procedure of halimotes as much like the common law

procedure as possible, went far to produce similarity between

forms of actions, presentments, verdicts and juries, in both sets

of tribunals. But nevertheless, characteristic distinctions

remained to show that the import of some institutions brought

near each other in this way was widely different. I have said

already that the peasant suitors of the halimote are appealed to

on questions of law as well as on questions of fact. But the most

important point for our present purpose is this: the jurors

called to substantiate the claim of a party in a trial are mere

representatives of the whole court. The testimony of the court is

taken indirectly through their means, and very often resort is

had to that testimony without the intermediate stage of a jury.

Now this is by no means a trifle from the point of view of legal

analysis. The grand and petty juries of the common law are means

of information, and nothing more. They form no part of the

tribunal, strictly speaking; the court is constituted by the

judges, the lawyers commissioned by the king, who adopt this

method in investigating the facts before them, because a

knowledge of the facts at issue, and an understanding of local

conditions surrounding them, is supposed to reside naturally in

the country where the facts have taken place.(54*) Historically

the institution is evolved from examinations of witnesses and

experts, and has branched off in France into the close formalism

of inquisitorial process. The manorial jury, on the other hand,

represents the court, and interchanges with it.(55*) For this

reason, we may speak directly of the court instead of treating of

its delegates. And if the verdict of the court is taken, it is

not on account of the chance knowledge, the presumable

acquaintance of the suitors with facts and conditions, but as a

living remembrance of what took place before this same court, or

as a re-assertion of its power of regulating the legal standing

of the community. The verdict of the suitors is only another form

of the entry on the rolls, and both are means of securing the

continuity of an institution and not merely of providing

information to outsiders. Of course, claims may not be always

reduced to such elementary forms that they can be decided by a

mere reference to memory, the memory of the constituted body of

the court. A certain amount of reasoning and inference may be

involved in their settlement, a set of juridical doctrines is

necessary to provide the general principles of such reasoning.

And in both respects the manorial court is called upon to act. It

is considered as the repositary of legal lore, and the exponent

of its applications. This means that the court is, what its name

implies, a tribunal and not a set of private persons called upon

to assist a judge by their knowledge of legal details or material

facts.(56*)

    The whole exposition brings us back to a point of primary

importance. The title by which land is held according to manorial

custom is derived from communal authority quite as much as from

the lord's grant. Without stepping out of the feudal evidence

into historical inquiry, we find that civil arrangements of the

peasantry are based on acts performed through the agency of the

steward, and before the manorial court, which has a voice in the

matter and vouches for its validity and remembrance. The 'full

court' is noticed in the records as quite as necessary an element

in the conveyancing business as the lord and his steward,

although the legal. theory of modern times has affected to take

into account only these latter.(57*) Indeed, it is the part

assumed by the court which appears as the distinctive, if not the

more important factor. A feoffment of land made on the basis of

free tenure proceeds from the grantor in the same way as a grant

on the conditions of base tenure; freehold comes from the lord,

as well as copyhold. But copyhold is necessarily transferred in

court, while freehold is not. And if we speak of the presentment

of offences through the representatives of townships, as of the

practice of communal accusation, even so we have to call the

title by which copyhold tenure is created a claim based on

communal testimony.

    All the points noticed in the rolls of manors held at common

law are to be found on the soil of ancient demesne, but they are

stated more definitely there, and the rights of the peasant

population are asserted with greater energy. Our previous

analysis of the condition of ancient demesne has led us to the

conclusion, that it presents a crystallisation of the manorial

community in an earlier stage of development than in the ordinary

manor, but that the constitutive elements in both cases are

exactly the same. For this reason, every question arising in

regard to the usual arrangements ought to be examined in the

light of the evidence that comes from the ancient demesne.

    We have seen that it would be impossible to maintain that

originally the steward was the only judge of the manorial

tribunal; the whole court with its free and unfree suitors

participates materially in the administration of justice, and its

office is extended to questions of law as well as to issues of

fact. On the other hand, it was clear that the steward and the

lord were already preparing the position which they ultimately

assumed in legal theory, that in the exercise of their functions

they were beginning to monopolise the power of ultimate decision

and to restrict the court to the duty of preliminary presentment.

The same parties are in presence in the court of ancient demesne,

but the right of the suitors has been summed up by legal theory

in quite the opposite direction. The suitors are said to be the

judges there; legal dogmatism has set up its hard and fast

definitions, and drawn its uncompromising conclusions as if all

the historical facts had always been arrayed against each other

without the possibility of common origins and gradual

development. Is it necessary to say that the historical reality

was very far from presenting that neat opposition? The ancient

demesne suitors are villains in the main, though privileged in

many respects, and the lord and steward are not always playing

such a subordinate part that one may not notice the transition to

the state of things that exists in common law manors. It is

curious, anyhow, that later jurisprudence was driven to set up as

to the ancient demesne court a rule which runs exactly parallel

to the celebrated theory that there must be a plurality of free

tenants to constitute a manor. Coke expresses it in the following

way: 'There cannot be ancient demesne unless there is a court and

suitors. So if there be but one suitor, for that the suitors are

the judges, and therefore the demandant must sue at common law,

there being a failure of justice within the manor.'(58*) We shall

have to speak of this rule again when treating of classes in

regard to manorial organisation. But let us notice, even now,

that in this view of the ancient demesne court the suitors are

considered as the cardinal element of its constitution. The same

notion may be found already in trials of the fourteenth and even

of the thirteenth century. A curious case is reported in the Year

Books of 11/12 Edw. III.(59*) Herbert of St. Quentyn brought a

writ of false judgment against John of Batteley and his wife, the

judgment having been given in the court of Cookham, an ancient

demesne manor. The suitors, or suit-holders as they were called

there, sent up their record to the King's Bench, and many things

were brought forward against the conduct of the case by the

counsel for the plaintiff, the defendant trying to shield himself

by pleading the custom of the manor to account for all unusual

practices. The judges find, however, that one point at least

cannot be defended on that ground. The suitors awarded default

against the plaintiff because he had not appeared in person

before them, and had sent an attorney, who had been admitted by

the steward alone and not in full court. Stonor, C. J., remarks,

'that it is against law that the person who holds the court is

not suffered to record an attorney for a plea which will be

discussed before him.' The counsel for the plaintiff offer to

prove that the custom of the manor did not exclude an attorney

appointed before the steward, on condition that the steward

should tell it to the suitors in the next court after receiving

him. The case is interesting, not merely because it exhibits the

suit-holders in the undisputed position of judges, but also

because it shows the difficulties created by the presence of the

second element of the manorial system, the seignorial element,

which would neither fit exactly into an entirely communal

organisation nor be ousted from it.(60*) The difficulty stands

quite on the same line with that which meets us in the common law

manor, where the element of the communal assessors has been

ultimately suppressed and conjured away, as it were, by legal

theory. The results are contradictory, but on the same line, as I

say. And the more we go back in time, the more we find that both

elements, the lord and the community, are equally necessary to

the constitution of the court. In the thirteenth century we find

already that the manorial bailiffs are made responsible for the

judgment along with the suitors and even before them.(61*)

    The rolls of ancient demesne manors present a considerable

variety of types, shading off from an almost complete

independence of the suitors to forms which are not very different

from those of common law manors. Stoneleigh may be taken as a

good specimen of the first class.

    The manor was divided into six hamlets, and every one of

these consisted of eight virgates of land which were originally

held by single socmen; although the regularity of the arrangement

seems to have been broken up very soon in consequence of increase

of population, extension of the cultivated area, and the sale of

small parcels of the holdings. The socmen met anciently to hold

courts in a place called Motstowehill, and afterwards in a house

which was built for the purpose by the Abbot. The way in which

the Register speaks of the ad mission of a socman to his holding

is very characteristic: 'Every heir succeeding to his father

ought to be admitted to the succession in his fifteenth year, and

let him pay relief to the lord, that is, pay twice his rent. And

he will give judgments with his peers the socmen; and become

reeve for the collection of the lord's revenue, and answer to

writs and do everything else as if he was of full age at common

law.' The duty and right to give judgment in the Court of

Stoneleigh is emphatically stated on several occasions, and

altogether the jurisdictional independence of the court and of

its suitors is set before us in the smallest but always

significant details. If somebody is bringing a royal close writ

of right directed to the bailiffs of the manor it cannot be

opened unless in full court. When the bailiff has to summon

anybody by order of the court he takes two socmen to witness the

summons. Whenever a trial is terminated either by some one's

default in making his law or by non-defence the costs are to be

taxed by the court. The alienation of land and admittance of

strangers are allowed only upon the express consent of the

court.(62*) In one word, every page of the Stoneleigh Register

shows a closely and powerfully organised community, of which the

lord is merely a president.

    The rolls of King's Ripton are not less explicit in this

respect. People are fined for selling land without the licence of

the court, for selling it 'outside the court.'(63*) The judgment

depends entirely on the verdict given by the community of suitors

or its representatives the jurors. When the parties rely on some

former decision, arrangement, or statement of law, they appeal to

the rolls of the court, which, as has been said already, present

nothing else but the recorded jurisprudence of the body of

suitors.(64*) The extent of the legal self-government of this

little community may be well seen in the record of a trial in

which the Abbot of Ramsey, the lord of the manor, is impleaded

upon a little writ of right by one of his tenants.(65*) But it is

hardly necessary to dwell on so normal an event. I should like to

take up for once the opposite standpoint, and to show that in

these very communities on the ancient demesne elements are

apparent which have thrived and developed in ordinary manors to

such an extent as to obscure their self-government. In the Rolls

of King's Ripton we might easily notice a number of instances in

which the influence of the lord makes itself felt directly or

indirectly through the means of his steward. We come, for

instance, on the following forms of pleading: An action of dower

is brought, and the defendants ask that the laws and customs

hitherto used in the court should be observed in regard to them

-- they have a right to three summonses, three distraints, and

three essoins, and if they make default after that, the land

ought to be taken into the lord's hand, when, but only if it is

not replevied in the course of fifteen days, it will be lost for

good and all. All these demands are granted by the steward, with

whom the decision, at least formally, rests.(66*) Again, when we

hear that the whole court craves leave to defer its judgment till

the next meeting, it is clear that it rests with the steward to

grant this request.(67*) We may find now and then a consideration

for the interests of the lord which transcends the limits of mere

formal right, as in a case where a certain Margery asks the

court, without any writ of right or formal action, that an

inquest may be held as to a part of her messuage which is

detained in the hands of the Abbot, although she performs the

service due for it. The inquest is held, and apparently ends in

her favour, but she is directed at the same time to go and speak

with the lord about the matter. Ultimately she gets what she

wants after this private interview.(68*) The proceedings are

irregular and interesting: the usual forms of action are

disregarded; a verdict is given, but the material decision is

left with the lord, and is to be sought for by private

intercession. Quite close to this entry we find an instance which

is in flagrant contradiction with such a considerate treatment of

all parties. The jurors of the court are called upon to decide a

question of testament and succession. They say that none of them

was present when the testament was made, and that they know

nothing about it, and will say nothing about it. 'And so leaving

their business undone, and in great contempt of the lord and of

his bailiffs, they leave the court. And therefore it is ordered

that the bailiffs do cause to be levied a sum of 40s to the use

of the lord from the property of the said jurors by distress

continued from day to. day.'(69*) This case may stand as a good

example both of the sturdy self-will which the peasantry

occasionally asserted in their dealings with the lord, and of the

opportunities that the lord had of asserting his superiority in a

very high-handed manner.

    But we need not even turn to any egregious instances in which

the lord's power is thus displayed. The usual forms of surrender

are there to show that, as regards origins, we have the same

thing here as in ordinary manors, although the peculiarities of

the ancient demesne have brought forward the features of communal

organisation in a very marked way, and have held the element of

lordship in check.

    We have seen that there was only one halimot in the

thirteenth and the preceding centuries, and that the division

into customary court and court baron developed at a later time.

We have seen, secondly, that this halimot was a meeting of the

community under the presidency of the steward, and that the

relative functions of community and steward became very distinct

only in later days. It remains to be seen how far the fundamental

class division between free tenants and villains affected the

management of the court. As there was but one halimot and not

two, both classes had to meet and to act concurrently in it. The

free people now and then assert separate claims: a chaplain wages

his law on the manor of Brightwaltham that he did not defame the

lord's butler, but when he gets convicted by a good inquest of

jurors of having broken the lord's hedges and carried away the

lord's fowls, he will not justify himself of these trespasses and

departs in contempt, doubtless because he will not submit to the

judgment of people who are not on a par with him.(70*)

Freeholders object to being placed on ordinary juries of the

manor,(71*) although they will serve as jurors on special

occasions, and as a sort of controlling body over the common

presenters.(72*) Amercements are sometimes taxed by free

suitors.(73*) But although some division is apparent in this way,

and the elements for a separation into two distinct courts are

gathering, the normal condition is one which does not admit of

any distinction between the two classes. We come here across the

same peculiarity that we have seen in police and criminal law,

namely, that the fundamental line of civil condition seems

disregarded. Even when a court is mainly composed of villains,

and in fact called curia villanorum, some of its suitors may be

freeholders.(74*) Even in a court composed of free people, like

that of Broughton, there may be villains among them.(75*) The

parson, undoubtedly a free man, may appear as a villain in some

rolls.(76*) Altogether, the fact has to be noticed as a very

important one, that whatever business the freeholders may have

had in connexion with the manorial system, this business was

transacted by courts which consisted chiefly of servile

tenants.(77*) In fact the presenting inquests, on which the free

tenants refused to serve, would not be prevented by their

composition from attainting these free tenants.

    This seems strange and indeed anomalous. One point remains to

be observed which completes the picture: although the great

majority of the thirteenth century peasantry are mere villains,

although on some manors we hardly distinguish freeholders, there

is a legal requirement that there should be at least a few

freeholders on every manor. Later theory does not recognise as a

manor an estate composed only of demesne land and copyhold.

Freeholds are declared to be a necessary element, and should they

all escheat, the manor would be only a reputed one.(78*) We have

no right to treat this notion as a mere invention of later times.

it comes forward again and again in the shape of a rule, that

there can be no court unless there are some free tenants to form

it. The number required varies. In Henry VIII's reign royal

judges were contented with two. In John's time as many as twelve

were demanded, if a free outsider was to be judged. The normal

number seems to have been four, and when the record of the

proceedings was sent up to the King's tribunal four suitors had

to carry it. The difference between the statement of Coke and the

earlier doctrine lies in the substitution of the manor for the

court. Coke and his authorities, the judges of Henry VIII's

reign, speak of the manor where the older jurisprudence spoke of

the court. Their rule involves the more ancient one and something

in addition, namely, the inference that if there be no court

baron there is no manor. Now this part of the doctrine, though

interesting by itself, must stand over for the present. Let us

simply take the assertion that free suitors are necessary to

constitute a court, and apply it to a state of things when there

was but one strictly manorial court, the halimot. In 1294 it is

noted in the report of a trial that, 'in order that one may have

a court he must have at least four free tenants, without

borrowing the fourth tenant.'(79*) Now a number of easy

explanations seem at hand: four free tenants at least were

necessary, because four such tenants were required to take the

record up to the king's court and to answer for any false

judgment; a free tenant could protest against being impleaded

before unfree people; some of the franchises could not be

exercised unless there were free suitors to form a tribunal. But

all these explanations do not go deep enough: they would do very

well for the later court baron, but not for the halimot. It is

not asserted that free suitors are necessary only in those cases

where free tenants are concerned -- it is the court as such which

depends on the existence of such free suitors, the court which

has largely, if not mostly, to deal with customary business, and

consists to a great extent of customary tenants. And, curiously

enough, when the court baron disengages itself from the halimot,

the rule as to suitors, instead of applying in a special way to

this court baron, for which it seems particularly fitted, extends

to the notion of the manor itself, so that we are driven to ask

why the manor is assumed to contain a certain number of free

tenants and a court for them. Why is its existence denied where

these elements are wanting? Reverting to the thirteenth century,

we have to state similar puzzling questions: thus if one turns to

the manorial surveys of the time, the freehold element seems to

be relatively insignificant and more or less severed from the

community; if one takes up the manorial rolls, the halimot is

there with the emphatically expressed features and even the name

of a court of villains; but when the common law is concerned,

this same tribunal appears as a court of freeholders. The manors

of the Abbey of Bec on English soil contained hardly any

freeholders at all. Had the Abbey no courts? Had it no manors

from the standpoint of Coke's theory? What were the halimots

whose proceedings are recorded in the usual way on its manorial

rolls? In presence of these flagrant contradictions I cannot help

thinking that we here come across one of those interesting points

where the two lines of feudal doctrine do not meet, and where

different layers of theory may be distinguished.

    Without denying in the least the practical importance of such

notions as that which required that one's judges should be one's

peers, or of such institutions as the bringing up of the manorial

record to the King's Court, I submit that they must have

exercised their influence chiefly by calling forth occasions when

the main principle had to be asserted. Of course they could not

create this principle: the idea that the halimot was a communal

court constituted by free suitors meeting under the presidency of

the steward, must have existed to support them. That idea is

fully embodied in the constitution of the ancient demesne

tribunal, where the suitors were admitted to be the judges,

although they were villains, privileged villains and nothing

else. Might we not start from the original similarity between

ancient demesne and ordinary manors, and thus explain how the

rule as to the necessary constitution of the manorial court was

formed? It seems to me a mere application of the higher rule that

a court over free people must contain free people, to a state of

things where the distinction between free and unfree was not

drawn at the same level as in the feudal epoch, but was drawn at

a lower point. We have seen that a villain was in many respects a

free man; that he was accepted as such in criminal and police

business; that he was free against everybody but his lord in

civil dealings; that the frank-pledge system to which he belonged

was actually taken to imply personal freedom, although the

freeholders ultimately escaped from it. I cannot help thinking

that a like transformation of meaning as in the case of

frank-pledge did take place in regard to the free suitors of the

manorial court. The original requirement cannot have concerned

freeholders in the usual legal sense, but free and lawful men,

'worthy of were and wite' -- a description which would cover the

great bulk of the villains and exclude slaves and their progeny.

When the definitions of free holding and villainage got to be

very stringent and marked, the libere tenentes assumed a more and

more overbearing attitude and got a separate tribunal, while the

common people fell into the same condition as the progeny of

slaves. In a word, I think that the general movement of social

development which obliterated the middle class of Saxon ceorls or

customary free tenants (leaving only a few scattered indications

of its existence) made itself felt in the history of the manorial

court by the substitution of exceptional freeholders for the free

suitors of the halimot. Such a substitution had several results:

the diverging history of the ancient demesne from that of the

ordinary manorial courts, the elevation of the court baron, the

growth of the notion that in the customary court the only judge

was the steward. One significant little trait remains to be

observed in this context. it has been noticed (80*) that care

seems to be taken that there should be certain Freemen or

Franklains in every manor. The feature has been mentioned in

connexion with the doctrine of free suitors necessary to a court.

But these people are by no means free tenants; in the usual legal

sense they are mostly holding in villainage, and their freedom

must be traced not to the dual division of feudal times, but to

survivals of the threefold division which preceded feudalism, and

contrasted slave, free ceorl, and military landowner.

    Before concluding this chapter I have to say a few words upon

those forms of the manorial court which appear as a modification

of the normal institution. Of the ancient demesne tribunal I have

already spoken, but there are several other peculiar formations

which help to bring out the main ideas of manorial organisation,

just because they swerve from it in one sense or another. Mr

Maitland has spoken so well of one of these variations, that I

need not do anything more than refer the reader to his pages

about the Honour and its Court.(81*) He has proved that it is no

mere aggregate of manors, but a higher court, constructed on the

feudal principle, that every lord who had free tenants under him

could summon them to form a court for their common dealings. It

ought to be observed, however, that the instance of Broughton,

though its main basis is undoubtedly this feudal doctrine, still

appears complicated by manorial business, which is brought in by

way of appeal and evocation, as well as by a mixture between the

court of the great fief and the halimot of Broughton.

    A second phenomenon well worth consideration is the existence

in some parts of the country of a unit of jurisdiction and

management which does not fall in with the manor, -- it is called

the soke, and comprises free tenantry dispersed sometimes over a

very wide area. A good example of this institution is given by Mr

Clark's publication on the Soke of Rothley in Lincolnshire.(82*)

We need not go into the details of the personal status of the

tenants, they clearly come under the description of free sokemen.

Our present concern is that they are not simply arranged into the

manor of Rothley as usual, but are distinguished as forming the.

soke of this manor. They are rather numerous -- twenty-three --

and come to the lord's court, but their services are trifling as

compared with those of the customers, and their possessions are

so scattered, that there could be no talk of their joining the

agrarian unit of the central estate. What unites them to the

manor is evidently merely jurisdiction, although in feudal theory

they are assumed to hold of the lord of Rothley. But they are set

apart as forming the soke, and this shows them clearly to be

subjected to jurisdiction rather than anything else. It is

interesting to note such survivals in the thirteenth century, and

within the realm of feudal law the case of Rothley is of course

by no means the only one.(83*) If we contrast this exceptional

appearance of the soke outside the manor with the normal

arrangement by which all the free tenants are fitted into the

manor, we shall come to the conclusion that originally the

element of jurisdiction over freeholders might exist separately

from the management of the estate, but that in the general course

of events it was merged into the estate and formed one of the

component elements of the manorial court. The case of Rothley is

especially interesting because the men of the soke or under the

soke do not go to a court of their own, but simply join the

manorial meetings. If they are still kept apart, it is evident

that their relation to the court, and indeed to the manor, was

what made them distinct from everybody else. In short, to state

the difference in a pointed form, the other people were tenants

and they were subjects.

    One more point remains to be noticed. In order to make it

clear we must by way of exception start from the arrangements of

a later epoch than that which we have been discussing. The manor

of Aston and Cote, which may have been carved out with several

others from the manor of Bampton, presents a very good instance

of a village meeting which does not coincide with the manorial

divisions, and appears constructed on the lines of a village

community which has preserved its unity, although several manors

have grown out of it. It was stated by the lord of the manor of

Aston and Cote in 1657, that 'there hath been a custom time out

of mind that a certain number of persons called the Sixteen, or

the greater part of them, have used to make orders, set

penalties, choose officers, and lot meadows, and do all such

things as are usually performed or done in the courts baron of

other manors.' All the details of this case are interesting, but

we need not go into them, because they have been set out with

sufficient care in the existing literature, and summed up by Mr

Gomme in his book on the Village Community.(84*) It is the main

point which we must consider. Here is an assembly meeting to

transact legal and economic business, which acts on the pattern

of manorial courts. And if not a manorial court, what is it? I

think it is difficult to escape the conclusion that it is a

meeting of the village community outside the lines of manorial

division. The supposition that it represents the old manor of

Bampton, to which Aston, Cote, Bampton Pogeys, Bampton Priory are

subordinated, is entirely insufficient to explain the case,

because then we should not have had to recognise new manors in

the fractions which were detached from Bampton, and there would

have been no call to speak of a peculiar assembly assuming the

competence of a court baron -- we should have had the manorial

court and the lord of Bampton, and not the Sixteen to speak of.

The fact is patent and significant. It shows by itself that there

may have been cases where the village community and the manor did

not coincide, and the village community had the best of it.

    The first proposition does not admit of doubt. It was of

quite common occurrence that the land of one village should be

broken up between several manors, although its open field system

and all its husbandry arrangements remained undivided. The

question arises, how was that system to work? There could be

express agreement between the owners;(85*) ancient custom and the

interference of manorial officers chosen from the different parts

could help on many occasions. But it is impossible to suppose, in

the light of the Bampton instance, that meetings might not

sometimes exist in such divided villages which took into their

hands the management of the many economic questions arising out

of common husbandry: questions about hedges, rotation of crops,

commonable animals, usage as to wood, moor, pasture, and so

forth. A diligent search in the customs of manors at a later

period, say in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, must

certainly disclose a number of similar instances. Our own

material does not help us, because it passes over questions of

husbandry, and touches merely jurisdiction, ownership, and

tenant-right. And so we must restrict ourself to notice the

opening for an inquiry in that direction.

    Such an inquiry must also deal with the converse possibility,

namely, the cases in which the manor is so large that several

village units fit into it. We may find very frequently in some

parts of the country large manors which are composed of several

independent villages and hamlets.(86*) On large tracts of land

these villages would form separate open field groups. Although

the economic evidence is not within our reach in early times, we

have indications of separate village meetings under the manorial

court even from the legal point of view taken by the court-rolls.

In several instances the entries printed in the second volume of

the Selden Society publications point to the action of townships

as distinct from the manorial court, and placed under it. In

Broughton a man distrained for default puts himself on the

verdict of the whole court and of the township of Hurst, both

villains and freemen, that he owes no suit to the court of

Broughton, save twice a year and to afforce the court. Be it

noted that the court of Hurst is distinguished from the township,

which appears subordinated to it, probably because there were

other townships in the manor of Hurst. At the same time the

township is called upon to act as an independent unit in the

matter. Even so in the rolls of Hemingford, the township which

forms the centre of the manor and gives its name to it, is

sometimes singled out from the rest of the court as an organised

corporation.(87*) When township and tithing coincided, as in the

case of Brightwaltham, the tithing gets opposed to the general

court in the same way.(88*) Altogether the corporate unity of

townships is well perceivable behind the feudal covering of the

manor. Mr Maitland says with perfect right, 'the manor was not a

unit in the governmental system; the county was such a unit, so

was the hundred. So again was the vill, for the township had many

police duties to perform; it was an amerciable, punishable unit;

not so the manor, unless it coincided with the vill.'(89*) And

then he proceeds to suggest that the true explanation of the

manor is that it represents an estate which could be and was

administered as a single economic and agrarian whole. I am unable

to follow him entirely as to this last point, because it seems

pretty clear that the open field arrangements followed the

division into townships, and not those into manors. From the

point of view of the services, of the concentration of duties of

the tenantry in regard to the lord, the manor was a whole, and

for this very reason it was a whole as regards geldability, but

this is only one side of the economic structure of society, the

upper side, if one may be allowed to say so. The arrangement of

actual cultivation is the other side, and it is represented by

the township with its communal open fields. Now in a great many

cases the estate and the community fitted into each other; and of

these instances there is no need to speak any further. But if

both did not fit, the agrarian unity is the township and not the

manor. The open field system appears in this connexion as outside

the manor, and proceeding from the rural community by itself.

    Let us sum up the results obtained in this chapter.

    1. The village communities contained in the manorial system

are organised on a system of self-government which affords great

help to the lord in many ways, but certainly limits his power

materially, and reduces him to the position of a constitutional

ruler.

    2. The original court of the manor was one and the body of

its suitors was one. The distinction between courts for free

tenants and customary courts grows up very gradually in the

fourteenth century, and later.

    3. The steward was not the only judge of the halimot. The

judgment came from the whole court, and its suitors, without

distinction of class, were necessary judicial assessors.

    4. The court of ancient demesne presents the same elements as

the ordinary halimot, although it lays greater stress on the

communal side of the organisation.

    5. The conveyancing entries on the rolls do not prove the

want of right on the part of the peasant holders. On the

contrary, they go back to very early communal practice.

    6. The rule which makes the existence of the manor dependent

on the existence of free suitors is derived from the conception

of the court as a court of free and lawful men, taking in

villains and excluding slaves.

    7. The manor by itself is the estate; the rural community and

the jurisdiction of the soke are generally fused with it into one

whole; but in some cases the two latter elements are seen

emerging as independent growths from behind the manorial

organisation.



NOTES:



1. A good specimen of the accusations which might be made against

a manorial agent is afforded by the Court-rolls of the Abbey of

Ramsey. Seld. Soc. ii. p. 95.



2. Seld. Soc. ii. 22: 'Et dicit curia quod tenementum et una acra

servilis condicionis sunt et una acra libere.'



3. Coram Rege, Pascha 9 Edw. I, 34, 6: 'Messarius abbatis et

messarius villate.'



4. Okeburn Inqu. 56 (Add. MSS. 24316): 'Eligere debent unum

messarium de se ipsis et domini de ipso electo poterunt facere

prepositum.'



5. G1oucester Cart. iii. 221: 'Prepositus eligetur per

communitatem halimoti qui talrin eligant qui ad suam terram

propriam excolendum et cetera bona sua discrete et circumspecte

tractanda idoneus merite notatur et habeatur, pro cuius

drfectibus et abmittendis totum halimotum respondeat, nisi ubi

urgens necessitas aut causa probabilis illud halimotum coram loci

ballivo rationabilem praetendere poterit excusationem.' Cf Walter

of Henley, ed. Lamond, pp. 10, 64, 66.



6. Seld. Soc. ii. 12: 'Nicholaus filius sacerdotis... et Robertus

de Magedone... in misericordia quia contradixerunt tallagium quod

positum fuit super eos per vicinos suos.' Glastonb. Inqu. of

1189, p. 33: 'Totum manerium reddit de dono 73 solidos et 4 den.

sicut homines ville illud statuunt.'



7. Ramsey Cart. i. 401: 'Sunt in scot et in lot et in omnibus cum

villata.' Spalding Priory Reg., Cole MSS. xliii. p. 283: 'Libere

tenens tacit fossa tum maris et omnes communas ville secundum

quantitatem bouatae.'



8. Ramsey Cart. i. 398: 'Henricus le Freman solebat esse in

communa villatae, ut in tallagio et similibus. Nulla inde facit.'

p. 394 (a villager does not pay his part of the tallage), 'quod

quidem tallagium tota villata et ad magnum ipsorum gravamen

hucusque persolvit.'



9. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS. i. f III: 'Si nul soit enfraunchi

de ses ouvrages dont la ville est le plus charge.'



10. Add. MSS. 6159, f 25, b: 'Dominus debet invenire duos homines

sumptibus suis coram eisdem justiciariis et villata de Rode

sumptibus suis tres homines invenient. Et hoc per consuetudinem a

tempore quo non extat memoria ut dicitur.' Cf Domesday of St.

Paul's, 15: 'Alanus filius Alexandri de Cassingburne tres

virgatas pro 20 solidis et preter haec 10 acras de villata et 10

de dominico propter sectam sire et hundredi quam modo non facit.'



11. Custumal of Bleadon, 257: 'Invenit fabrum pro ferdello domino

et toti villae.'



12. Shaftesbury Cart., Harl. MSS. 61, f. 63: 'Ibit ad scotaliam

domine sicut ad scotaliam vicinorum.'



13. Ramsey Cart. i. 425: 'Ponitur in respectu quousque videatur

quomodo se gerat versus dominum abbatem et suos vicinos.'



14. Seld. Soc. ii. 172: 'Ad istam curiam venit tota communitas

villanorum de Bristwalton et de sua mera et spontaneavoluntate

sursum reddidit domino totum jus et clamium quod idem villani

habere clamabant racione commune in bosco domini qui vocatur

Hemele et landis circumadjacentibus, ita quod nec aliquid juris

vel clamii racione commune in bosco predicto et landis

circumadjacentibus exigere, vendicare vel habere poterint in

perpetuum. Et pro hac sursum reddicione remisit eis dominus de

sua gracia speciali communam quam habuit in campo qui vocatur

Estfeld,' etc.



15. Annals of Dunstable (Annales Monast.) iii. 379, 380: 'Et

prior dicit, quod praedicta tenementa aliquo tempore fuerunt in

seisina hominum villate de Thodingdone, qui quidem homines,

unanimi voluntate et assensu, feofaverunt praedictum Simonem,

praedecessorem praedicti prioris, de praedictis tenementis,

tenendum eidem Simoni et successoribus suis in perpetuum. Jurati

dicunt... quod praedicta tenementa aliquo tempore fuerunt in

seisina praedictorum hominum villatae de Thodingdone et quod

omnes illi, qui aliquid habuerunt in praedictis duabus placiis

terrae, congregati in uno loco ad quandam curiam apud Thodingdone

tentam, unanimi assensu concesserunt praedicto Symoni, quondam

priori de Dunstaple, praedecessori prioris nunc, praedictas

placeas terrae, cum pertinentiis, tenendum eidem et successoribus

suis in perpetuum, reddendo inde eisdem hominibus et eorum

haeredibus per annum sex denarios temporibus falcacionis prati.'



16. Madox, Firma Burgi, 54, f.: '... statim visis litteris capiat

in manum Regis maneria de Cochame et Bray, quae sunt in manibus

hominum prae dictorum maneriorum, et salvo custodiat, ita quod

deinceps Regi possit respondere de firma praedictorum maneriorum

ad scaccarium.' 54, g: 'Miramur quamplurimum quod 30s. quos

monachi de Lyra de elemosyna nostra constituta singulis annis per

manus ballivorum villae vestrae, antequam predietam villam

caperitis ad firmam recipere.' Cf Exch. i. 407, a, 412, b; Rot.

Hundr. ii. 134: 'Benmore juxta Langport fuit de dominico domini

Regis pertinens ad Sumerton ubi omnes homines domini Regis de

Sumerton, Sutton, Puttem et Merne solebant communicare cum

omnimodis averiis suis, set per negligenciam villanorum de

Sumertone qui manerium tunc temporis ad firmam tenuerunt et

Henricus de Urtiaco vetus eandem moram sibi appropriavit.'



17. Gloucester Cart. iii. 181: 'Omnes isti villani tenent de

dominio quoddam pratum quod vocatur Hay continens 23 acras et

reddunt inde per annum 23 solidos 3 denarios.'



18. Cf. Prof Maitland's Introduction to the rolls of the Abbey of

Ramsey. Seld. Soc. ii. 87.



19. See the record of proceedings in the Court of the manor of

Hitchin, printed by Mr Seebohm at the end of. his volume on the

'Village Community.'



20. Introduction to Seld. Soc. ii. p. xvi.



21. Add. MSS. 6159, f 54, a: 'Visus de borchtruning.'



22. Gloucester Cart. iii. 221; Malmesbury Cart. ii. 17. Cf.

Kovalevsky, 'History of police administration in England'

(Russian), 137.



23. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 101: 'De tidinga Estone 5

solidos vel placita que orientur.' Cf Maitland, Introduction to

Seld. Soc. ii. pp. xxx, xxxiii.



24. Rot. Hundr. ii. 461, b: 'Et predicti Radulfus et Robertus

habent suas duodenas.'



25. Y.B. 21-22 Edw. I, 399: 'Presence a vewe de franc pledge

demande par la reson de la persone, non de la tenure.'



26. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS. i. f 100, b: 'Predictus Abbas

consensit quod omnes homines eorum de predictis villis qui

fuerint duodecim annorum et amplius faciant sectam ad predictum

hundredum bis in annis perpetuum... exceptis omnibus bercariis,

carrucariis predictarum villarum et carrectariis cuiuscumque

hominis fuerint et omnibus aliis hominibus tam de predictis

villis quam aliunde qui sunt de manupastis ipsius abbatis qui

nullam sectam facient ad predictum hundredum nisi ibidem fuerint

implacitati vel alios implacitent.'



27. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS. i. f. 112: '... ne soit a Iapeis

le roi come tere tenaunt en diseine ou en fraunche pleivine.' f

III: 'Serment de ceux qui entrent en diseine... ne celeras chose

qe apent a la pei le roi de engleterre.'



28. Introduction to Seld. Soc. ii. p. xviii.



29. Seld. Soc. ii. p. lxx.



30. Rot. Hundr. ii. 143: 'Ermoldus de Boys dominus de AsYnton

solebat facere sectam ad Boxford ad Sockomanemot pro terra

Ricardi Serle in Cornerche, nunc illa secta subtracta per 4

annos.' The expression 'frankhalimote' occurs often, but it is

evidently an equivalent to 'libera curia,' and interchanges with

'liberum manerium.' See Rot. Hundr. ii. 69, 74, 127.



31. Eynsham Inqu., Christ Church MSS. 15, a: 'Curia debet ibi

tencri si dominus voluerit.'



32. Seld. Soc. ii. 49, etc.



33. Beaulieu Cart., Harl. MSS. 748, f 113: 'De sectatoribus

intrinsecis... et qui habent terram in campis ... et ad

forciamentum curie omnes predicti tam liberi quam alii cum 12

burgensibus vel pluribus venient ad curiam per racionabilem

summonicionem.' Glastonb. Cart., Wood MSS. i. 101, d: 'Ipse et

heredes et homines sui de Acforde facient bis in anno sectam ad

hundredum abbatis de Nywentone et ad afforciamentum curie.'



34. Rot. Hundr. ii. 710, a; Ramsey Cart. i. 491.



35. Warwick Hundred Roll, Exch. Q. R. Misc. Books, 29, p. 10:

'Quidam de tenentibus dicunt quod nunquam fecerunt sectam.'



36. Gloucester Cart. iii. 208.



37. Chapterhouse Box 152, No. 14: 'Hereditas de qua una secta

debetur.'



38. Ramsey Cart. i. 412: 'Prohibitum est in plena curia, ne quis

ducat placitatores in curiam abbatis ad impediendum vel

prorogandum judicium domini Abbatis.' Gesta Abbatum (St.

Alban's), 455: 'Non permittatur quod in halimotis adventicii

placitatores partes cum sollemnitate sustineant sed communiter

per bundos (i.e. bondos) de curia veritas inquiratur, sine

callumnia verborum.'



39. Stoneleigh Reg. f 75: 'Curia de Stonle ad quam sokemanni

faciebant sectam solebat ab antiquo teneri super montem iuxta

villam de Stonle vocatam Motstowehull, ideo sic dictum quia ibi

placitabant sed postquam abbates de Stonle habuerunt dictam

curiam et libertatem pro aysiamento tenencium et sectatorum

fecerunt domum curie in medio ville de Stonle.'



40. Selden Soc. ii. p. 67.



41. Introduction to Seld. Soc. vol. ii. p. 76.



42. The Durham halimot books (Surtees Society) supply some

instances.



43. Glastonbury Inqu. of 1189, p. 33: 'De dono 73 solidos sicut

homines ville illud statuunt.'



44. Selden Soc. ii. 36, 168.



45. Selden Society, vol. ii. 6, 7, 8.



46. Ibid. 31: 'Johannes Smert... Henricus Coterel maritavit se

sine licencia domini, ideo distringantur ad faciendum voluntatem

domini.'



47. Ibid. p. 44: 'Postea taxata fuit dicta misericordia per

Rogerum de Suhtcote, Willelmum de Scaccario, Hugonem de Cumbe

liberos sectatores curie usque ad duas marcas.'



48. Introduction to Seld. Soc. ii. p. lxv.



49. Ibid. pp. 163, 166.



50. Comp. Heussler, Institutionen des deutschen Privatrechts, i.

215; ii. 622; but I cannot agree with him as the ceremony being

employed only where there was to be a 'donatio mortis causa.' In

connexion with this the part played by the Salman is

misunderstood, as it seems to me.



51. The court rolls of Common Law manors do not think it

necessary to give the particulars about the transmission of the

rod. But the description of the practice at Stoneleigh, which,

though ancient demesne, presents manorial customs of the same

character as those followed on ordinary estates, leaves no doubt

as to the course of the proceedings. See above the passage quoted

on pp. 113-6. Comp. a parallel ceremony as to freehold, Madox.

Formulare, p. 54. The instance has been pointed out to me by Prof

Maitland.



52. See Pollock, Land-laws, 199, 2O8 (2nd ed.).



53. Seld. Soc. ii. 33; insertion of a lease in the roll. , p. 35:

'Lis conquievit inter ipsos ita quod concordati fuerunt in hac

forma de voluntate domini et in plena curia ita videlicet quod

predictus Willelmus de Baggemere concessit, remisit et quietum

clamavit pro se et heredibus suis... et hoc paratus est

verificare per recordum rotulorum seu 12 juratores ejusdem curie

per voluntatem domini et senescalli.' p. 166: 'Et sciatis quod si

haberem ad manus rotulos curie tempore Willelmi de Lewes ego

vobis certificarem et vobis monstrarem multa mirabilia non

opportune facta.'



54. These points have been conclusively settled by the masterly

investigations of Brunner, Zeugen- und Inquisitions beweis

(Abhandlungen der Wiener Akademie) and Entstehung der

Schwurgerichte.



55. Seld. Soc. ii. 41: 'Quod talis sit consuetudo manerii et quod

dicta Augnes sic venit in plena curia cum marito suo et totum jus

et clamium quod haberet vel aliquo modo habere poterit in toto

vel in parte hujus burgagii in manus domini ad opus ejusdem R.

reddidit ponit super curiam... Et 12 juratores curie,' etc.



56. I do not mean to say that the analytical distinctions which

we make between fact and law, between presenters to a tribunal

and assessors of a tribunal, were clearly perceived or

consequently carried out in the twelfth or thirteenth centuries.

On the contrary there was a good deal of confusion in details,

and the instinctive logic of facts had more to do in dividing and

settling institutions than conscious reasoning. Juries and

assizes of the Royal Courts might be called upon incidentally to

decide legal questions, but, in the aggregate, there can be

hardly a doubt that the sworn inquests before the Royal judges

were working to provide the Courts with a knowledge of local

facts and perhaps conditions, while the manorial court gave legal

decisions.



57. Seld. Soc. ii. 41: 'Et 12 juratores curie... dicunt super

sacramentum suum quod predicta Agnes venit in plena curia et

totum jus et clamium quod aliquo modo habere potuit in dicto

burgagio in manus domini reddidit.' 42: 'Et juratores... dicunt

super sacramentum suum quod Juliana per quam dicta Matildis petit

hujusmodi messuagium nunquam fuit seisita de ipso mesuagio, set

Willelmus Ponfrayt maritus ipsius Juliane, unde secundum

Consuetudinem manerii Juliana post mortem W. mariti sui nichil

poterit clamare nisi dotem in huiusmodi mesuagium nisi fuerit in

plena curia una cum marito suo de huiusmodi perquisito conjunctim

seisita.' Cf p. 40: 'Unde Willelmus pro premissis in plena curia

recordatis et inrotulatis dat domino 10 solidos.'



58. 4 Inst. 270, cap. 58.



59. Y.B. 11/12 Edw. III (Rolls Ser.), p. 325, sqq.: '... les

suters de Cokam firent venir plein record... les suiters

agarderent seisine de terre... il firent faux judgement...

Stonore: Cest usage est molt encontre la ley, qe cesti qe doit

tenir les plees ne poet pas recorder un attourne en ple qe serra

plede devant lui mesme. Trew: Nous voloms averer qe les usages

sont tiels, qe le seneschal de la court poet resceivir un

attourne, issint qil dei entre les suiters coment il ad resceu un

tiel attourne en tiel ple a la proschein court apres la resceite,

et vous dions qe cesti Adam qe respondi par attourne fut resceu

attourne en la manere.' Cf Lysons, Magna Brit. i. 266. Y.B. 3

Edw. III. 29: 'Rob. le W. porta Son brief de faux judgement

devers un home et Sa feme, et apres le record avowe par les

suters de la court de Bloxham... les suters agarderent qe Robert

et ses plegis fuerent in le mercie, et quod narratio sua fuit

iniqua, et recordarent un nonsuit la ou la partie fust en court,

per qe nous prioms qe cel record soit revers.' Viner, Abr. ii. A.

5, O. 6.



60. Y.B. 11/12 Edw. III (Rolls Ser.), p. 517: 'Trew. Le brief

suppose qe le defendant tint le ple et qil fut baillif, ou

seuters tenent le ple qe ont record; jugement de bref. Et non

allocetur, quia ipse tenet curiam et ei dirigitur breve.'



61. Note Book of Bracton, pl. 1122: 'Preceptum fuit ballivis de

Kingestona quod in plena curia sua de Kingestona recordari

facerent loquelam... et recordum venire facerent per quatuor qui

recordo illi interfuerunt, etc.... Ideo balliui inde sine die et

Radulfus in misericordia.' 834: 'Preceptum fuit vicecomiti quod

preciperet balliuis manerii Domini Regis de Haueringes quod

recordari facerent in curia domini Regis de Haueringes loquelam

que fuit in eadem curia per breve domini Regis... unde predicte

Agnes et Dyonisia queste fuerunt falsum sibi factum fuisse

iudicium in eadem curia et quod diligenter inquirerent qui

fuerunt illi de maneriis Domini Regis de Writele, Neuport et

Hatfeuld qui interfuerunt predicto iudicio faciendo simul cum

hominibus Dolnini Regis de Haueringes et illos venire facerent

aput Aueringe ad diem quem predicti homines et balliui Haueringe

predicti loquelam recordari facerent, ita quod tam predicti

ballivi et homines de Haueringe quam predicti homines de

predictis maneriis recordum illud haberent coram justiciariis

aput Westmonasterium per 4 legales homines de manerio de

Aueringes et 6 de maneriis de Writele, de Neuport et de

Hatfeuldia ex illis qui recordo illi interfuerunt....

Consideratum est quod illi de predictis maneriis falsum fecerunt

iudicium et ideo omnes de manerio in misericordia preter

Willelmum Dun... qui noluerunt consentire judicio.'



62. Stoneleigh Reg., f 75: 'Item si aliquis deforciatur de

tenemento suo et tulerit breve Regis clausum ballivis manerii

versus deforciantes, dictum breve non debet frangi nisi in

curia... Item quando ballivus aliquem summoneat ex precepto

curie, tunc assumet secum duos sokemannos quos voluerit pro

testanda summonicione predicta... Item qualitercumque placitum

terminetur in curia sive in deficiendo in lege vadiata sive per

non defensionem dampna sunt semper taxanda per curiam... Item

debent sokemanni respondere per 12 coram justiciariis et

coronatore domini Regis. Et ipsi dabunt iudicia eurie de

Stonle... Item nullus adiudicabitur tenens terre nisi qui a curia

tenens acceptatur per fidelitatem et alias consuetudines licet

tenens extra curiam aliquem feoffaverit per cartam vel sine

carta.'



63. Selden Soc. ii. 122: 'Capiatur in manum domini quarta pars

unius rode prati jacens in Smalemade quam Rogerus Greylong

vendidit Nicholao le Neuman sine licencia curie.' Cf 112:

'Praesentatum est quod Hugo Graeleng solvit sursum extra curiam

ad opus Thome Aspelon de Broucton liberi unam portionem cuiusdam

mesuagii... Ideo preceptum quod capiatur in manum domini.'



64. We hear constantly such phrases as the following: 'Quod

iuncta est secum vocat rotulos ad warrantum ; ponit se super

rotulos.' But we have also: 'Et partes pecierunt quod inquiratur

per villatam que dixit quod sufficientem duxit sectam. Postea

testificatum fuit per totam villatam quod dictus Nicolaus

tenebatur dicto Bartholomeo in predictis 5d.' (Seld. Soc. ii.

118). In one case the party relies on the evidence of the

Register of Ramsey (p. 111), which was compiled, of course, on

the basis of sworn inquests held in the different manors.



65. Seld. Soc. ii. 112.



66. Augment. Court Rolls, Portf xxiii. No. 94, m. 3: 'Quod quidem

per senescallum concessum est eisdem' (the entry is omitted in Mr

Maitland's publication).



67. Seld. Soc. ii. III.



68. Augment. Court Rolls, Portf xxiii. No. 94, m. 25 v. (the

entry is not in the Selden volume): 'Margeria que fuit uxor

Nicholai de Aula de Kingesripton venit et petit unum parvum

mesuagium existens in manu domini quod quondam fuit de mesuagio

Suo proprio et quod ipsa Margeria singulis annis defendit versus

dominum Abbatem, unde petit quod ius suum super hoc inquiratur

per bonam inquisicionem. Que venit et dicit... Et ideo preceptum

eidem quod inde habeat colloquium cum domino. Et postea colloquio

habito cum domino concessum est ei quod pacifice habeat faciendo

seruicia inde debita et consueta.'



69. Selden Soc. ii. 127.



70. Selden Soc. ii. 173.



71. Ibid. 94: 'Reginaldus fil. Benedicti injuste dedicit esse

unus de 12 jurator ibus allegando libertatem... Dicunt eciam quod

Willelmus de Bernewell injuste allegat libertatem propter quam

contradicit esse unus de juratis.' Cf Cor. Rege incerti anni

Johann. 5: Predecessores sui et ipse tenuerunt liberum tcnementum

et quod quidam ex juratis sunt consuetudinarii monialium.' Cor.

Rege Pascha, 9 Edw. I, 34, b: '(Amerciamentum sochemanni) per

pares vel per liberos de curia et vicinos ad curiam venientes.'



72. Hereford Rolls (Bodleian), 12: 'Compertum per libere tenentes

quod custumarii falso presentant... ideo custumarii in

misericordia.' Rot. Hundr. ii. 469: 'Quatuor homines et

prepositus presentabant defaltas predictis liberis hominibus et

ipsi liberi presentabant ballivis.'



73. Seld. Soc. ii. 44.



74. Introduction to Seld. Soc. ii. p. lxx.



75. Seld. Soc. ii. 67.



76. Ibid. 164.



77. See as to all this Mr Maitland's Introduction to the Selden

volume (ii), pp lxix, lxx.



78. Introd. to Selden Soc. ii. p. lxi, and following. Comp. Coram

Rege, 27 Henry III, 2: 'Dicunt quod non est aliquis liber homo in

eodem manerio nisi Willelmus filius Radulfi qui respondet infra

corpus comnitatus.'



79. Y.B. 21-22 Edw. I, 526 (Rolls Series).



80. Comp. Mr Maitland in his often-quoted Introduction, p. lxxi.



81. Introduction to Seld. Soc. ii. p. lxvi.



82. Archaeologia, vol. 47, p. 27, and following.



83. Rot. Hundr., Cartulary of Ramsey, i.



84. Gomme, Village Community, 162, etc.



85. Cart. of Malmesbury (Rolls Ser.), ii, 221.



86. A very good case in point is presented by Hitchin, because

the boundaries and the jurisdiction of the manor comprise a great

number of villages and hamlets which managed their open fields

quite independently of the central township of Hitchin, and could

not but do so, as they lay quite apart and a good way from it, as

may be seen on the Ordnance Map. And still the manor comprises,

the township of Hitchin and the hamlet of Walsworth, the lesser

manors of the Rectory of Hitchin, of Moremead, otherwise

Charlton, and of the Priory of the Biggin, being comprehended

within the boundaries of the said manor of Hitchin, which also

extends into the hamlets of Langley and Preston in the said

parish of Hitchin, and into the parishes of Ickleford, Ipolitts,

Kimpton, Kingswalden, and Offley.' (Seebohm, Village Community,

443, 444:) As Mr Seebohm tells me, the con. trast between the

central portion, that of the township, managed in one open field

system, and the outlying parts, is probably reflected in the

curious denominations of the manor as Portman and Foreign. It is

well known how frequently our surveys mention hamlets; in many

cases these annexes of townships arc so widely scattered, that it

would be impossible to suppose one open field system for them.



87. Seld. Soc. ii. 68, 90.



88. lbid. 162, I66.



89. Introd. to Seld. Soc. ii. p. xxxix.





Chapter 6



The Manor and the Village Community



Conclusions



    If we look at the village life of mediaeval England, not for

the purpose of dissecting it into its constitutive elements, but

in order that we may detect the principles that hold it together

and organise it as a whole, we shall be struck by several

features which make it quite unlike the present arrangement of

rural society. Even a casual observer will not fail to perceive

the contrast which it presents to that free play of individual

interests and that undisputed supremacy of the state in political

matters, which are so characteristic of the present time. And on

the other hand there is just as sharp a contrast between the

manorial system and a system of tribal relationships based on

blood relationship and its artificial outgrowths; and yet again

it may be contrasted with a village community built upon the

basis of equal partnership among free members. It is evident, at

the same time, that such differences, deep though they are,

cannot be treated as primordial and absolute divisions. All these

systems are but stages of development, after all, and the most

important problem concerning them is the problem of their origins

and mutual relations. The main road towards its solution lies

undoubtedly through the demesne of strictly historical

investigation. Should we succeed in tracing with clearness the

consecutive stages of the process and the intermediate links

between them, the most important part of the work will have been

done. This is simple enough, and seems hardly worth mentioning.

But things are not so plain as they look.

    To begin with, even a complete knowledge of the sequence of

events would not be sufficient since it would merely present a

series of arrangements following upon each other in time and not

a chain of causes and effects. We cannot exempt ourselves from

the duty of following up the investigation by speculations as to

the agencies and motives which produced the changes. But even

apart from the necessity of taking up ultimately what one may

call the dynamic thread of the inquiry, there is considerable

difficulty. In obtaining a tolerably settled sequence of general

facts to start with. Any one who has had to do with such studies

knows how scanty the information about the earlier phenomena is

apt to be, how difficult it is to distinguish between the main

forms and the variations which mediate and lead from one to

another. The task of settling a definite theory of development

would not have been so arduous, and the conflicting views of

scholars would not have suggested such directly opposite results,

if the early data had not been so scattered and so ambiguous. The

state of the existing material requires a method of treatment

which may to some extent supplement the defects in the evidence.

The later and well-recorded period ought to be made to supply

additional information as to the earlier and imperfectly

described ones. It is from this point of view that we must once

more survey the ground that we have been exploring in the

foregoing pages.

    The first general feature that meets our eye is the

cultivation of arable on the open-field system: the land tilled

is not parcelled up by enclosures, but lies open through the

whole or the greater part of the year; the plot held and tilled

by a single cultivator is not a compact piece, but is composed of

strips strewn about in all parts of the village fields and

intermixed with patches or strips possessed by fellow villagers.

Now, both facts are remarkable. They do not square at all with

the rules and tendencies of private ownership and individualistic

husbandry. The individual proprietor will naturally try to fence

in his plot against strangers, to set up hedges and walls that

would render trespassing over his ground difficult, if not

impossible. And he could not but consider intermixture as a

downright nuisance, and strive by all means in his power to get

rid of it. Why should he put up with the inconvenience of holding

a bundle of strips lying far apart from each other, more or less

dependent because of their narrowness on the dealings of

neighbours, who may be untidy and unthrifty? Instead of having

one block of soil to look to and a comparatively short boundary

to maintain, every occupier has a number of scattered pieces to

care for, and neighbours, who not only surround, but actually cut

up, dismember, invade his tenement. The open-field system stands

in glaring contradiction with the present state of private rights

in Western Europe, and no wonder that it has been abolished

everywhere, except on some few tracts of land kept back by

geographical conditions from joining the movement of modern

civilisation. And even in mediaeval history we perceive that the

arrangement does not keep its hold on those occasions when the

rights of individuals. are strongly felt: it gives way on the

demesne farm and on newly reclaimed land.

    At the same time, the absence of perpetual enclosures and the

intermixture of strips are in a general way quite prevalent at

the present time in the East of Europe. What conditions do they

correspond to? Why have nations living in very different climates

and on very different soils adopted the open-field system again

and again in spite of all inconveniences and without having

borrowed it from each other?

    There is absolutely nothing in the manorial arrangement to

occasion this curious system. It is not the fact that peasant

holdings are made subservient to the wants of the lord's estate,

that can explain why early agriculture is in the main a culture

of open fields and involves a marvellous intermixture of rights.

The absence of any logical connexion between these two things

settles the question as to historical influence. The open-field

arrangement is, I repeat it, no lax or indifferent system, but

stringent and highly peculiar. And so it cannot but proceed from

some pressing necessity.

    It is evidently communal in its very essence. Every trait

that makes it strange and inconvenient from the point of view of

individualistic interests, renders it highly appropriate to a

state of things ruled by communal conceptions. It is difficult to

prevent trespasses upon an open plot, but the plot must be open,

if many people besides the tiller have rights over it, pasture

rights, for instance. It involves great loss of time and

difficulty of supervision to work a property that lies in thirty

separate pieces all over the territory of a village, but such a

disposition is remarkably well adapted for the purpose of

assigning to fellow villagers equal shares in the arable. It is

grievous to depend on your neighbours for the proceeds and

results of your own work, but the tangled web of rights and

boundaries becomes simple if one considers it as the management

of land by an agricultural community which has allotted the

places where its members have to work. Rights of common usage,

communal apportionment of shares in the arable, communal

arrangement of ways and times of cultivation -- these are the

chief features of open-field husbandry, and all point to one

source -- the village community. It is not a manorial

arrangement, though it may be adapted to the manor. If more proof

were needed we have only to notice the fact, that open-field

cultivation is in full work in countries where the manor has not

been established, and in times when it has not as yet been

formed. We may take India or tribal italy as instances.

    The system as exhibited in England is linked to a division

into holdings which gives it additional significance. The holding

of the English peasant is distinguished by two characteristic

features: it is a unit which as a rule does not admit of

division; it is equal to other units in the same village. There

is no need to point out at length to what extent these features

are repugnant to an individualistic order of things. They belong

to a rural community. But even in a community the arrangement

adopted seems peculiar. We must not disregard some important

contradictions. The holdings are not all equal, but are grouped

on a scale of three, four, five divisions -- virgates, bovates,

and cotlands for instance. And the question may be put: why

should an artificial arrangement contrived for the sake of

equality start from a flagrant inequality which looks the more

unjust, because instead of those intermediate quantities which

shade off into each other in our modern society we meet with

abrupt transitions? A second difficulty may be found in the

unchangeable nature of the holding. The equal virgates are in

fact an obstacle to a proportionate repartition of the land among

the population, because there is nothing to insure that the

differences of growth and requirements arising between different

families will keep square with the relations of the holdings. In

one case the family plot may become too large, in another too

scanty an allowance for the peasant household working and feeding

on that plot. And ultimately, as we have seen, the indivisible

nature of the holding looks to some extent like an artificial

one, and one that is more apparent than real. Not to speak of

that provincial variation, the Kentish system of gavelkind, we

notice that even in the rest of England large units are breaking

into fractions, and that very often the supposed unity is only a

thin covering for material division. Why should it be kept up

then?

    Such serious contradictions and incongruities lead us

forcibly to the conclusion that we have a state of transition

before us, an institution that is in some degree distorted and

warped from its original shape. In this respect the manorial

element comes strongly to the fore. The rough scale of holdings

would be grossly against justice for purely communal purposes,

but it is not only the occupation of land, but also the incidence

of services that is regulated by it. People would not so much

complain of holding five acres instead of thirty, if they had to

work and to pay six times less in the first case. Again, a

division of tenements fixed once and for all in spite of changes

in the numbers and wants of the population, looks anything but

convenient. At the same time the fixed scheme of the division

offers a ready basis for computing rents and assessing labour

services. And for the sake of the lord it was advisable to

preserve outward unity even when the system was actually breaking

up: for dealings with the manorial administration virgates

remained undivided, even when they were no longer occupied as

integral units.

    Although the holdings are undoubtedly made subservient to the

wants of the manor, it would be going a great deal too far to

suppose that they were formed with the primary object of meeting

those wants. If we look closer into the structure we find that it

is based on the relation between the plough-team and the arable,

a relation which is more or less constant and explains the

gradations and the mode of apportionment. The division of the

land is no indefinite or capricious one, because the land has to

be used in certain quantities, and smaller quantities or

fractions would disarrange the natural connexion between the soil

and the forces that make it productive. The society of those days

appears as an agricultural mass consisting not of individual

persons or natural families, but of groups possessed of the

implements for tilling the land. Its unit of reckoning is not the

man, but the plough-beast. As the model plough-team happens to be

a very large one, the large unit of the hide is adopted. Lesser

quantities may be formed also, but still they correspond to

aliquot parts of the full team of eight oxen. Thus the possible

gradations are not so many or so gentle as in our own time, but

are in the main the half plough-land, the virgate, and the

oxgang. What else there is can be only regarded as subsidiary to

the main arrangement: the cotters and crofters are not tenants in

the fields, but gardeners, labourers, craftsmen, herdsmen, and

the like. If the country had not been mainly cultivated as

ploughland, but had borne vines or olives or crops that required

no cumbersome implements, but intense and individualistic labour,

one may readily believe that the holdings would have been more

compact, and also more irregular.

    The principles of coaration give an insight into the nature

of these English village communities. They did not aim at

absolute equality; they subordinated the personal element to the

agricultural one, if we may use that expression. Not so much an

apportionment of individual claims was effected as an

apportionment of the land to the forces at work upon it. This

observation helps us to get rid of the anomalies with which we

started: the holding was united because an ox could not be

divided; the plots might be smaller or larger, but everywhere

they were connected with a scheme of which the plough-team was

the unit. An increasing population had to take care of itself,

and to try to fit itself into the existing divisions by family

arrangements, marriage, adoption, reclaiming of new land,

employment for hire, by-professions, and emigration. The manorial

factor comes in to make everYthing artificially regular and

rigid.

    If we examine the open-field system and its relation to the

holdings of individual peasants, we see, as it were, the

framework of a peasant community that has swerved from the path

of its original development. The gathering of scattered and

intermixed strips into holdings points to practices of division

or allotment: these practices are the very essence of the whole,

and they alone can explain the glaring inconveniencies of

scattered ownership coupled with artificial concentration. But

redivision of the arable is not seen in the documents of our

period. There is no shifting of strips, no changes in the

quantities allotted to each family. Everything goes by heredity

and settled rules of family property, as if the husbandry was not

arranged for communal ownership and re-allotment. I should like

to compare the whole to the icebound surface of a northern sea:

it is not smooth, although hard and immoveable, and the hills and

hollows of the uneven plain remind one of the billows that rolled

when it was yet unfrozen.

    The treatment of the arable gives the clue to all other sides

of the subject. The rights of common usage of meadow and pasture

carry us back to practices which must have been originally

applied to arable also. When one reads of a meadow being cut up

into strips and partitioned for a year among the members of the

community by regular rotation or by lot, one does not see why

only the grass land should be thus treated while there is no

reallotment of the arable plots. As for the waste, it does not

even admit of set boundaries, and the only possible means of

apportioning its use is to prescribe what and how many heads of

cattle each holding may send out upon it. The close affinity

between the different parts of the village soil is especially

illustrated by the fact, that the open-field arable is treated as

common through the greater part of the year. Such facts are more

than survivals, more than stray relics of a bygone time. The

communal element of English mediaeval husbandry becomes

conspicuous in the individualistic elements that grow out of it.

    The question has been asked whether we ought not to regard

these communal arrangements as derived from the exclusive right

of ownership, and the power of coercion vested in the lord of the

soil. I think that many features in the constitution of the

thirteenth century manor show its gradual growth and

comparatively recent origin. The so-called manorial system

consists, in truth, in the peculiar connexion between two

agrarian bodies, the settlement of villagers cultivating their

own fields, and the home-estate of the lord tacked on to this

settlement and dependent on the work supplied by it. I take only

the agrarian side, of course, and do not mention the political

protection which stands more or less as an equivalent for the

profits received by the lord from the peasantry. And as for the

agrarian arrangement, we ought to keep it quite distinct from

forms which are sometimes confused with it through loose

terminology. A community paying taxes, farmers leasing land for

rent, labourers without independent husbandry of their own, may

be all subjected to some lord, but their subjection is not

manorial. Two elements are necessary to constitute the manorial

arrangement, the peasant village and the home farm worked by its

help.

    If we turn now to the evidence of the feudal period, we shall

see that the labour-service relation, although very marked and

prevalent in most cases, is by no means the only one that should

be taken into account. In a large number of cases the relation

between lord and peasants resolves itself into money payments,

and this is only another way of saying that the manorial group

disaggregates itself. The peasant holding gets free from the

obligation of labouring under the supervision of the bailiff, and

the home estate may be either thrown over or managed by the help

of hired servants and labourers.

    But alongside of these facts, testifying to a progress

towards modern times, we find survivals of a more ancient order

of things, quite as incompatible with manorial husbandry. Instead

of performing work on the demesne, the peasantry are sometimes

made to collect and furnish produce for the lord's table and his

other wants. They send bread, ale, sheep, chicken, cheese, etc.,

sometimes to a neighbouring castle and sometimes a good way off.

When we hear of the firma unius noctis, paid to the king's

household by a borough or a village, we have to imagine a

community standing entirely by itself and taxed to a certain

tribute, without any superior land estate necessarily engrafted,

upon it; a home farm may or may not be close by, but its

management is not dependent on the customary work of the vill

(consuetudines villae), and the connexion between the two is

casual. The facts of which I am speaking are certainly of rare

occurrence and dying out, but they are very interesting from a

historical point of view, they throw light on a condition of

things preceding the manorial system, and characterised by a

large over-lordship exacting tribute, and not cultivating land by

help of the peasantry.

    We come precisely to the same conclusion by another way. The

feudal landlord is represented in the village by his demesene

land, and by the servants acting as his helpers in

administration. Now, the demesne land is often found intermixed

with the strips of the peasantry. This seems particularly fitted

for a time when the peasantry did not collect to work on a

separate home farm, but simply devoted one part of the labour on

their own ground to the use of the lord. What I mean is, that if

a demesne consisted of, say, every fifth acre in the village

fields, the teams of four virgaters composing the plough would

traverse this additional acre after going over four of their own

instead of being called up under the supervision of the bailiff,

to do work on an independent estate. The work performed by the

peasants when the demesne is still in intermixture with the

village land, appears as an intermediate stage between the

tribute paid by a practically self-dependent community, and the

double husbandry of a manorial estate linked to a village.

    Another feature of transition is perceivable in the history

of the class of servants or ministers who collect and supervise

the dues and services of the peasants. The feudal arrangement is

quite as much characterised by the existence of these middlemen

as modern life by the agreements and money dealings which have

rendered it useless. In the period preceding the manorial age we

see fewer officers, and their interference in the life of the

community is but occasional. The gathering of tribute, the

supervision of a few labour duties in addition, did not require a

large staff of ministers. It was in the interest of the lord to

dispense as much as possible with their costly help, and to throw

what obligations there were to be performed on the community

itself. It seems to me that the feudal age has preserved several

traces of institutions belonging to that period of transition.

The older surveys, especially the Kentish ones, show a very

remarkable development of carriage duties which must have been

called forth by the necessity of sending produce to the lord's

central halls or courts, while the home farms were still few and

small. The riding bailiffs appear in ancient documents in a

position which is gradually modified as time goes on. They begin

by forming a very conspicuous class among the tenants, in fact

the foremost rank of the peasantry. These radmen, radulfs,

rodknights, riders, are privileged people, and mostly rank with

the free tenants, but they are selected from among the villagers,

and very closely resemble the hundredors, whose special duties

have kept up their status among the general decay. In later

times, in the second half of the thirteenth century and in the

fourteenth, it would be impossible to distinguish such a class of

riding tenants. They exist here and there, but in most cases

their place has been taken by direct dependents of the lord.

Besides, as the home-farm has developed on every manor, their

office has lost some of the importance it had at a time when

there was a good deal of business to transact in the way of

communicating between the villages and the few central courts to

which rents had to be carried. And, lastly, I may remind the

reader of the importance attached in some surveys to the

supervision of the best tenants over the rest at the boon works.

The socmen, or free tenants, or holders of full lands, as the

case may be, have to ride out with rods in their hands to inspect

the people cutting the corn or making hay. These customs are

mostly to be found in manors with a particularly archaic

constitution. They occur very often on ancient demesne. And I

need hardly say that they point to a still imperfect development

of the ministerial class. The village is already set to work for

the lord, but it manages this work as much as possible by itself,

with hardly any interference from foreign overseers.

    One part of the village population is altogether outside the

manorial labour intercourse between village and demesne. The

freeholders may perform some labour-services, but the home-farm

could never depend on them, and when such services are mentioned,

they are merely considered as a supplement to the regular duties

of the servile holders. At the same time, the free tenants are

members of the village community, engrained in it by their

participation in all the eventualities of open field life, by

their holdings in the arable, by their use of the commons. This

shows, again, that the manorial element is superimposed on the

communal, and not the foundation of it. I shall not revert to my

positive arguments in favour of the existence of ancient freehold

by the side of tenements that have become freehold by exemption

from servile duties. But I may be allowed to point out in this

place, that negatively the appearance of free elements among the

peasantry presents a most powerful check to the theory of a

servile origin of the community: it throws the burden of proof on

those who contend for such an origin as against the theory of a

free village feudalized in process of time.

    In a sense the partizans of the servile community are in the

same awkward position in respect to the manorial court. Its body

of suitors may have consisted to a great extent of serfs, but

surely it must have contained a powerful free admixture also,

because out of serfdom could hardly have arisen all the

privileges and rights which make it a constitutional

establishment by the side of the lord. The suitors are the judges

in litigation, the conveyancing practice proceeds from the

principle of communal testimony, and in matters of husbandry,

custom and self-government prevail against any capricious change

or unprecedented exaction. And it has to be noticed that the will

and influence of the lord is much more distinct and overbearing

in the documents of the later thirteenth and of the fourteenth

century, than in the earlier records; one more hint, that the

feudal conception of society took some time to push back older

notions, which implied a greater liberty of the folk in regard to

their rulers.

    Whichever way we may look, one and the same observation is

forced upon us: the communal organisation of the peasantry is

more ancient and more deeply laid than the manorial order. Even

the feudal period that has formed the immediate subject of our

study shows everywhere traces of a peasant class living and

working in economically self-dependent communities under the

loose authority of a lord, whose claims may proceed from

political sources and affect the semblance of ownership, but do

not give rise to the manorial connexion between estate and

village.















Villainage in England: Essays in English Mediaeval History



	by Paul Vinogradoff



1892









First Essay



The Peasantry of the Feudal Age.





Chapter One



The Legal Aspect of Villainage. General Conceptions



    It has become a commonplace to oppose medieval serfdom to

ancient slavery, one implying dependence on the lord of the soil

and attachment to the glebe, the other being based on complete

subjection to an owner. There is no doubt that great landmarks in

the course of social development are set by the three modes

hitherto employed of organising human labour: using the working

man (1) as a chattel at will, (2) as a subordinate whose duties

are fixed by custom, (3) as a free agent bound by contract. These

landmarks probably indicate molecular changes in the structure of

society scarcely less important than those political and

intellectual revolutions which are usually taken as the

turning-points of ancient, medieval, and modern history.

    And still we must not forget, in drawing such definitions,

that we reach them only by looking at things from such a height

that all lesser inequalities and accidental features of the soil

are no longer sensible to the eyesight. In finding one's way over

the land one must needs go over these very inequalities and take

into account these very features. If, from a general survey of

medieval servitude, we turn to the actual condition of the

English peasantry, say in the thirteenth century, the first fact

we have to meet will stand in very marked contrast to our general

proposition.

    The majority of the peasants are villains, and the legal

conception of villainage has its roots not in the connexion of

the villain with the soil, but in his personal dependence on the

lord.

    If this is a fact, it is a most important one. It would be

reckless to treat it as a product of mere legal pedantry.* The

great work achieved by the English lawyers of the twelfth and

thirteenth centuries was prompted by a spirit which had nothing

to do with pedantry. They were fashioning state and society,

proudly conscious of high aims and power, enlightened by the

scholastic training of their day, but sufficiently strong to use

it for their own purposes; sound enough not to indulge in mere

abstractions, and firm enough not to surrender to mere

technicalities.* In the treatment of questions of status and

tenure by the lawyers of Henry II, Henry III, and Edward I, we

must recognise a mighty influence which was brought to bear on

the actual condition of things, and our records show us on every

page that this treatment was by no means a matter of mere theory.

Indeed one of the best means that we have for estimating the

social process of those times is afforded by the formation and

the break up of legal notions in their cross influences with

surrounding political and economic facts.

    As to the general aspect of villainage in the legal theory of

English feudalism there can be no doubt. The 'Dialogus de

Scaccario' gives it in a few words: the lords are owners not only

of the chattels but of the bodies of their ascripticii, they may

transfer them wherever they please, 'and sell or otherwise

alienate them if they like.'* Glanville and Bracton, Fleta and

Britton* follow in substance the same doctrine, although they use

different terms. They appropriate the Roman view that there is no

difference of quality between serfs and serfs: all are in the

same abject state. Legal theory keeps a very firm grasp of the

distinction between status and tenure, between a villain and a

free man holding in villainage, but it does not admit of any

distinction of status among serfs: servus, villanus, and nativus

are equivalent terms as to personal condition, although this last

is primarily meant to indicate something else besides condition,

namely, the fact that a person has come to it by birth.* The

close connexion between the terms is well illustrated by the

early use of nativa, nieve, 'as a feminine to villanus.'

    These notions are by no means abstractions bereft of

practical import. Quite in keeping with them, manorial lords

could remove peasants from their holdings at their will and

pleasure. An appeal to the courts was of no avail: the lord in

reply had only to oppose his right over the plaintiff's person,

and to refuse to go into the subject-matter of the case.* Nor

could the villain have any help as to the amount and the nature

of his services;* the King's Courts will not examine any

complaint in this respect, and may sometimes go so far as to

explain that it is no business of theirs to interfere between the

lord and his man.* In fact any attempt on the part of the

dependant to assert civil rights as to his master will be met and

defeated by the 'exceptio villenagii.'* The state refuses to

regulate the position of this class on the land, and therefore

there can be no question about any legal 'ascription' to the

soil. Even as to his person, the villain was liable to be

punished and put into prison by the lord, if the punishment

inflicted did not amount to loss of life or injury to his body

The extant Plea Rolls and other judicial records are full of

allusions to all these rights of the lord and disabilities of the

villain, and it must be taken into account that only an

infinitely small part of the actual cases can have left any trace

in such records, as it was almost hopeless to bring them to the

notice of the Royal Courts.*

    It is not strange that in view of such disabilities Bracton

thought himself entitled to assume equality of condition between

the English villain and the Roman slave, and to use the terms

servus, villanus, and nativus indiscriminately. The

characteristics of slavery are copied by him from Azo's

commentary on the institutes, as material for a description of

the English bondmen, and he distinguishes them carefully even

from the Roman adscripticii or coloni of base condition. The

villains are protected in some measure against their lord in

criminal law; they cannot be slain or maimed at pleasure; but

such protection is also afforded to slaves in the later law of

the Empire, and in fact it is based in Bracton on the text of the

Institutes given by Azo, which in its turn is simply a summary of

enactments made by Hadrian and Antonine. The minor law books of

the thirteenth century follow Bracton in this identification of

villainage with slavery. Although this identification could not

but exercise a decisive influence on the theory of the subject,

it must be borne in mind that it did not originate in a wanton

attempt to bring together in the books dissimilar facts from

dissimilar ages. On the contrary, it came into the books because

practice had paved the way for it. Bracton was enabled to state

it because he did not see much difference between the definitions

of Azo and the principles of Common Law, as they had been

established by his masters Martin of Pateshull and William

Raleigh. He was wrong, as will be shown by-and-by, but certainly

he had facts to lean upon, and his theory cannot be dismissed on

the ground of his having simply copied it from a foreigner's

treatise.

    Most modern writers on the subject have laid stress upon a

difference between villains regardant and villains in gross, said

to be found in the law books.* It has been taken to denote two

degrees of servitude -- the predial dependence of a colonus and

the personal dependence of a true slave. The villain regardant

was (it is said) a villain who laboured under disabilities in

relation to his lord only, the villain in gross possessed none of

the qualities of a freeman. One sub-division would illustrate the

debasement of freemen who had lost their own land, while the

other would present the survival of ancient slavery.

    In opposition to these notions I cannot help thinking that

Hallam was quite right in saying: 'In the condition of these

(villains regardant and villains in gross), whatever has been

said by some writers, I can find no manner of difference; the

distinction was merely technical, and affected only the mode of

pleading. The term in gross is appropriated in our legal language

to property held absolutely and without reference to any other.

Thus it is applied to rights of advowson or of common, when

possessed simply, and not as incident to any particular lands.

And there can be no doubt that it was used in the same sense for

the possession of a villein.' (Middle Ages, iii. 173; cf. note

XIV.) Hallam's statement did not carry conviction with it

however, and as the question is of considerable importance in

itself and its discussion will incidentally help to bring out one

of the chief points about villainage, I may be allowed to go into

it at some length.

    Matters would be greatly simplified if the distinction could

really be traced through the authorities. In point of fact it

turns out to be a late one. We may start from Coke in tracing

back its history. His commentary upon Littleton certainly has a

passage which shows that he came across opinions implying a

difference of status between villains regardant and villains in

gross. He speaks of the right of the villain to pursue every kind

of action against every person except his lord, and adds: 'there

is no diversity herein, whether he be a villain regardant or in

gross, although some have said to the contrary,* (Co. Lit. 123

b). Littleton himself treats of the terms in several sections,

and it is clear that he never takes them to indicate status or

define variation of condition. As has been pointed out by Hallam,

he uses them only in connexion with a diversity in title, and a

consequent diversity in the mode of pleading. If the lord has a

deed or a recorded confession to prove a man's bondage, he may

implead him as his villain in gross; if the lord has to rely upon

prescription, he has to point out the manor to which the party

and his ancestors have been regardant, have belonged, time out of

mind.* As it is a question of title and not of condition,

Littleton currently uses the mere 'villain' without any

qualification, whereas such a qualification could not be

dispensed with, if there had been really two different classes of

villains. Last but not least, any thought of a diversity of

condition is precluded by the fact, that Littleton assumes the

transfer from one sub-division to the other to depend entirely on

the free will of the lord (sections 175, 181, 182, 185). But

still, although even Littleton does not countenance the

classification I am now analysing, it seems to me that some of

his remarks may have given origin to the prevalent misconception

on the subject.

    Let us take up the Year Books, which, even in their present

state, afford such an inestimable source of information for the

history of legal conceptions in the fourteenth and fifteenth

centuries. An examination of the reports in the age of the

Edwards will show at once that the terms regardant and in gross

are used, or rather come into use, in the fourteenth century as

definitions of the mode of pleading in particular cases. They are

suggested by difference in title, but they do not coincide with

it, and any attempt to make them coincide must certainly lead to

misapprehension. I mean this the term 'villain regardant' applied

to a man does not imply that the person in question has any

status superior to that of the 'villain in gross,' and it does

not imply that the lord has acquired a title to him by some

particular mode of acquisition, e.g. by prescription as

contrasted with grant or confession; it simply implies that for

the purpose of the matter then in hand, for the purpose of the

case that is then being argued, the lord is asserting and hoping

to prove a title to the villain by relying on a title to a manor

with which the villain is or has been connected-title it must be

remembered is one thing, proof of title is another. As the

contrast is based on pleading and not on title, one and the same

person may be taken and described in one case as a villain

regardant to a manor, and in another as a villain in gross. And

now for the proof.

    The expression 'regardant' never occurs in the pleadings at

all, but 'regardant to a manor' is used often. From Edward III's

time it is used quite as a matter of course in the formula of the

'exceptio' or special plea of villainage.* That is, if the

defendant pleaded in bar of an action that the plaintiff was his

bondman he generally said, I am not bound to answer A, because he

is my villain and I am seised of him as of my villain as

regardant to my manor of C. Of course there are other cases when

the term is employed, but the plea in bar is by far the most

common one and may stand for a test. This manner of pleading is

only coming gradually into use in the fourteenth century, and we

actually see how it is taking shape and spreading. As a rule the

Year Books of Edward I's time have not got it. The defendant puts

in his plea unqualified. 'He ought not to be answered because he

is our villain' (Y.B. 21/22 Edward I, p. 166, ed. Horwood). There

is a case in 1313 when a preliminary skirmish between the counsel

on either side took place as to the sufficiency of the

defendant's plea in bar, the plaintiff contending that it was not

precise enough. Here, if any where, we should expect the term

'regardant,' but it is not forthcoming1. What is more, and what

ought to have prevented any mistake, the official records of

trials on the Plea Rolls up to Edward II always use the plain

assertion, 'villanus... et tenet in villenagio.'* The practice of

naming the manor to which a villain belonged begins however to

come in during the reign of Edward II, and the terminology is by

no means settled at the outset; expressions are often used as

equivalent to 'regardant' which could hardly have misled later

antiquaries as to the meaning of the qualification.* In a case of

1322, for instance, we have 'within the manor' where we should

expect to find 'regardant to the manor.'* This would be very

nearly equivalent to the Latin formula adopted by the Plea Rolls,

which is simply ut de manerio.* Every now and then cases occur

which gradually settle the terminology, because the weight of

legal argumentation in them is made to turn on the fact that a

particular person was connected with a particular manor and not

with another. A case from 1317 is well in point. B.P. the

defendant excepts against the plaintiff T.A. on the ground of

villainage (qil est nostre vileyn, and nothing else). The

plaintiff replies that he was enfranchised by being suffered to

plead in an assize of mort d'ancestor against B.P.'s grandmother.

By this the defendant's counsel is driven to maintain that his

client's right against T.A. descended not from his grandmother

but from his grandfather, who was seised of the manor of H. to

which T.A. belonged as a villain.* The connexion with the manor

is adduced to show from what quarter the right to the villain had

descended, and, of course, implies nothing as to any peculiarity

of this villain's status, or as to the kind of title, the mode of

acquiring rights, upon which the lord relies -- it was ground

common to both parties that if the lord had any rights at all he

acquired them by inheritance.

    Another case seems even more interesting. It dates from 1355,

that is from a time when the usual terminology had already become

fixed. It arose under that celebrated Statute of Labourers which

played such a prominent part in the social history of the

fourteenth century. One of the difficulties in working the

statute came from the fact that it had to recognise two different

sets of relations between the employer and the workman. The

statute dealt with the contract between master and servant, but

it did not do away with the dependence of the villain on the

lord, and in case of conflict it gave precedence to this latter

claim; a lord had the right to withdraw his villain from a

stranger's service. Such cross influences could not but occasion

a great deal of confusion, and our case gives a good instance of

it. Thomas Barentyn has reclaimed Ralph Crips from the service of

the Prior of the Hospitalers, and the employer sues in

consequence both his former servant and Barentyn. This last

answers, that the servant in question is his villain regardant to

the manor of C. The plaintiffs counsel maintains that he could

not have been regardant to the manor, as he was going about at

large at his free will and as a free man; for this reason A. the

former owner of the manor was never seised of him, and not being

seised could not transfer the seisin to the present owner,

although he transferred the manor. For the defendant it is

pleaded, that going about freely is no enfranchisement, that by

the gift of the manor every right connected with the manor was

also conferred and that consequently the new lord could at any

moment lay hands on his man, as the former lord could have done

in his time. Ultimately the plaintiff offers to join issue on the

question, whether the servant had been a villain regardant to the

manor of C. or not. The defendant asserts, rather late in the

day, that even if the person in question was not a villain

regardant to the manor of C. the mere fact of his being a villain

in gross would entitle his lord to call him away. This attempt to

start on a new line is not allowed by the Court because the claim

had originally been traversed on the ground of the connexion with

the manor.

    The peculiarity of the case is that a third person has an

interest to prove that the man claimed as villain had been as a

free man. Usually there were but two parties in the contest about

status; the lord pulling one way and the person claimed pulling

the other way, but, through the influence of the Statute of

Labourers, in our case lord and labourer were at one against a

third party, the labourer's employer. The acknowledgment of

villainage by the servant did not settle the question, because,

though binding for the future, it was not sufficient to show that

villainage had existed in the past, that is at the time when the

contract of hire and service was broken through the interference

of the lord. Everything depended on the settlement of one

question was the lord seised at the time, or not? Both parties

agree that the lord was not actually seised of the person, both

agree that he was seised of the manor, and both suppose that if

the person had as a matter of fact been attached to the manor it

would have amounted to a seisin of the person. And so the

contention is shifted to this point: can a man be claimed through

the medium of a manor, if he has not been actually living,

working and serving in it? The court assumes the possibility, and

so the parties appeal to the country to decide whether in point

of fact Ralph Crips the shepherd had been in legal if not in

actual connexion with the manor, i.e. could be traced to it

personally or through his relatives.

    The case is interesting in many ways. It shows that the same

man could be according to the point of view considered both as a

villain in regard to a manor, and as a villain in gross. The

relative character of the classification is thus illustrated as

well as its importance for practical purposes. The transmission

of a manor is taken to include the persons engaged in the

cultivation of its soil, and even those whose ancestors have been

engaged in such cultivation, and who have no special plea for

severing the connexion.

    As to the outcome of the whole inquiry, we may, it seems to

me, safely establish the following points: 1. The terms

'regardant' and 'in gross' have nothing to do with a legal

distinction of status. 2. They come up in connexion with the

modes of proof and pleading during the fourteenth century. 3.

They may apply to the same person from different points of view.

4. 'Villain in gross' means a villain without further

qualification; 'villain regardant to a manor' means villain by

reference to a manor. 5. The connexion with a manor, though only

a matter of fact and not binding the lord in any way, might yet

be legally serviceable to him, as a means of establishing and

proving his rights over the person he claimed.

    I need hardly mention, after what has been said, that there

is no such thing as this distinction in the thirteenth century

law books. I must not omit, however, to refer to one expression

which may be taken to stand in the place of the later 'villain

regardant to a manor.' Britton (ii, 55) gives the formula of the

special plea of villain ge to the assize of mort d'ancestor in

the following words. 'Ou il poie dire qe il est soen vileyn et

soen astrier et demourrant en son villenage.' There can be no

doubt that residence on the lord's land is meant, and the term

astrier leads even further, it implies residence at a particular

hearth or in a particular house. Fleta gives the assize of novel

disseisin to those who have been a long time away from their

villain hearth* ('extra astrum suum villanum,' p, 217). If the

term 'astrier' were restricted to villains it would have proved a

great deal more than the 'villain regardant' usually relied upon.

But it is of very wide application. Britton uses it of free men

entitled to rights of common by reason of tenements they hold in

a township (i, 392). Bracton speaks of the case of a nephew

coming into an inheritance in preference to the uncle because he

had been living at the same hearth or in the same hall (in atrio

or astro) with the former owner,* and in such or a similar sense

the word appears to have been usually employed by lawyers.* On

the other hand, if we look in Bracton's treatise for parallel

passages to those quoted from the Fleta and Britton about the

villain astrier, we find only a reference to the fact that the

person in question was a serf and holding in villainage and under

the sway of a lord,* and so there is nothing to denote special

condition in the astrer. When the term occurs in connexion with

villainage it serves to show that a person was not only a bondman

born, but actually living in the power of his lord, and not in a

state of liberty. The allusion to the hearth cannot possibly mean

that the man sits in his own homestead, because only a few of the

villains could have been holders of separate homesteads, and so

it must mean that he was sitting in a homestead belonging to his

lord, which is quite in keeping with the application of the term

in the case of inheritance.

    The facts we have been examining certainly suppose that in

the villains we have chiefly to do with peasants tilling the

earth and dependent on manorial organisation. They disclose the

working of one element which is not to be simply deduced from the

idea of personal dependence.

    It may be called subjection to territorial power. The

possession of a manor carries the possession of cultivators with

it. It is always important to decide whether a bondman is in the

seisin of his lord or not, and the chief means to show it is to

trace his connexion with the territorial lordship. The

interposition of the manor in the relation between master and man

is, of course, a striking feature and it gives a very

characteristic turn to medieval servitude. But if it is not

consistent with the general theory laid down in the thirteenth

century law books, it does not lead to anything like the Roman

colonatus. The serf is not placed on a particular plot of land to

do definite services under the protection of the State. He may be

shifted from one plot within the jurisdiction of his lord to

another, from one area of jurisdiction to another, from rural

labour to industrial work or house work, from one set of customs

and services to another. He is not protected by his predial

connexion against his lord, and in fact such predial connexion is

utilised to hold and bind him to his lord. We may say, that the

unfree peasant of English feudalism was legally a personal

dependant, but that his personal dependence was enforced through

territorial lordship.



NOTES:



1. Thorold Rogers, History of Agriculture and Prices, i. 70; Six

Centuries of Work and Wages, 44. Cf Chandler, Five Court Rolls of

Great Cressingham in the county of Norfolk, 1885, pp. viii, ix.



2. Stubbs, Seventeen Lectures, 304, 305; Maitland, Introduction

to the Note-book of Bracton, 4 sqq.



3. Dial. de Scacc. Ii. 10 (Select Charters, p. 222). Cf i. 10; p.

192.



4. Glanville, v. 5; Bracton, 4, 5; Fleta, i. 2; Britton, ed.

Nichols, i. 194.



1. Bracton, 5; Britton, i. 197. Pollock, Land-laws, App. C, is

quite right as to the fundamental distinction between status and

tenure, but he goes too far, I think, in trying to trace the

steps by which names originally applying to different things got

confused in the terminology of the Common Law. Annotators

sometimes indulged in distinctions which contradict each other

and give us no help as to the law. The same Cambridge MS. from

which Nichols gives an explanation of servus, nativus, and

villanus (i. 195) has a different etymology in a marginal note to

Bracton. 'Nativus dicitur a nativitate-quasi in servitute natus,

villanus dicitur a villa, quasi faciens villanas consuetudines

racione tenementi, vel sicut ille qui se recognoscit ad villanum

in curia quae recordum habet, servus vero dicitur a servando

quasi per captivitatem, per vim et injustam detentionem villanus

captus et detentus contra mores et consuetudines juris naturalis,

(Cambr. Univers. MSS. Dd. vii. 6. I have the reference from my

friend F.W. Maitland).



2. Placita Coram Rege, Easter, 14 Edw. I, m. 9: "Willelmus

Barantyn et Radulfus attachiati fuerunt ad respondendum Agueti de

Chalgraue de placito quare in ipsam Agnetem apud Chalgraue

insultum fecerunt et ipsam verberaverunt, vulneraverunt et male

tractaverunt, et bona et catalla sua in domibus ipsius Agnetis

apud Chalgraue scilicet ordeum et avenam, argentum, archas et

alia bona ad valenciam quadraginta solidorum ceperunt et

asportaverunt; et ipsam Agnetem effugaverunt de uno mesuagio et

dimidia virgata terre de quibus fuit in seysina prr predictum

Willelmum que fuerunt de antiquo dominico per longum tempus; nec

permiserunt ipsam Agnetem morari in predicta villa de Chalgraue;

et eciam quandam sororem ipsius Agnetis eo quod ipsa soror eam

hospitavit per duas noctes de domibus suis eiecit, terra et

catalla sua abstulit. Et predicti Willelmus et Radulfus veniunt.

Et quo ad insultacionem et verberacionem dicunt quod non sunt

inde culpabiles. Et quo ad hoc quod ipsa Agnes dicit quod ipsam

eiecerunt de domibus et terris suis, dicunt quod predicta Agnes

est natiua ipsius Willelmi et tenuit predicta tenementa in

villenagio ad voluntatem ipsius Willelmi propter quod bene

licebat eidem Willelmo ipsam de predicto tenemento ammouere. --

Juratores dicunt.... quod predicta tenementa sunt villenagium

predicti Willelmi de Barentyn et quod predicta Agnes tenuit eadem

tenementa ad voluntatem ipsius Willelmi.' Cf. Y.B. 12/13 Edw. III

(ed. Pike), p. 233 sqq., 'or vous savez bien qe par ley de terre

tout ceo qe le vileyn ad si est a soun seignour;' 229 sqq., 'qar

cest sa terre demene, et il les puet ouster a sa volunte demene.'



1. Coram Rege, Mich., 3/4 Edw. I, m. I: 'Ricardus de Assheburnham

summonitus fuit ad respondendum Petro de Attebuckhole et Johanni

de eadem de placito quare, cum ipsi teneant quasdam terras et

tenementa de predicto Ricardo in Hasseburnham ac ipsi parati sunt

ad faciendum ei consuetudines et servicia que antecessores sui

terras et tenementa illa tenentes facere consueverint, predictus

Ricardus diversas commoditates quam ipsi tam in boscis ipsius

Ricardi quam in aliis locis habere consueverint eisdem subtrahens

ipsos ad intollerabiles servitutes et consuetudines faciendas

taliter compellit quod ex sua duricia mendicare coguntur. Et unde

queruntur quod, cum teneant tenementa Sua per certas

consuetudines et certa servicia, et cum percipere consueverunt

boscum ad focum et materiam de bosco crescente in propriis terris

suis, predictus Ricardus ipsos non permittit aliquid in boscis

suis capere et eciam capit aueria sua et non permittit eos terram

suam colere. -- Ricardus dicit, quod non debet eis ad aliquam

accionen respondere nisi questi essent de vita vel membris vel de

iniuria facta corpori suo. Dicit eciam quod nativi sui sunt, et

quod omnes antecessores sui nativi fuerunt antecessorum suorum et

in villenagio suo manentes.'



2. Note-book of Bracton, pl. 1237: 'dominus Rex non vult se de

eis intromittere.'



3. It occurs in the oldest extant Plea Roll, 6 Ric. I; Rot. Cur.

Regis, ed. Palgrave, p. 84: 'Thomas venit et dicit quod ipsa fuit

uxorata cuidam Turkillo, qui habuit duos filios qui clamabant

libertatem tenementi sui in curia domini Regis... et quod ibi

dirationavit eos esse villanos suos, et non defendit

disseisinam... Et ipsi Elilda et Ricardus defendunt vilenagium et

ponunt se super juratam,' etc.



1. Maitland, Select Pleas of the Crown (Selden Soc. I), pl. 3:

'Quendam nativum suum quem habuit in vinculis eo quod voluit

fugere.' Bract. Notebook, pl. 1041: 'Petrus de Herefordia

attachiatus fuit ad respondendum R. fil. Th. quare ipse cepit

Ricardum et eum imprisonauit et coegit ad redempcionem I marce.

Et Petrus venit alias et defendit capcionem et imprisonacionem

set dicit quod villanus fuit,' etc.

     It must be noted, however, that in such cases it was

difficult to draw the line as to the amount of bodily injury

allowed by the law, and therefore the King's courts were much

more free to interfere. In the trial quoted on p. 45, note 2, the

defendants distinguish carefully between the accusation and the

civil suit. They plead 'not guilty' as to the former. And so

Bishop Stubbs' conjecture as to the 'rusticus verberatus' in Pipe

Roll, 31 Henry I, p. 55 (Constit. Hist. I. 487), seems quite

appropriate. The case is a very early one, and may testify to the

better condition of the peasantry in the first half of the

twelfth century.



2. As to the actual treatment experienced by the peasants at the

hands of their feudal masters, see a picturesque case in

Maitland's Select Pleas of the Crown (Selden Soc.), 203.



1. Stubbs, Constitutional History, ii. 652, 654; Freeman, Norman

Conquest, v. 477; Digby, Introduction to the Law of Real

Property, 244.



1. Sir Thomas Smith, The Commonwealth of England, ed. 1609, p.

123, shows that the notion of two classes corresponding to the

Roman servus and the Roman adscriptus glebae had taken root

firmly about the middle of the sixteenth century. 'Villeins in

gross, as ye would say immediately bond to the person and his

heirs... (The adscripti) were not bond to the person but to the

mannor or place, and did follow him who had the mannors, and in

our law are called villains regardants (sic), for because they be

as members or belonging to the mannor or place. Neither of the

one sort nor of the other have we any number in England. And of

the first I never knew any in the Realme in my time. Of the

second so fewe there bee, that it is not almost worth the

speaking, but our law doth acknowledge them in both these sorts.'



1. Section 182 is not quite consistent with such an exposition,

but I do not think there can be any doubt as to the general

doctrine.



2. I need not say that the work done by Mr Horwood, and

especially by Mr Pike, for the Rolls' Series quite fulfil the

requirements of students. But in comparison with it the old year

Books in Rastall's, and even more so in Maynard's edition, appear

only the more wretchedly misprinted.



1. For instance, Liber Assisarum, ann. 44, pl. 4 (f 283): 'Quil

fuit son villein et il seisi de luy come de son villein come

regardant a son maneir de B. en la Counte de Dorset.'



1. Y.B. Hil. 5 Edw. II: 'Iohan de Rose port son [ne] vexes vers

Labbe de Seint Bennet de Holme, et il counta qil luy travaille,

etc., e luy demande.' Migg.: 'defent tort et force, ou et quant

il devera et dit qil fuist le vilein Labbe, per qi il ne deveroit

estre resceve.' Devom.: 'il covient qe vous disez plus qe vous

estes seisi, ut supra,' etc. Migg.: ' il est nostre vileyn, et

nous seisi de luy come de nostre vileyn.' Ber.; 'Coment seisi

come,' etc.? Migg.: 'de luy et de ces auncestres come de nos

vileynes, en fesant de luy nostre provost en prenant de luy

rechate de char et de saunk et redemption pur fille et fitz

marier de luy et de ces auncestres et a tailler haut et bas a

nostre volente, prest,' etc. (Les reports des cases del Roy

Edward le II, London, 1678; f 157.)



2. I do not think it ever came into any one's mind to look at the

Plea Rolls in this matter. Even Hargrave, when preparing his

famous argument in Somersett's case, carried his search no

further than the Year Books then in print. And in consequence he

just missed the true solution. He says (Howell's State Trials,

xx. 42, 43), 'As to the villeins in gross the cases relative to

them are very few; and I am inclined to think that there never

was any great number of them in England.... However, after a long

search, I do find places in the Year Books where the form of

alledging villenage in gross is expressed, not in full terms, but

in a general way; and in all the cases I have yet seen, the

villenage is alledged in the ancestors of the person against whom

it was pleaded.' And he quotes 1 Edw. II, 4; 5 Edw. II, 157

(corr. for 15); 7 Edw. II, 242, and 11 Edw. II, 344. But all

these cases are of Edward II's time, and instead of being

exceptional give the normal form of pleading as it was used up to

the second quarter of the fourteenth century. They looked

exceptional to Hargrave only because he restricted his search to

the later Year Books, and did not take up the Plea Rolls. By

admitting the cases quoted to indicate villainage in gross, he in

fact admitted that there were only villains in gross before 1350

or thereabouts, or rather that all villains were alike before

this time, and no such thing as the difference between in gross

and regardant existed. I give in App. I the report of the

interesting case quoted from I Edw. II.



3. Y. B. 32 /33 Edw. I (Horwood), p. 57: 'Quant un home est seisi

de son vilein, issl. qil est reseant dans son vilenage.'

Fitzherbert, Abr. Vill. 3 (39 Edw. III): '... villeins sunt

appendant as maners qe sount auncien demesne.' On the other hand,

'regardant' is used quite independently of villainage. Y. B.

12/13 Edw. III (Pike), p. 133: 'come services regardaunts al

manoir de H.'



1. Y.B. Hil. 14 Edw. II, f 417: 'R. est bailli... del manoir de

Clifton... deins quel manoir cesti J. est villein.'



2. See App. I and II.



3. Y.B. Trin. 9 Edw. II, f 294: 'Le manoir de H. fuit en ascun

temps en la seisine Hubert nostre ael, a quel manoir cest vileyn

est regardant.'



1. Y.B. Trin. 29 Edw. III, f. 41. For the report of this case and

the corresponding entry in the Common Pleas Roll, see Appendix

II.



1. Cf. Annals of Dunstaple, Ann. Mon. Iii. 371: 'Quia astrarius

eius fuit,' in the sense of a person living on one's land.



2. Bracton, f. 267, b.



3. Bract. Note-book, pl. 230, 951, 988. Cf. Spelman, Gloss. v.

astrarius Kentish Custumal, Statutes of the Realm, i. 224. Fleta

has it once in the sense of the Anglo-Saxon heord-faest, i. cap.

47, 10 (f. 62).



1. Bracton, f. 190.







Chapter 2



Rights and Disabilities of the Villain



    Legal theory as we have seen endeavoured to bring the general

conception of villainage under the principles of the Roman law of

slavery, and important features in the practice of the common law

went far to support it in so doing. On the other hand, even the

general legal theory discloses the presence of an element quite

foreign to the Roman conception. If we proceed from principles to

their application in detail, we at once find, that in most cases

the broad rules laid down on the subject do not fit all the

particular aspects of villainage. These require quite different

assumptions for their explanation, and the whole doctrine turns

out to be very complex, and to have been put together out of

elements which do not work well together.

    We meet discrepancies and confusion at the very threshold in

the treatment of the modes in which the villain status has its

origin. The most common way of becoming a villain was to be born

to this estate, and it seems that we ought to find very definite

rules as to this case. In truth, the doctrine was changing.

Glanville (v. 6) tried in a way to conform to the Roman rule of

the child following the condition of the mother, but it could not

be made to work in England, and ever since Bracton, both common

law and jurisprudence reject it. At the close of the Middle Ages

it was held that if born in wedlock the child took after his

father,* and that a bastard was to be accepted as filius nullius

and presumed free.* Bracton is more intricate; the bastard

follows the mother, the legitimate child follows the father; and

there is one exception, in this way, that the legitimate child of

a free man and a nief born in villainage takes after the mother.*

It is not difficult to see why the Roman rule did not fit; it was

too plain for a state of things which had to be considered from

three different sides.* The Roman lawyer merely looked to the

question of status and decided it on the ground of material

demonstrability of origin,* if such an expression may be used.

The Medieval lawyer had the Christian sanctification of marriage

to reckon with, and so the one old rule had to be broken up into

two rules-one applicable to legitimate children, the other to

bastards. In case of bastardy the tendency was decidedly in

favour of retaining the Roman rule, equally suiting animals and

slaves, and the later theory embodied in Littleton belongs

already to the development of modern ideas in favour of liberty.*

In case of legitimacy the recognition of marriage led to the

recognition of the family and indirectly to the closer connexion

with the father as the head of the family. In addition to this a

third element comes in, which may be called properly feudal. The

action of the father-rule is modified by the influence of

territorial subjection. The marriage of a free man with a nief

may be considered from a special point of view, if, as the feudal

phraseology goes, he enters to her into her villainage.* By this

fact the free man puts his child under the sway of the lord, to

whose villainage the mother belongs. It is not the character of

the tenement itself which is important in this case, but the fact

of subjection to a territorial lord, whose interest it is to

retain a dependant's progeny in a state of dependency. The whole

system is historically important, because it illustrates the

working of one of the chief ingredients of villainage, an

ingredient entirely absent from ancient slavery; whereas medieval

villainage depends primarily on subjection to the territorial

power of the lord. Once more we are shown the practical

importance of the manorial system in fashioning the state of the

peasantry. Generally a villain must be claimed with reference to

a manor, in connexion with an unfree hearth; he is born in a

nest,* which makes him a bondman. The strict legal notion has to

be modified to meet the emergency, and villainage, instead of

indicating complete personal subjection, comes to mean subjection

to a territorial lord.

    This same territorial element not only influences the status

of the issue of a marriage, it also affects the status of the

parties to a marriage, when those parties are of unequal

condition. Most notable is the case of the free wife of a villain

husband lapsing into servitude, when she enters the villain

tenement of her consort; her servitude endures as long as her

husband is in the lord's power, as long as he is alive and not

enfranchised. The judicial practice of the thirteenth century

gives a great number of cases where the tribunals refuse to

vindicate the rights of women entangled in villainage by a

mesalliance.* Such subjection is not absolute, however. The

courts make a distinction between acquiring possession and

retaining it. The same woman who will be refused a portion of her

father's inheritance because she has married a serf, has the

assize of novel disseisin against any person trying to oust her

from a tenement of which she had been seised before her

marriage.* The conditional disabilities of the free woman are not

directly determined by the holding which she has entered, but by

her marital subordination to an unfree husband ('sub virga,'

Bract. Note-book, pl. 1685), For this reason the position of a

free husband towards the villainage of his wife a nief is not

exactly parallel. He is only subject to the general rules as to

free men holding in villainage.* In any case, however, the

instances which we have been discussing afford good illustrations

of the fact, that villainage by no means flows from the simple

source of personal subjection; it is largely influenced by the

Christian organisation of the family and by the feudal mixture of

rights of property and sovereignty embodied in the manorial

system.

    There are two other ways of becoming a villain besides being

born to the condition; the acknowledgment of unfree status in a

court of record, and prescription. We need not speak of the

first, as it does not present any particulars of interest from a

historical point of view. As to prescription, there is a very

characteristic vacillation in our sources. In pleadings of Edward

III's time its possibility is admitted, and it is pointed out,

that it is a good plea if the person claimed by prescription

shows that his father and grandfather* were strangers.

    There is a curious explanatory gloss, in a Cambridge MS. of

Bracton, which seems to go back at least to the beginning of the

fourteenth century, and it maintains that free stock doing

villain service lapses into villainage in the fifth generation

only.* On the other hand, Britton flatly denies the possibility

of such a thing; according to him no length of time can render

free men villains or make villains free men. Moreover he gives a

supposed case (possibly based on an actual trial), in which a

person claimed as a villain is made to go back to the sixth

generation to establish his freedom,* It does not seem likely

that people could often vindicate their freedom by such elaborate

argument, but the legal assumption expounded in Britton deserves

full attention. It is only a consequence of the general view,

that neither the holding nor the services ought to have any

influence on the status of a man, and in so far it seems legally

correct. But it is easy to see how difficult it must have been to

keep up these nice distinctions in practice, how difficult for

those who for generations had been placed in the same material

position with serfs to maintain personal freedom.* For both

views, though absolutely opposed to each other, are in a sense

equally true: the one giving the logical development of a

fundamental rule of the law, the other testifying to the facts.

And so we have one more general observation to make as to the

legal aspect of villainage. Even in the definition of its

fundamental principles we see notable discrepancies and

vacillations, which are the result of the conflict between

logical requirements and fluctuating facts.

    The original unity of purpose and firmness of distinction are

even more broken up when we look at the criminal and the police

law where they touch villainage. In the criminal law of the

feudal epoch there is hardly any distinction between free men and

villains. In point of amercements there is the well-known

difference as to the 'contenement' of a free landholder, a

merchant and a villain, but this difference is prompted not by

privilege but by the diversity of occupations. The Dialogus de

Scaccario shows that villains being reputed English are in a

lower position than free men as regards the presumption of

Englishry and the payment of the murder-fine,* but this feature

seems to have become obliterated in the thirteenth century. In

some cases corporal punishment may have differed according to the

rank of the culprit, and the formalities of ordeal were certainly

different.* The main fact remains, that both villains and free

men were alike able to prosecute anybody by way of 'appeal'* for

injury to their life, honour, and even property,* and equally

liable to be punished and prosecuted for offences of any kind.

Their equal right was completely recognized by the criminal law,

and as a natural sequence of this, the pleas of the crown

generally omit to take any notice of the status of parties

connected with them. One may read through Mr Maitland's

collection of Pleas of the Crown edited for the Selden Society,

or through his book of Gloucestershire pleas, without coming

across any but exceptional and quite accidental mentions of

villainage. In fact were we to form our view of the condition of

England exclusively on the material afforded by such documents,

we might well believe that the whole class was all but an extinct

one. One glance at Assize Rolls or at Cartularies would teach us

better. Still the silence of the Corona Rolls is most eloquent.

It shows convincingly that the distinction hardly influenced

criminal law at all.

    It is curious that, as regards police, villains are grouped

under an institution which, even by its name, according to the

then accepted etymology, was essentially a free institution. The

system of frank pledge (plegium liberale), which should have

included every one 'worthy of his were and his wite,' is, as a

matter of fact, a system which all through the feudal period is

chiefly composed of villains. Free men possessed of land are not

obliged to join the tithing because they are amenable to law

which has a direct hold on their land,* and so the great mass of

free men appear to be outside these arrangements, for the police

representation of the free, or, putting it the other way, feudal

serfs actually seem to represent the bulk of free society. The

thirteenth-century arrangements do not afford a clue to such

paradoxes, and one has to look for explanation to the his tory of

the classes.

    The frankpledge system is a most conspicuous link between

both sections of society in this way also, that it directly

connects the subjugated population with the hundred court, which

is the starting-point of free judicial organisation. Twice a year

the whole of this population, with very few exceptions, has to

meet in the hundred in order to verify the working of the

tithings. Besides this, the class of villains must appear by

representatives in the ordinary tribunals of the hundred and the

shire: the reeve and the four men, mostly unfree men,* with their

important duties in the administration of justice, serve as a

counterpoise to the exclusive employment of 'liberi et legales

homines' on juries.

    And now I come to the most intricate and important part of

the subject -- to the civil rights and disabilities of the

villain. After what has been said of the villain in other

respects, one may be prepared to find that his disabilities were

by no means so complete as the strict operation of general rules

would have required. The villain was able in many cases to do

valid civil acts, to acquire property and to defend it in his own

name. It is true that, both in theory and in practice, it was

held that whatever was acquired by the bondman was acquired by

the lord. The bondman could not buy anything but with his lord's

money, as he had no money or chattels of his own.* But the

working of these rules was limited by the medieval doctrine of

possession. Land or goods acquired by the serf do not eo ipso

lapse into his lord's possession, but only if the latter has

taken them into his hand.* If the lord has not done so for any

reason, for want of time, or carelessness, or because he did not

choose to do so, the bondman is as good as the owner in respect

of third persons. He can give away* or otherwise alienate land or

chattels, he has the assize of novel disseisin to defend the

land, and leaves the assize of mort d'ancestor to his heirs. In

this case it would be no good plea to object that the plaintiff

is a villain. In fact this objection can be raised by a third

person only with the addition that, as villain, the plaintiff

does not hold in his own name, but in the name of his lord.* A

third person cannot except against a plaintiff merely on the

ground of his personal status. As to third persons, a villain is

said to be free and capable to sue all actions.* This of course

does not mean that he has any action for recovering or defending

his possession of the tenements which he holds in villainage, but

this disability is no consequence of his servile blood, for he

shares it with the free man who holds in villainage; it is a

consequence of the doctrine that the possession of the tenant in

villainage is in law the possession of him who has the freehold.

It may be convenient for a villain as defendant to shelter

himself behind the authority of his lord,* and it was difficult

to prevent him from doing so, although some attempts were made by

the courts even in this case to distinguish whether a person had

been in possession as a dependant or not. But there was

absolutely nothing to prevent a villain from acting in every

respect like a free man if he was so minded and was not

interrupted by his lord. There was no need of any accessory

action to make his acts complete and legal.* Again we come to an

anomaly: the slave is free against everybody but his lord.

    Even against his lord the bondman had some standing ground

for a civil action. It has rightly been maintained, that he could

implead his master in consequence of an agreement with him. The

assertion is not quite easy to prove however, and has been put

forward too sweepingly.* At first sight it seems even that the

old law books, i.e. those of Bracton and his followers, teach the

opposite doctrine. They deal almost exclusively with the case of

a feoffment made by the lord to a villain and his heirs, and give

the feoffee an action only on the ground of implied manumission.

The feoffor enfranchises his serf indirectly, even if he does not

say so in as many words, because he has spoken of the feoffee's

heirs, and the villain has no other heirs besides the lord,* The

action eventually proceeds in this case, because it is brought

not by a serf but by a freed man. One difficult passage in

Bracton points another way; it is printed in a foot-note.* There

can be no doubt, that in it Bracton is speaking of a covenant

made by the lord not with a free man or a freed man, but with a

villain. This comes out strongly when it is said, that the lord,

and not the villain, has the assize against intruders, and when

the author puts the main question -- is the feoffor bound to hold

the covenant or not? The whole drift of the quotation can be

understood only on the fundamental assumption that we have lord

and villain before us. But there are four words which militate

against this obvious explanation; the words 'sibi et heredibus

suis,' We know what their meaning is -- they imply

enfranchisement and a freehold estate of inheritance. They

involve a hopeless contradiction to the doctrine previously

stated, a doctrine which might be further supported by references

to Britton, Fleta and Bracton himself.* In short, if we accept

them, we can hardly get out of confusion. Were our text of

Bracton much more definitely and satisfactorily settled than it

is,* one would still feel tempted to strike them out; as it is we

have a text studded with interpolations and errors, and it seems

quite certain that 'sibi et heredibus suis' has got into it

simply because the compositor of Tottell's edition repeated it

from the conclusion of the sentence immediately preceding, and so

mixed up two cases, which were to be distinguished by this very

qualification. The four words are missing in all the MSS. of the

British Museum, the Bodleian and the Cambridge University

Library,* I have no doubt that further verification will only

confirm my opinion. On my assumption Bracton clearly

distinguishes between two possibilities. In one case the deed

simply binds the lord as to a particular person, in the other it

binds him in perpetuity, and in this latter case, as there ought

not to be any heirs of a bondman but the lord, bondage is

annihilated by the deed. It is not annihilated when one person is

granted a certain privilege as to a particular piece of land, and

in every other respect the grantee and all his descendants remain

unfree:* -- he has no freehold, but he has a special covenant to

fall back upon. This seems to lie at the root of what Bracton

calls privileged villainage by covenant as distinguished from

villain socage.*

    The reader may well ask whether there are any traces of such

an institution in practice, as it is not likely that Bracton

would have indulged in mere theoretical disquisitions on such an

important point. Now it would be difficult to find very many

instances in point; the line between covenant and enfranchisement

was so easily passed, and an incautious step would have such

unpleasant consequences for landlords, that they kept as clear as

possible of any deeds which might indirectly destroy their claims

as to the persons of their villains.* On the other hand, even

privileged serfs would have a great difficulty in vindicating

their rights on the basis of covenant if they remained at the

same time under the sway of the lord in general. The difficulties

on both sides explain why Fleta and Britton endorse only the

chief point of Bracton's doctrine, namely, the implied

manumission, and do not put the alternative as to a covenant when

heirs are not mentioned. Still I have come across some traces in

legal practice* of contracts in the shape of the one discussed. A

very interesting case occurred in Norfolk in 1227, before Martin

Pateshull himself. A certain Roger of Sufford gave a piece of

land to one of his villains, William Tailor, to hold freely by

free services, and when Roger died, his son and heir William of

Sufford confirmed the lease. When it pleased the lord afterwards

to eject the tenant, this latter actually brought an assize of

novel disseisin and recovered possession. Bracton's marginal note

to the case runs thus: 'Note, that the son of a villain recovered

by an assize of novel disseisin a piece of land which his father

had held in villainage, because the lord of the villain by his

charter gave it to the son [i.e. to the plaintiff], even without

manumission.'* The court went in this case even further than

Bracton's treatise would have warranted: the villain was

considered as having the freehold, and an assize of novel

disseisin was granted; but although such a treatment of the case

was perhaps not altogether sound, the chief point on which the

contention rested is brought out clearly enough. There was a

covenant, and in consequence an action, although there was no

manumission; and it is to this point that the marginal note draws

special attention.*

    Again, we find in the beginning of Bracton's treatise a

remark* which is quite out of keeping with the doctrine that the

villain had no property to vindicate against his lord; it is

contradicted by other passages in the same book, and deserves to

be considered the more carefully on that account. Our author is

enumerating the cases in which the serf has an action against his

lord. He follows Azo closely, and mentions injury to life or to

limb as one cause. Azo goes on to say that a plaint may be

originated by intollerabilis injuria, in the sense of corporeal

injury. Bracton takes the expression in a very different sense;

he thinks that economic ruin is meant, and adds, 'Should the lord

go so far as to take away the villain's very waynage, i.e. plough

and plough-team, the villain has an action,' It is true that

Bracton's text, as printed in existing editions, contains a

qualification of this remark; it is said that only serfs on

ancient demesne land are possessed of such a right. But the

qualification is meaningless; the right of ancient demesne

tenants was quite different, as we shall see by-and-by. The

qualifying clause turns out to be inserted only in later MSS. of

the treatise, is wanting in the better MSS., and altogether

presents all the characters of a bad gloss.* When the gloss is

removed, we come in sight of the fact that Bracton in the

beginning of his treatise admits a distinct case of civil action

on the part of a villain against his lord. The remark is in

contradiction with the Roman as well as with the established

English doctrine, it is not supported by legal practice in the

thirteenth century, it is omitted by Bracton when he comes to

speak again of the 'persona standi in judicio contra dominum.'*

But there it is, and it cannot be explained otherwise than as a

survival of a time when some part of the peasantry at least had

not been surrendered to the lord's discretion, but was possessed

of civil rights and of the power to vindicate them. The notion

that the peasant ought to be specially protected in the

possession of instruments of agricultural labour comes out,

singularly enough, in the passage commented upon, but it is not a

singular notion in itself. It occurs, as every one knows, in the

clause of the Great Charter, which says that the villain who

falls into the king's mercy is to be amerced 'saving his

waynage.' We come across it often enough in Plea Rolls in cases

against guardians accused of having wasted their ward's property.

One of the special points in such cases often is, that a guardian

or his steward has been ruining the villains in the ward's manors

by destroying their waynage.* Of course, the protection of the

peasant's prosperity, guaranteed by the courts in such trials, is

wholly due to a consideration of the interests of the ward; and

the care taken of villains is exactly parallel to the attention

bestowed upon oaks and elms. Still, the notion of waynage is in

itself a peculiar and an important one, and whatever its ultimate

origin may be, it points to a civil condition which does not

quite fall within the lines of feudal law.

    Another anomaly is supplied by Britton. After putting the

case as strongly as possible against serfs, after treating them

as mere chattels to be given and sold, he adds, 'But as bondmen

are annexed to the freehold of the lord, they are not devisable

by testament, and therefore Holy Church can take no cognisance of

them in Court Christian, although devised in testament.' (I. 197)

The exclusion of villains is not peculiar to them; they share it

with the greater part of landed possessions.' As all the courts

of civil jurisdiction had been prohibited from holding

jurisdiction as to testamentary matters, and the Ecclesiastical

Courts were not permitted to exercise jurisdiction as to any

question relating to freehold, there was no court which could

properly take cognisance of a testamentary gift of land as

such.'* The point to be noted is, that villains are held to be

annexed to the freehold, although in theory they ought to be

treated as chattels. The contradiction gives us another instance

of the peculiar modification of personal servitude by the

territorial element. The serf is not a colonus, he is not bound

up with any particular homestead or plot of land, but he is

considered primarily as a cultivator under manorial organisation,

and for this reason there is a limitation on the lord's power of

alienating him. Let it be understood, however, that the

limitation in this case does not come before us as a remnant of

independent rights of the peasant. It is imposed by those

interests of the feudal suzerain and of the kin which precluded

the possibility of alienating land by devise.*

    An inquiry into the condition of villains would be altogether

incomplete, if it did not touch on the questions of villain

tenure and villain services. Both are intimately connected with

personal status, as may be seen from the very names, and both

have to be very carefully distinguished from it. I have had to

speak of prescription as a source of villainage. Opinions were

very uncertain in this respect, and yet, from the mere legal

point of view, there ought not to have been any difficulty about

the matter. Bracton takes his stand firmly on the fundamental

difference between status and tenure in order to distinguish

clearly between serfs and free men in a servile position.* The

villain is a man belonging to his lord personally; a villain

holding (villenagium) is land held at the will of the lord,

without any certainty as to title or term of enjoyment, as to

kind or amount of services. Serfs are mostly, though not

necessarily, found on villain land; it does not follow that all

those seated on villain land are serfs. Free men are constantly

seen taking up a villenagium; they do not lose by it in personal

condition; they have no protection against the lord, if he choose

to alter their services or oust them from the holding, but, on

the other hand, they are free to go when they please. There is

still less reason to treat as serfs such free peasants as are

subjected to base services, i.e. to the same kind of services and

payments as the villains, but on certain conditions, not more and

not less. Whatever the customs may be, if they are certain, not

only the person holding by them but the plot he is using are

free, and the tenure may be defended at law.*

    Such are the fundamental positions in Bracton's treatise, and

there can be no doubt that they are borne out in a general way by

legal practice. But if from the general we turn to the

particular, if we analyse the thirteenth-century decisions which

are at the bottom of Bracton's teaching, we shall find in many

cases notions cropping up, which do not at all coincide with the

received views on the subject. In fact we come across many

apparent contradictions which can be attributed only to a state

of fermentation and transition in the law of the thirteenth

century.

    Martin of Bestenover's case is used by Bracton in his

treatise as illustrating the view that tenure has no influence on

status.* It was a long litigation, or rather a series of

litigations. Already in the first year of King John's reign we

hear of a final concord between John of Montacute and Martin of

Bestenover as to a hundred acres held by the latter.* The tenant

is ejected however, and brings an assize of mort d'ancestor

against Beatrice of Montacute, who, as holding in dower, vouches

her son John to warranty. The latter excepts against Martin as a

villain. A jury by consent of the parties is called in, and we

have their verdict reported three times in different records.*

They say that Martin's father Ailfric held of John Montacute's

father a hundred acres of land and fifty sheep besides, for which

he had to pay 20s. a year, to be tallaged reasonably, when the

lord tallaged his subjects, and that he was not allowed to give

his daughter away in marriage before making a fine to the lord

according to agreement. We do not know the decision of the judges

in John's time, but both from the tenor of the verdict and from

what followed, we may conclude that Martin succeeded in

vindicating his right to the land. Proceedings break out again at

the beginning of Henry III's reign.

    In 1219 John of Montacute is again maintaining that Martin is

his villain, in answer as it seems to an action de libertate

probanda which Martin has brought against him. The court goes

back to the verdict of the jury in John's time, and finds that by

this verdict the land is proved to be of base tenure, and the

person to be free. The whole is repeated again on a roll of 1220;

whether we have two decisions, one of 1219 and the other of 1220,

or merely two records of the same decision, is not very clear,

nor is it very important. But there are several interesting

points about this case. The decision in 1220 is undoubtedly very

strong on the distinction between status and tenure: 'nullum erat

placitum in curia domini Regis de villenagio corporis ipsius

Martini nisi tantum de villenagio et consuetudinibus terre,' etc.

As to tenure, the court delivers an opinion which is entitled to

special consideration, and has been specially noticed by Bracton

both in his Notebook and in his treatise. 'If Martin,' say the

judges on the roll of 1219, 'wishes to hold the land, let him

perform the services which his father has been performing; if

not, the lord may take the land into his hands.'* The same thing

is repeated almost literally on the roll of 1220. Bracton draws

two inferences from these decisions. One is suggested by the

beginning of the sentence; 'If Martin wishes to hold the land.'

Both in the Note-book and in the treatise Bracton deduces from

it, that holding and remaining on the land depended on the wish

of Martin, who as a free man was entitled to go away when he

pleased.* The judgment does not exactly say this, but as to the

right of a free person to leave the land there can be no doubt.

    The second conclusion is, that if a free man hold in

villainage by villain services he cannot be ejected by the lord

against his will, provided he is performing the services due from

the holding. What Bracton says here is distinctly implied by the

decisions of 1219 and 1220, which subject the lord's power of

dealing with the land to a condition -- non-performance of

services.* There can be no question as to the importance of such

a view; it contains, as it were, the germ of copyhold tenure.* It

places villainage substantially on the same footing as freehold,

which may also be forfeited by discontinuance of the services,

although the procedure for establishing a forfeiture in that case

would be a far more elaborate one. And it must be understood that

Bracton's deduction by no means rests on the single case before

us. He appeals also to a decision of William Raleigh, who granted

an assize of mort d'ancestor to a free man holding in

villainage.* Unfortunately the original record of this case has

been lost. The decision in a case of 1225 goes even further. It

is an assize of novel disseisin brought by a certain William the

son of Henry against his lord Bartholomew the son of Eustace. The

defendant excepts against the plaintiff as his villain; the court

finds, on the strength of a verdict, that he is a villain, and

still they decide that William may hold the land in dispute, if

he consents to perform the services; if not, he forfeits his

land.* Undoubtedly the decision before us is quite isolated, and

it goes against the rules of procedure in such cases. Once the

exception proved, nothing ought to have been said as to the

conditions of the tenure. Still the mistake is characteristic of

a state of things which had not quite been brought under the

well-known hard and fast rule. And the best way to explain it is

to suppose that the judges had in their mind the more familiar

case of free men holding in villainage, and gave decision in

accordance with Martin of Bestenover v. Montacute, and the case

decided by Raleigh.* All these instances go clean against the

usually accepted doctrine, that holding in villainage is the same

as holding at the will of the lord: the celebrated addition

'according to the custom of the manor' would quite fit them. They

bring home forcibly one main consideration, that although in the

thirteenth century the feudal doctrine of non-interference of the

state between lord and servile tenantry was possessed of the

field, its victory was by no means complete. Everywhere we come

across remnants of a state of things in which one portion at

least of the servile class had civil rights as well as duties in

regard to the lord.

    Matters were even more unsettled as to customs and services

in their relation to status and tenure. What services, what

customs are incompatible with free status, with free tenure? Is

the test to be the kind of services or merely their certainty?

Bracton remarks that the payment of merchet, i.e. of a fine for

giving away one's daughter to be married, is not in keeping with

personal freedom. But he immediately puts in a kind of

retractation,* and indeed in the case of Martin of Bestenover it

was held that the peasant was free although paying merchet. To

tenure, merchet, being a personal payment, should have no

relation whatever. In case of doubt as to the character of the

tenure, the inquiry ought to have been entirely limited to the

question whether rents and services were certain or not,* because

it was established that even a free tenement could be encumbered

with base services. In reality the earlier practice of the courts

was to inquire of what special kind the services and customs

were, whether merchet and fine for selling horses and oxen had

been paid, whether a man was liable to be tallaged at will or

bound to serve as reeve, whether he succeeded to his tenancy by

'junior right' (the so-called Borough English rule), and the

like.

    All this was held to be servile and characteristic of

villainage.* I shall have to discuss the question of services and

customs again, when I come to the information supplied by

manorial documents. It is sufficient for my present purpose to

point out that two contradictory views were taken of it during

the thirteenth century; 'certain or uncertain?' was the catchword

in one case; 'of what kind?' in the other. A good illustration of

the unsettled condition of the law is afforded by the case Prior

of Ripley v. Thomas Fitz-Adam. According to the Prior, the jurors

called to testify as to services and tenures had, while admitting

the payment of tallage and merchet, asked leave to take the

advice of Robert Lexington, a great authority on the bench,

whether a holding encumbered by such customs could be free.

    The subject is important, not only because its treatment

shows to what extent the whole law of social distinctions was

still in a state of fermentation, but also because the

classification of tenures according to the nature of customs may

afford valuable clues to the origin of legal disabilities in

economic and political facts. The plain and formal rule of later

law, which is undoubtedly quite fitted to test the main issue as

to the power of the lord, is represented in earlier times by a

congeries of opinions, each of which had its foundation in some

matter of fact. We see here a state of things which on the one

hand is very likely to invite an artificial simplification, by an

application of some one-sided legal conception of serfdom, while

on the other hand it seems to have originated in a mixture and

confusion of divers classes of serfs and free men, which shaded

off into each other by insensible degrees.

    The procedure in trials touching the question of status was

decidedly favourable to liberty. To begin with, only one proof

was accepted as conclusive against it -- absolute proof that the

kinsfolk of the person claimed were villains by descent.* The

verdict of a jury was not sufficient to settle the question,* and

a man who had been refused an assize in consequence of the

defendant pleading villainage in bar had the right

notwithstanding such decision to sue for his liberty. When the

proof by kinship came on, two limitations were imposed on the

party maintaining servitude: women were not admitted to stand as

links in the proof because of their frailty and of the greater

dignity of a man, and one man was not deemed sufficient to

establish the servile condition of the person claimed.* If the

defendant in a plea of niefty, or a plaintiff in an action of

liberty, could convincingly show that his father or any not too

remote ancestor had come to settle on the lord's land as a

stranger, his liberty as a descendant was sufficiently proved.*

In this way to prove personal villainage one had to prove

villainage by birth. Recognition of servile status in a court of

record and reference to a deed are quite exceptional.

    The coincidence in all these points against the party

maintaining servitude is by no means casual; the courts

proclaimed their leaning 'in favour of liberty' quite openly, and

followed it in many instances besides those just quoted. It was

held, for instance, that in defending liberty every means ought

to be admitted. The counsel pleading for it sometimes set up two

or three pleas against his adversary and declined to narrow his

contention, thus transgressing the rules against duplicity of

plea 'in favour of liberty.'* In the case of a stranger settling

on the land, his liberty was always assumed, and the court

declined to construe any uncertainty of condition against him.4

When villainage was pleaded in bar against a person out of the

power of the lord, the special question was very often examined

by a jury from the place where the person excepted to had been

lately resident, and not by a jury from the country where he had

been born.* This told against the lord, of course, because the

jurors might often have very vague notions as to the previous

condition of their new fellow-countryman.*

    It would be impossible to say in what particular cases this

partiality of the law is to be taken as a consequence of

enlightened and humanitarian views making towards the liberation

of the servile class, and in what cases it may be traced to the

fact that an original element of freedom had been attracted into

the constitution of villainage and was influencing its legal

development despite any general theory of a servile character.

There is this to be noticed in any case, that most of the

limitations we have been speaking of are found in full work at

the very time when villainage was treated as slavery in the

books. One feature, perhaps the most important of all, is

certainly not dependent on any progress of ideas, however

complete the lord's power over the serf may have been, it was

entirely bound up with the manorial organisation. As soon as the

villain had got out of its boundaries he was regularly treated as

a free man and protected in the enjoyment of liberty so long as

his servile status had not been proved.* Such protection was a

legal necessity, a necessary complement to the warranty offered

by the state to its real free men. There could be no question of

allowing the lord to seize on any person whom he thought fit to

claim as his serf. And, again, if the political power inherent in

the manor gave the lord A great privileges and immunities as to

the people living under his sway, this same manorial power began

to tell against him as soon as such people had got under the sway

of lord B or within the privileged town C The dependant could be

effectually coerced only if he got back to his unfree nest again

or through the means of such kinsfolk as he had left in the

unfree nest.* And so the settlement of disputed rights connected

with status brings home forcibly two important positions: first

the theory of personal subjection is modified in its legal

application by influence in favour of liberty; and next this

influence is not to be traced exclusively to moral and

intellectual progress, but must be accounted for to a great

extent by peculiarities in the political structure of feudalism.

    One point remains to be investigated in the institution of

villainage, namely modes in which a villain might become free. I

have had occasion to notice the implied manumission which

followed from a donation of land to a bondman and his heirs,

which in process of time was extended to all contracts and

concords between a lord and his serf. A villain was freed also,

as is well known, by remaining for a year and a day on the

privileged soil of a crown manor or a chartered town.* As to

direct manumission, its usual mode was the grant of a charter by

which the lord renounced all rights as to the person of his

villain. Traces of other and more archaic customs may have

survived in certain localities, but, if so, they were quite

exceptional. Manumission is one of the few subjects touched by

Glanville in the doctrine of villainage, and he is very

particular as to its conditions and effects. He says that a serf

cannot buy his freedom, because he has no money or goods of his

own. His liberty may be bought by a third person however, and his

lord may liberate him as to himself, but not as regards third

persons. There seems to be a want of clearness in, if not some

contradiction between these two last statements, because one does

not see how manumission by a stranger could possibly be wider

than that effected by the lord. Again, the whole position of a

freed man who remains a serf as regards everybody but his lord is

very difficult to realize, even if one does not take the later

view into account, which is exactly the reverse, namely that a

villain is free against everybody but his lord. I may be allowed

to start a conjecture which will find some support in a later

chapter, when we come to speak about the treatment of freedom and

serfdom in manorial documents. It seems to me that Glanville has

in mind liberation de facto from certain duties and customs, such

as agricultural work for instance, or the payment of merchet.

Such liberation would not amount to raising the status of a

villain, although it would put him on a very different footing as

to his lord.* However this may be, if from Glanville's times we

come down to Bracton and to his authorities, we shall find all

requirements changed, but distinct traces of the former view

still lingering in occasional decisions and practices. There are

frequent cases of villains buying their freedom with their own

money,* but the practice of selling them for manumission to a

stranger is mentioned both in Bracton's Treatise* and in his

Notebook. A decision of 1226 distinctly repeats Glanville's

teaching that a man may liberate his serf as to himself and not

as to others. The marginal note in the Notebook very

appropriately protests against such a view, which is certainly

quite inconsistent with later practice.* Such flagrant

contradictions between authorities which are separated barely by

some sixty or seventy years, and on points of primary importance

too, can only tend to strengthen the inference previously drawn

from other facts -- that the law on the subject was by no means

square and settled even by the time of Bracton, but was in every

respect in a state of transition.



NOTES:



1. Littleton, sect. 188.



2. Bracton, ff. 5, 193, b.



3. I need not say that there were very notable variations in the

history of the Roman rule itself (cf for instance, Puchta,

Institutionen, 211), but these do not concern us, as we are

taking the Roman doctrine as broadly as it was taken by medieval

lawyers.



4. Mater certa est. Gai. Inst. I. 82. 3 See Fitz. Abr. Villenage,

pl. 5 (43 Edw. III): 'Ou il allege bastardise pur ceo qe si son

auncestor fuit bastard il ne puit estre villein, sinon par

connusance.' There was a special reason for turning the tables in

favour of bastardy, which is hinted at in this case. The

bastard's parents could not be produced against a bastard. He had

no father, and his mother would be no proof against him because

she was a woman [Fitz. Abr. Vill. 37 (13 Edw. I), Par ce qe la

feme ne puit estre admise pur prove par lour fraylte et ausi cest

qi est demaunde est pluiz digne person qe un feme]. It followed

strictly that he could be a villain by confession, but not by

birth. The fact is a good instance of the insoluble

contradictions in which feudal law sometimes involved itself.



5. Bracton, f 5: 'Servus ratione qui se copulaverit villanae in

villenagio constitutae.' Bract. Note-book, 1839: 'Juratores

dicunt quod predictus Aluredus habuit duos fratres Hugonem

[medium] medio tempore natum et Gilibertum postnatum qui nunc

petit, set Hugo cepit quamdam terram in uillenagio et duxit

uxorem [uillanam] et in uillenagio illo procreauit quemdam filium

qui ad huc superest.... Et bene dicunt quod... Iste Gilibertus

propinquior heres eius est, ea racione quod filius Hugonis

genitus fuit in uillenagio.' 2 Y.B. 30/31 Edw. I, p. 167 sqq.:

'Usage de Cornwall est cecy qe la ou neyfe deyt estre marier hors

de maner ou ele est reseant, qe ele trovera seurte... de revenir

a son ny ov ses chateux apres la mort de son baroun.' Bracton, f.

26, 'Quasi avis in nido.'



6. Bract. Note-book, pl. 702: 'Nota quod libera femina maritata

uillano non recuperat partem alicuius hereditatis quamdiu

uillanus uixerit.'



7. Bract. Note-book, pl. 1837: 'Nota quod mulier que est libera

uel in statu libero saltem ad minus non debet disseisiri quin

recuperare possit per assisam quamuis nupta fuerit uillano set

hereditatem petere non poterit.' Bract. Note-book, pl. 1010: 'Et

uillani mori poterunt per quod predicte sorores petere possint

ius suum.' Fitzherb. Villen. 27 (P. 7 Edw. II.): 'Les femmes sont

sans recouverie vers le seignior uiuant leur barons pur ce que

ils sont villens.' Cf Bracton, f 202.



8. Another instance of the influence of marriage on the condition

of con tracting parties is afforded by the enfranchisement of the

wife in certain cases. The common law was, however, by no means

settled as to this point. Y. B. 30/31 Edw. I, p. I67 sqq.: 'La ou

le seygnur espouse sa neyfe, si est enfranchi pur tozjurs; secus

est la ou un homme estrange ly espose, qe donk nest ele

enfraunchi si non vivant Son baroun, et post mortem viri redit ad

pristinum statum.' Fitzherb. Vill. 21 (P. 33 Edw. III): 'Si home

espouse femme qe est son villein el est franke durant les

espousailles. Mes quand son baron est mort el est in statu quo

prius, et issint el puis estre villein a son fils demesne.' It is

quite likely that gentlemen sometimes got into a state of moral

bondage to their own bondwomen, and were even led to marriage in

a few instances, but the law had not much to feed upon in this

direction, I imagine.



9. Fitzherbert, Vill. 24 (H. 50 Edw. III; P. 40 Edw. III, 17):

'Si home demurt en terre tenue en villenage de temps dount, etc.,

il sera villen, et est bon prescripcion et encountre tel

prescripcion est bon ple a dire qe son pere ou ayle fuit

adventiffe,' etc. I suppose ayle here to be a simple error for

ayl or ael, grandfather.



10. Cambridge Univ., Dd. vij. 6, f 231: 'Nota de tempore quo

servus dicere poterit quia fecerlt consuetudines villanas racione

tenementi non racione persone. Et sciendum, quod quamdiu servus

poterit verificare stipitem suam liberam non dicitur nativus, set

quam citius dominus dlcere poterit villicus noster est ex auo et

tritauo, tunc primo desinit gaudere replicacione omnimoda et

privilegio libertatis racione stipitis, ut si A. primo ingressus

villenagium tenuerit de F. per villana servitia, deinde B. filius

A., deinde C. filius B., deinde D. filius C., et sic tenuerint in

villenagium de gradu in gradum usque ad quartum gradum de F. et

heredibus suis, ille uillanus inuentus in quinto gradu

descendente natiuus dicitur.' I am indebted for this passage to

the kindness of Prof Maitland.



11. Britton, i. 196, 206.



12. Hale, Pleas of the Crown (ed. 1736), ii. 298, gives an

interesting record from Edward I's reign, which shows that even

the general theory was doubtful,



13. Dial. de Scacc. I. 10. p. 193: 'Ea propter pene quicumque sic

hodie occisus reperitur, ut murdrum punitur, exceptis his quibus

certa sunt ut diximus servilis condicionis indicia.' On the other

hand the Dialogus lays stress on the fact, that if a villain's

chattels get confiscated they go to the king and not to the lord

(ii. 10. p. 222), but this is regarded as a breach of a general

principle.



14. Glanville, xiv. I: 'Per ferrum callidum si fuerit homo liber,

per aquam si fuerit rusticus.'



15. Lighter offences committed by the lord could not give rise to

prosecution, but the persona standi in iudicio was admitted in a

general way even in this case. A curious illustration of the

different footing of villains in civil and criminal cases is

afforded by a trial of Richard I's time. Richard of Waure brings

an appeal against his man and reeve, Robert Thistleful, for

conspiring with his enemies against his person. He offers to

prove it against him, 'ut dominus, vel ut homo maimatus, sicut

curia consideraverit.' Reeves were mostly villains, and the duty

of serving as a reeve was considered as a characteristic of base

condition. The lord probably goes to the King's court because he

wants his man subjected to more severe punishment than he could

inflict on him by his own power. (Rot. Cur. Regis Ricardi, 60.)



16. The lord had power over their property, but against everybody

else they were protected by the criminal law.



17. Sometimes the system is used so as to enforce servitude. See

Court Rolls of Ramsey Abbey. Augmentation Court Rolls, Edw. I,

Portf 34, No. 46, m. 1 d. (Aylington): 'Adhuc dicunt quod

Johannes filius Ricardi Dunning est tannator et manet apud

Heyham, set dat per annum pro recognicione duos capones. Et quia

potens est et habet multa bona, preceptum fuit Hugoni Achard et

eius decennae ad ultimum visum ad habendum ipsum ad istam curiam,

et non habuit. Ideo ipse et decenna sua in misericordia.' (This

case is now being printed in Selden Soc. vol. Ii. p. 64.)



18. Bracton, 124 b: 'Quia omnis homo siue liber siue seruus, aut

est aut debet esse in franco plegio aut de alicuius manupastu,

nisi sit aliquis itinerans de loco in locum, qui non plus se

teneat ad unum quam ad alium, vel quid habeat quod sufficiat pro

franco plegio, sicut dignitatem vel ordinem vel liberum

tenementum, vel in civitatem rem immobilem.' Nichols, Britton, i.

181, gives a note from Cambr. MS. Dd. vii. 6, to the effect that

'Villeins and naifs ought not to be in tithings, secundum

quosdam.' This is certainly a misunderstanding, but it can hardly

be accounted for either by the enfranchisement of the peasant or

the decay of the frank pledge. I think the annotator may have

seen the passages in Leg. Cnuti or Leg. Henrici I, which speak

about free men joining the tithings, or speculated about the

meaning of 'plegium liberale.' There could be no thought of

excluding the villains in practice during the feudal period. As

to the allusion in the Mirror of Justices, I shall refer to it in

Appendix III.



19. See below, Essay I. chap. vi.



20. Bract. Note-book, pl. 1256: 'Et Ricardus dicit quod assisa

non debet inde fieri quia predictus lohannes dedit terram illam

cuidam uillano ipsius Ricardi, et ipse uillanus reddidit terram

illam domino suo sicut emptam catallis domini sui, et quod ita

ingressum habuit per uillanum illum in terram illam ponit se

super iuratam.' Liber Assisarum, ann. 41. pl. 4. f 252. Shows

that the statute de religiosis could be evaded by the lord

entering into his villain's acquest. 'Levesque d'Exester port un

Assise de no. diss. vers le tenaunt et Persey pur Leuesque en

euidence dit, que un A. que fuit villeine le Evesque come de

droit de sa Eglise purchase les tenements a luy et ses heyres et

morust seisie, apres que mort entra B. come fitz et heire, sur

que possession pur cause de villeinage entra Leuesque. Wich. Home

de religion ne puit pas recoverer per assise terre si title de

droit ne soit troue en luy, et ou le title que est trouue en

Leuesque est pur cause de la purchace de son villein, en quel cas

Leuesque ne fuit compellable de entre sil nust vola mes puit auer

eu ses seruices, et le statute voit Quod terrae et tenementa ad

manum mortuam nullo modo deueniant, per que il semble que nous ne

possomus pas doner iudgement pur Leuesque en ceo cas. Sanke: de

son villein ne puit il pas leuer ses seruices, ne accepter lesse

par sa maine, car a ceo que ieo entend par acceptacion de homage

ou de fealty per sa maine il serra enfraunchi, per quey necessite

luy arcte dentre, et le statut nestoit pas fait mes de

restreindre purchaus a faire de nouel, et non pas a defaire ceo

qe fuit launcien droit dez eglises. Et sur ceo fuerent aiournes

en common bank, et illonque le judgement done pur Leuesque sans

difficultie,' etc. (See also the report of the same case in Y.B.

Mich. 4I Edw. III, pl. 8. f 21.)



21. Bracton, f 25: 'Si... stipulatus sit servus sibi ipsi, et non

domino, id non statim acquiritur domino, quamuis illud (corr.

Ille) sit sub voluntate et potestate sua, antequam dominus

apprehensus fuerit possessionem. Quod quidem impune facere

poterit, si voluerit, propter exceptionem,' etc. Fitz. Abr. Vill.

pl. 22 (Pasch. 35 Edw. III): 'Si le villen le roy purchase biens

ou chatteux le properte de eux est en le roy sauns seisier. Mes

auter est de auter home, etc. Mes sil purchas terre le roy doit

seisier, etc. Car Thorp. dit que terre demurt terre tout temps,

mes biens come boefs ou vache puit estre mange.'



22. Bracton, f 25 b: 'Sic constat, quod qui sub potestate

alterius fuerit, dare poterit. Sed qualiter hoc cum ipse, qui ab

aliis possidetur, nihil possidere possit? Ergo videtur quod nihil

dare possit, quia non potest quis dare quod non habet, et nisi

fuerit in possessione rei dandae. Respondeo, dare potest qui

seisinam habet qualemcunque, et servus dare potest,' etc. In case

of an execution for debt due to the king the goods of the villain

were to be taken only when the lord's goods were exhausted.

Dialog. de Scacc. Ii. 14. p. 229.



23. Bracton, f 190: 'Et non competit alicui hujusmodi exceptio de

villenagio, praeterquam vero domino, nisi utrumque probet,

scilicet quod villanus sit et teneat in villenagio, cum per hoc

sequatur, quod ad ipsum non pertineat querela sive assisa, sed ad

verum dominum, et ideo cadit assisa quantum ad personam suam et

non quantum ad personam domini.' Cf Britton, i. 325.



24. Britton, i. 199; Littleton, 189; Bract. Note-book. pl. 1025:

'Assisa venit recognitura utrum una uirgata terre cum

pertinenciis ln R. sit libera elemosina pertinens ad ecclesiam

Magistri Iohannis de R. de R. an laicum feodum Gaufridi

Beieudehe. Qui venit et dicit quod non debet inde assisa fieri

quia antecessores sui feoffati.guerunt a conquestu Anglie ita

quod tenerent de ecclesia illa et redderent ei per annum x.

solidos..... Iuratores dicunt quod terra illa est feodum eiusdem

ecclesie ita quod idem G. et antecessores sui semper tenuerunt de

ecclesia... Et dicunt quod idem Gaufridus est natiuus Comitis

Warenne et de eo tenet in uilenagio aliud tenementum. Postea

uenit Gaufridus et cognouit quod est uillanus Comitis Warenne.

Postea concordati sunt,' etc.



25. Example, Fitz. Abr. Villen. 16. The proper reply to such a

plea is shown by Bract. Note-book, pl. 1833: 'Et Iohannes dicit

quod hoc ei nocere non debet, quia quicquid idem dicat de

uillenagio, ipsemet ut liber homo sine contradiccione domini sui

terram illam dedit Iohanni del Frid patri istius Iohannis pro

homagio et seruicio suo... Consideratum est quod predictus

Iohannes recuperauit seisinam suam, et Richerus in misericordia.'

Liber Assis. ann. 43. pl. I. f 265 gives the contrary decision:

'Lassise agarde et prise, per quel il fuit troue quil [le

defendant] fuit villein al Counte... mes troue fuit ouster que le

Counte ne fut unques seisie de la terre, ne onques claima riens

en la terre, et troue fuit que le plaintif fuit seisie et

disseisie. Et sur ceo, le quel le plaintif recouerer, Ou que le

brief abateroit sont ajornes deuant eux mesmes a Westminster. A

que jour per opinion de la Court le briefe abatu, per que le

plaintif fuit non sue,' etc.



26. A different view is taken by Stubbs, i. 484.



27. Digby, Real Property, 3rd ed. p. 128. I may say at once that

I fail to see any connexion between copyhold tenure and any

express agreements between lord and villain.



28. Bracton, 192 b: 'Si autem dominus ita dederit sine

manumissione, servo et heredibus suis tenendum libere, presumi

poterit de hoc quod servum voluit esse liberum, cum aliter servus

heredes habere non possit nisi cum libertate et ita contra

dominum excipientem de villenagio competit ei replicatio.' Cf 23

b and Britton, i. 247; Fleta, 238; Littleton, secs. 205, 207.



29. Bracton, 24 b: 'Si autem in charta hoc tantum contineatur,

habendum et tenendum tali (cum sit servus) per liberum servitium

huiusmodi verba non faciunt servum liberum nec dant ei liberum

tenementum... Quia tenementum nichil confert nec detrahit

personae, nisi praecedat, ut dictum est, homagium vel manumissio,

vel quod tantundem valet de concessione domini, scilicet quod

villanus libere teneat et quiete et per liberum servitium, sibi

et haeredibus suis. Si autem hoc solum dicatur, quod teneat per

liberum servitium [sibi et heredibus suis], si ejectus fuerit a

quocunque non recuperet per assisam noue disseisine, ut liberum

tenementum, quia domino competit assisa et non villano. Si tamen

dominus ipsum ejecerit, quaeritur, an contra dominum agere possit

de conventione, cum prima facie non habet personam standi in

judicio ad hoc, quod dominus teneat ei conventionem, videtur quod

sic, propter factum domini sui, ut si agat de conventione, et

dominus excipiat de servitute, replicare poterit de facto domini

sui, sicut supra dicitur de feoffamento. Nec debent jura juvare

dominum contra voluntatem suam, quia semel voluit conventionem,

et quamvis damnum sentiat, non tamen fit ei injuria et ex quo

prudenter et scienter contraxit cum servo suo, tacite renunciavit

exceptionem villenagii.'



30. The freehold would be given and still, non recuperet per

assisam no. diss. quia domino competit assisa et non villano.'



31. See my article, 'The Text of Bracton,' in the Law Quarterly

Review, i. 189, et sqq.; and Maitland, Introduction to the

Note-book of Bracton, 26 sqq.



32. The Cambridge MSS. have been inspected for me by Mr Maitland.



33. Comp. Bracton, f 194 b: 'Quia ex quo mentionem fecit de

heredibus praesumitur vehementer, quod dominus voluit servum esse

liberum quod quidem non esset, si de heredibus mentionem

nonfecerit.'



34. Bracton, f 208 b: 'Est etiam villenagium non ita purum, sive

concedatur libero homini vel villano ex conventione tenendum pro

certis servitiis et consuetudinibus nominatis et expressis,

quamvis servitia et consuetudines sunt villanae. Et unde si liber

ejectus fuerit vel villanus manumissus vel alienatus (corr.

alienus best MSS.) recuperare non poterunt ut liberum tenementum,

cum sit villenagium et cadit assisa, vertitur tamen in juratam ad

inquirendum de conventione propter voluntatem dimittentis et

consensum, quia si quaerentes in tali casu recuperarint

villenagium, non erit propter hoc domino lnjuriatum propter

ipsius voluntatem et consensum, et contra voluntatem suam jura ei

non subveniunt, quia si dominus potest villanum manumittere et

feoffare multo fortius poterit ri quandam conventionem facere, et

quia si potest id quod plus est, potest multo fortius id quod

minus est.' We have here another difficulty with the text. The

wording is so closely allied to the passage on 24 b. just quoted,

and the last sentences seem to indicate so clearly that the case

of a privileged villain is here opposed to manumission and

feoffment, that the 'villanus manumissus vel alienus' looks quite

out of place. Is it a later gloss? Even if it is retained,

however, the passage points to a very material limitation of the

lord's power. The holding in question can certainly not be

described as being held 'at will'. To me the words in question

look like a gloss or an addition, although very probably they

were inserted early, perhaps by Bracton himself, who found it

difficult to maintain consistently a villain's contractual rights

against the lord. Another solution of the difficulty is suggested

to me by Sir Frederick Pollock. He thinks 'villanus manumissus

vel alienus, correct, and lays stress On the fact, that personal

condition does not matter in this case: that even though the

tenant be free or quoad that lord as good as free, the assize

lies not and there shall only be an action on the covenant. If we

accept this explanation which saves the words under suspicion, we

shall have to face another difficulty: the text would turn from

villanus (suus) to villanus alienus and back to villanus (suus)

without any intimation that the subject under discussion had been

altered.



35. The later practice is well known. Any agreement with a

bondman led to a forfeiture of the lord's rights. It may be seen

at a glance that such could not have been the original doctrine.

Otherwise why should the old books lay such stress on the mention

of heirs?



36. Besides the case from the Note-book which I discuss in the

text, Bracton, f 199, is in point: 'Item esto quod villanus

teneat per liberum servitium sibi tantum, nulla facta mentione de

heredibus, si cum ejectus fuerit proferat assisam, et cum objecta

fuerit exceptio villenagii, replicet quod libere teneat et petat

assisam, non valebit replicatio, ex quo nulla mentio facta est de

heredibus, quia liberum tenementum in hoc casu non mutat statum,

si fuerit sub potestate domini constitutus. Ut in eodem itinere

(in ultimo itinere Martini de Pateshull) in comitatu Essex,

assisa noue disseisine, si Radulphus de Goggenhal.' The villain

fails in his assize and there has been no manumission, still it

seems admitted that in this case the villain has acquired liberum

tenementum by the lord's act. How can this be except on the

supposition that there is a covenant enforceable by the villain

against the lord?



37. Bract. Note-book, pl. 1814: 'Nota quod filius villani

recuperat per assisam noUe disseisine terram quam pater suus

tenuit in villenagio quia dominus villani illam dedit filio suo

per cartam suam eciam sine manumissione.'



38. F.W. Maitland tells me, that Concanen's Report of Rowe v.

Brenton describes bond conventioners in Cornwall.



39. Bracton, f 6: 'Et in hoc legem habent contra dominos, quod

stare possunt in judicio contra eos de vita et membris propter

saevitiam dominorum, vel propter intollerabilem injuriam, ut si

eos destruant, quod salvum non possit eis esse waynagium suum.

[Hoc autem verum est de illis servis; qui tenent de antiquo

dominico coronae, sed de aliis secus est, quia quandocunque

placuerit domino, auferre poterit a villano suo waynagium suum et

omnia bona sua.] Expedit enim reipublicae ne quis re sua male

utatur.'



40. See my article in the L. Q. R., i. 195.



41. Bracton, f 196 202.



42. Coram Rege, 15 Edw. I, m. 18: '... licet habeant alia averia

per que distringi possent distringit eos per averia de carucis

suis quod est contra statutum domini Regis.' (Record Office.)



43. Spence, Equitable Jurisdiction, i. 136.



44. The Mirror of Justices, p. 110, follows Britton in this

matter. This curious book is altogether very interesting on the

subject of villeinage, but as its information is of a very

peculiar stamp, I have not attempted to use it currently on the

same level with other authorities. I prefer discussing it by

itself in App. III.



45. Bracton, f 26 b, 200. Cf Bract. Note-book, pl. 141: 'Dicit

quod tunc temporis scilicet in itinere iusticiariorum tenuit ipse

quamdam terram in uillenagium quam emerat, et tunc coguouit quod

terra illa fuit uillenagium, et precise defendit quod nunquam

cognouit se esse uillanum.'



46. Britton, ii. 13; Y.B. 20/21 Edw. I, p. 41: 'Kar nent plus

neit a dire, jeo tenk les tenements en vileynage de le Deen etc.

ke neit a dire ke jeo tenk les tenements..... a la volunte le

Deen etc.'



47. Bracton, f 168.



48. Ibid., f I99 b.



49. Palgrave, Rotuli Curiae Regis, ii. 192.



50. Placitorum Abbrev. 25, 29; Note-book, pl. 88. (The father is

called Ailfricus in the Plea Roll Divers terms 2 John, 2 d., at

the Record Office.)



51. Bract. Note-book, pl. 88.



52. Case 70: 'Consideratum est quod terra illa est uilenagium

ipsius Hugonis (corr. Johannis), et quod si Martinus uoluerit

terram tenere faciat consuetudines quas pater suus fecit, sin

autem capiat terram suam in manum suam.'



53. Marginal remark in the Note-book to pl. 70: 'Nota quod liber

homo potest facere uillanas consuetudines racione tenementi

uillani set propter hoc non erit uillanus, quia potest relinquere

tenementum.' Comp. Mr Maitland's note to the case.



54. Bracton, f 199 b: 'Unde videtur per hoc, quod licet liber

homo teneat villenagium per villanas consuetudines, contra

voluntatem suam ejici non debet, dum tamen facere voluerit

consuetudines quae pertinent ad villenagium, et quae praestantur

ratione villenagii, et non ratione personae.'



55. Cf. Blackstone's characteristic of copyholds: 'But it is the

very condition of the tenure in question that the lands be holden

only so long as the stipulated service is performed, quamdiu

velint et possint facere debitum servitium et solvere debitas

pensiones.' (Law Tracts, ii. 153.)



56. Bract. f 200.



57. Bract. Note-book, pl. 1103: 'Et ideo consideratum est quod

Willelmus conuictus est de uilenagio et si facere uoluerit

predictas consuetudines teneat illam bouatam terre per easdem

consuetudines, sin autem faciat Bartholomeus de terra et de ipso

Willelmo uoluntatem suam ut de uillano suo et ei liberatur Cf. Mr

Maitland's note.



58. I should like to draw attention to one more case which

completes the picture from another side. Bract. Note book, pl.

784: 'Symon de T. petit versus Adam de H. et Thomam P. quod

faciant ei consuetudines et recta seruicia que ei facere debent

de tenemento quod de eo tenent in uillenagio in T. Et ipsi

ueniunt et cognoscunt quod uillani sunt. Et Symon concedit eis

quod teneant tenementa sua faciendo inde seruicia quae pertinent

ad uillenagium, ita tamen quod non dent plus in auxilium ad

festum St. Mich. nec per annum quam duodecim denarios scilicet

quilibet ipsorum et hoc nomine tallagii.' -- The writ of customs

and services was out of place between lord and villain. The usual

course was distraint. The case is clearly one of privileged

villainage, but it is well to note that although the services are

in one respect certain, the persons remain unfree.



59. Bracton, f 208 b.



60. Ibid., f 200.



61. Bract. Note-book, pl. 63: 'Dicunt quod idem W. nullum habuit

liberum tenementum quia ipse uillanus fuit et fecit omnimoda

uilenagia quia non potuit filiam suam maritare nec bouem suum

uendere. 1819. R. de M. posuit se in magnam assisam Dom. Reg. In

comitatu de consuetudinibus et seruiciis que Th. B. petit uersus

eum, unde idem Th. exigebat ab eodem R. quod redderet ei de

uillenagio per annum 19 den. et aruram trium dierum et messuram

trium dierum... et gersumam pro filia sua maritanda et unam

gallinam ad Natale et tot oua ad Pascha et tallagium et quod sit

prepositus suus. Set quia illa sunt servilia et ad uillenagium

spectancia et non ad liberum tenementum, consideratum est quod

magna assisa non iacet inter eos, set fiat inquisicio per xii,'

etc. Cf. 794, 1005, 1225, 1661.



62. Bract. Note-book, 281: 'Et Prior dicit quod in parte bene

recordantur set in parte parum dicunt quia iuratores dixerunt

quod debuit dare xii. den pro filia sua maritanda, et debuit

plures alias consuetudines et petierunt respectum ut assensum

habere possent a domino Roberto de Lexintona utrum hoc esset

liberum tenementum ex quo sciunt quid debuit facere et quid non

et nullum respectum habere potuerunt.'



63. Example-Bract. Note-book, pl. 1887. Fitzherbert, Abr. Villen.

38 (13 Ed. I): 'Quia predictus J. nullam probacionem producit

neque sectam et cognoscit quod ille est in seisina... de patre

predicti W. quem potuit produxisse ad probacionem, consideratum

est quod predicti W. et R. liberi maneant.'



64. Bracton, f. 199. The jury came in only by consent of the

parties.



65. Britton, i. 207; Fitzherbert, Abr. Villen. 37.



66. Court Rolls of Havering atte Bower, Essex, Augment. Off.

Rolls, xiv. 38. (Curia-die Jovis proxima ante festum St.

Bartholomaei Apostoli anno r. r. Ricardi II, 21mo.)

'Inquisicio... dicit... quod non est aliquis homo natiuus de

sanguine ingressus feodum domini, set dicunt quod est quidam

Johannes Shillyllg qui Sepius dictus fuerat natiuus. Et dicunt

ultra quod qnidam Johannes Shillyng pater predicti Johannis fuit

alienigena et quod predictus Johannes Shillyng quod ad eorum

cognitionem est liber et libere condicionis et non natiuus.'



67. Fitzherbert, Abr. Villen. 32 (H. 19 Edw. II).



68. Ibid. 5 (13 Edw. I).



69. Fitzherbert, l.c.: 'E ce issu fuit trie par gents de paiis ou

le maner est e nemi ou il nasquist par touts les justices.'



70. Rotuli Parliam. Ii. 192. Hargrave's argument in the Negro

Somerset's case is very good on all these points. Howell, State

Trials, xx. 38, 39.



71. Bracton, 201; Britton, i. 202 sq.



72. Bracton, f 6, and on many other occasions.



73. Co. Lit. 137, b. Cf. King Henry I's writ in favour of the

Monastery of Abingdon. Bigelow, Placita Anglo-Normannica, 96:

'facias habere F. abbati omnes homines suos qui de terra sua

exierunt propter herberiam curie mee.' Henry II puts it the other

way, p 220.. 'Nisi sunt in dominio meo.'



74. A most curious pleading based on the conceptions of Glanville

occurs in a Cor. Rege case of 10 Henry III, which was pointed out

to me by F. Maitland. See App. IV. Mr York Powell suggests that

the limitation may have originated in the fact, that in early

times a man could no more give away a slave from his family

estate without the consent of the family than he could give away

the estate itself or part of it. There was no reason for such

limitation in the case of a slave that had been bought with one's

private money. Hence the necessity of selling a slave in order to

emancipate him. The conjecture seems a very probable one, but the

question remains, how such ancient practice could have left a

trace in the feudal period. The explanation in the text may

possibly account for the tenacity of the notion.



75. Note-book, pl. 31, 343.



76. Bracton, f. 194, 195. Bracton's text has been rendered almost

unintelligible here by the careless punctuation of his editors,

and Sir Travers Twiss' translation is as wrong and misleading as

usual. I will just give the passage in accordance with the

reading of Digby, 222 (Bodleian Libr.), which is the best of all

the MSS. I have seen: 'Quia esto quod seruus uelit manumitti et

cum nichil habeat proprium eligat fidem alicuius qui eum emat

quasi pro denariis suis, per talem emptionem non consequitur

emptus aliquam libertatem nisi tantum quod mutat dominum. In re

empta in primis solui debet pretium, postea sequitur traditio

rei: soluitur hic pretium pro natiuo, set nulla subsequitur

traditio, sed semper manet in uillenagio quo prius. Si tenementum

adquirat tenendum libere et heres manumissoris uel alius

successor eum eiciat, si petat per assisam et heres opponat

uillenagium, et villanus replicet de manumissione et emptione,

heres triplicare poterit, quod imperfecta fuit emptio siue

manumissio eo quod nunquam in uita uenditoris subsecuta fuit

traditio, et ita talis semper remanebit sub potestate heredis.'



77. Note book, pl. 1749: 'Iudicatum est quod liber sit quantum ad

heredem manumittentis et non quantum ad alios, quod iudicium non

est uerum.'





Chapter 3



Ancient Demesne



    The old law books mention one kind of villainage which stands

out in marked contrast with the other species of servile tenure.

The peasants belonging to manors which were vested in the crown

at the time of the Conquest follow a law of their own. Barring

certain exceptions, of which more will be said presently, they

enjoy a certainty of condition protected by law. They are

personally free, and although holding in villainage, nobody has

the right to deprive them of their lands, or to alter the

condition of the tenure, by increasing or changing the services.

Bracton calls their condition one of privileged villainage,

because their services are base but certain, and because they are

protected not by the usual remedies supplied at common law to

free tenants, but by peculiar writs which enforce the custom of

the manor.(1*) It seems well worth the while to carefully

investigate this curious case with a view to get at the reasons

of a notable deviation from the general course, for such

investigation may throw some reflected light on the treatment of

villainage in the common law.

    Legal practice is very explicit as to the limitation of

ancient demesne in time and space. It is composed of the manors

which belonged to the crown at the time of the Conquest.(2*) This

includes manors which had been given away subsequently, and

excludes such as had lapsed to the king after the Conquest by

escheat or forfeiture.(3*) Possessions granted away by Saxon

kings before the Conquest are equally excluded.(4*) In order to

ascertain what these manors were the courts reverted to the

Domesday description of Terra Regis. As a rule these lands were

entered as crown lands, T.R.E. and T.R.W., that is, were

considered to have been in the hand of King Edward in 1066, and

in the hand of King William in 1086. But strictly and legally

they were crown lands at the moment when King William's claim

inured, or to use the contemporary phrase, 'on the day when King

Edward was alive and dead.' The important point evidently was

that the Norman king's right in this case bridged over the

Conquest, and for this reason such possessions are often simply

said to have been royal demesne in the time of Edward the

Confessor. This legal view is well illustrated by a decision of

the King's Council, quoted by Belknap, Chief Justice of the

Common Pleas, in 1375. It was held that the manor of Tottenham,

although granted by William the Conqueror to the Earl of Chester

before the compilation of Domesday, was ancient demesne, as

having been in the hands both of St. Edward and of the

Conqueror.(5*) And so 1066 and not 1086 is the decisive year for

the legal formation of this class of manors.(6*)

    In many respects the position of the peasantry in ancient

demesne is nearly allied to that of men holding in villainage at

common law. They perform all kinds of agricultural services and

are subject to duties quite analogous to those which prevail in

other places; we may find on these ancient manors almost all the

incidents of servile custom. Sometimes very harsh forms of

distress are used against the tenants;(7*) forfeiture for

non-performance of services and non-payments of rents was always

impending, in marked contrast with the considerate treatment of

free tenantry in such cases.(8*) We often come across such base

customs as the payment of merchet in connexion with the 'villain

socmen' of ancient demesne.(9*) And such instances would afford

ample proof of the fact that their status has branched off from

the same stem as villainage, if such proof were otherwise needed.

    The side of privilege is not less conspicuous. The

indications given by the law books must be largely supplemented

from plea rolls and charters. The special favour shown to the

population on soil of ancient demesne extends much further than a

regulation of manorial duties would imply, it resolves itself to

a large extent into an exemption from public burdens. The king's

manor is treated as a franchise isolated from the surrounding

hundred and shire, its tenants are not bound to attend the county

court or the hundred moot,(10*) they are not assessed with the

rest for danegeld or common amercements or the murder fine,(11*)

they are exempted from the jurisdiction of the sheriff,(12*) and

do not serve on juries and assizes before the king's

justices;(13*) they are free from toll in all markets and

custom-houses.(14*) Last, but not least, they do not get taxed

with the country at large, and for this reason they have

originally no representatives in parliament when parliament forms

itself. On the other hand, they are liable to be tallaged by the

king without consent of parliament, by virtue of his private

right as opposed to his political right.(15*) This last privilege

gave rise to a very abnormal state of things, when ancient

demesne land had passed from the crown to a subject. The rule

was, that the new lord could not tallage his tenants unless in

consequence of a royal writ, and then only at the same time and

in the same proportion as the king tallaged the demesnes

remaining in his hand.(16*) This was an important limitation of

the lord's power, and a consequence of the wish to guard against

encroachments and arbitrary acts. But it was at the same time a

curious perversion of sovereignty: -- the person living on land

of this description could not be taxed with the county,(17*) and

if he was taxed with the demesnes, his lord received the tax, and

not the sovereign. I need not say that all this got righted in

time, but the anomalous condition described did exist originally.

There are traces of a different view by which the power of

imposing tallage would have been vested exclusively in the king,

even when the manor to be taxed was one that had passed out of

his hand.(18*) But the general rule up to the fourteenth century

was undoubtedly to relinquish the proceeds to the holder of the

manor. Such treatment is eminently characteristic of the

conception which lies at the bottom of the whole institution of

ancient demesne. It is undoubtedly based on the private privilege

of royalty. All the numerous exceptions and exemptions from

public liabilities and duties flow from one source: the king does

not want his land and his men to be subjected to any vexatious

burdens which would lessen their power of yielding income.(19*)

Once fenced in by royal privilege, the ancient demesne manor

keeps up its private immunity, even though it ceases to be royal.

And this is the second fact, with which one has to reckon. If the

privileged villainage of ancient demesne is founded on the same

causes as villainage pure and simple, the distinguishing element

of 'privilege' is supplied to it by the private interest of the

king. This seems obvious enough, but it must be insisted upon,

because it guards against any construction which would pick out

one particular set of rights, or one particular kind of relations

as characteristic of the institution. Legal practice and later

theory concerned themselves mostly with peculiarities of

procedure, and with the eventuality of a subject owning the

manor. But the peculiar modes of litigation appropriate to the

ancient demesne must not be disconnected from other immunities,

and the ownership of a private lord is to be considered only as

engrafted on the original right of the king. With this

preliminary caution, we may proceed to an examination of those

features which are undoubtedly entitled to attract most

attention, namely, the special procedure, which is put in action

when questions arise in any way connected with the soil of

ancient demesne.

    Bracton says, that in such cases the usual assizes and

actions do not lie, and the 'little writ of right close' must be

used 'according to the custom of the manor.' The writ is a

'little and a close' one, because it is directed by the king to

the bailiffs of the manor and not to the justices or to the

sheriff.(20*)

    It does not concern freehold estate, but only land of base

though privileged tenure. An action for freehold also may be

begun in a manorial court, but in that case the writ will be 'the

writ of right patent' and not 'the little writ of right

close.'(21*)

    The exclusion of the tenants from the public courts is a

self-evident consequence of their base condition; in fact,

pleading ancient demesne in bar of an action is, in legal

substance, the same thing as pleading villainage.(22*) Of course,

an outlet was provided by the manorial writ in this case, and

there was no such outlet for villains outside the ancient

demesne; but as to the original jurisdiction in common law

courts, jurisdiction that is in the first instance, the position

was identical. Though legally self-evident, this matter is often

specially noticed, and sometimes stress is laid on peculiarities

of procedure, such as the inapplicability of the duel and the

grand assize (23*) in land to ancient demesne, peculiarities

which, however, are not universally found,(24*) and which, even

if they were universally found, would stand as consequence and

not as cause. This may be accounted for by the observation that

the legal protection bestowed on this particular class of

holdings, notwithstanding its limitations, actually imparted to

them something of the nature of freehold, and led to a great

confusion of attributes and principles. Indeed, the difficulty of

keeping within the lines of privileged 'villainage' is clearly

illustrated by the fact that the 'little writ,' with all its

restrictions, and quite apart from any contention with the lord,

recognises the tenant in ancient demesne as capable of

independent action.

    Villains, or men holding in villainage, have no writ, either

manorial or extra-manorial, for the protection or recovery of

their holdings, and the existence of such an action for villain

socmen is in itself a limitation of the power of lord and

steward, even when they are no parties to the case. And so the

distinction between freehold and ancient demesne villainage is

narrowed to a distinction of jurisdiction and procedure. This is

so much the case that if, by a mere slip as it were, a tenement

in ancient demesne has been once recovered by an assize of novel

disseisin, the exclusive use of the 'little writ' is broken, and

assizes will ever lie hereafter, that is, the tenement can be

sued for as 'freehold' in common law courts.(25*) Surely this

could happen only because the tenure in ancient demesne, although

a kind of villainage, closely resembled freehold.

    One has primarily to look for an explanation of these great

privileges to manors, which had been granted by the king to

private lords. On such lands the 'little writ' lay both when

'villain socmen' were pleading against each other,(26*) and when

a socman was opposed to his lord as a plaintiff.(27*) This last

eventuality is, of course, the most striking and important one.

There were some disputes and some mistakes in practice as to the

operation of the rule. The judges were much exercised over the

question whether an action was to be allowed against the lord in

the king's court. The difficulty was, that the contending parties

had different estates in the land, the one being possessed of the

customary tenancy in ancient demesne, and the other of the frank

fee. There are authoritative fourteenth-century decisions to the

effect that, in such an action, the tenant had the option between

going to the court at Westminster or to the ancient demesne

jurisdiction.(28*)

    The main fact remains, that a privileged villain had

'personam standi in judicio' against his lord, and actually could

be a plaintiff against him. Court rolls of ancient demesne manors

frequently exhibit the curious case of a manorial lord who is

summoned to appear, distrained, admitted to plead, and subjected

to judgment by his own court.(29*) And as I said, one looks

naturally to such instances of egregious independence, in order

to explain the affinity between privileged villainage and

freehold. The explanation would be insufficient, however, and

this for two simple reasons. The passage of the manor into the

hands of a subject only modifies the institution of ancient

demesne, but does not constitute it; the 'little writ of right'

is by no means framed to suit the exceptional case of a

contention between lord and tenant; its object is also to protect

the tenants against each other in a way which is out of the

question where ordinary villainage is concerned. The two reasons

converge, as it were, in the fact that the 'little writ of right'

is suable in all ancient demesne manors without exception, that

it applies quite as much to those which remain in the crown as to

those which have been alienated from it.(30*) And this leads us

to a very important deduction. If the affinity of privileged

villainage and freehold is connected with the 'little writ of

right' as such, and not merely with a particular application of

it, if the little writ of right is framed for all the manors of

ancient demesne alike, the affinity of privileged villainage and

freehold is to be traced to the general condition of the king's

manors in ancient demesne.(31*)

    Although the tenants in ancient demesne are admitted to use

the 'little writ of right' only, their court made it go a long

way; and in fact, all or almost all the real actions of the

common law had their parallel in its jurisdiction. The demandant,

when appearing in court, made a protestation to sue in the nature

of a writ of mort d'ancestor or of dower(32*) or the like, and

the procedure varied accordingly, sometimes following very

closely the lines of the procedure in the high courts, and

sometimes exhibiting tenacious local usage or archaic

arrangements.(33*)

    Actions as to personal estate could be pleaded without writ,

and as for the crown pleas they were reserved to the high

courts.(34*) But even in actions regarding the soil a removal to

these latter was not excluded.(35*) Evocation to a higher court

followed naturally if the manorial court refused justice and such

removal made the land frank fee.(36*) The proceedings in ancient

demesne could be challenged, and thereupon a writ of false

judgment brought the case under the cognizance of the courts of

common law. If on examination an error was found, the sentence of

the lower tribunal was quashed and the case had to proceed in the

higher.(37*) instances of examination and revision are frequent

in our records.(38*) The examination of the proceedings by the

justices was by no means an easy matter, because they were

constantly confronted by appeals to the custom of the manor and

counter appeals to the principles of the common law of England.

It was very difficult to adjust these conflicting elements with

nicety. As to the point of fact, whether an alleged custom was

really in usage or not, the justices had a good standing ground

for decision. They asked, as a rule, whether precedents could be

adduced and proved as to the usage;(39*) they allowed a great

latitude for the peculiarities of customary law; but the

difficulty was that a line had to be drawn somewhere.(40*) This

procedure of revision on the whole is quite as important a

manifestation of the freehold qualities of privileged villainage

as pleading by writ. Men holding in pure villainage also had a

manorial court to go to and to plead in, but its judicial

organisation proceeded entirely from the will and power of the

lord, and it ended where his will and power ended; there was no

higher court and no revision for such men. The writ of false

judgment in respect of tenements in ancient demesne shows

conclusively that the peculiar procedure provided for the

privileged villains was only an instance and a variation of the

general law of the land, maintaining actionable rights of free

persons. And be it again noted, that there was no sort of

difference as to revision between those manors which were in the

actual possession of the crown and those which were out of

it.(41*) Revision and reversal were provided not as a complement

to the legal protection of the tenant against the lord, but as a

consequence of that independent position of the tenant as a

person who has rights against all men which is manifested in the

parvum breve.(42*) It is not without interest to notice in this

connexion that the parvum breve is sometimes introduced in the

law books, not as a restriction put upon the tenant, nor as the

outcome of villainage, but as a boon which provides the tenant

with a plain form of procedure close at hand instead of the

costly and intricate process before the justices.(43*)

    If protection against the lord had been the only object of

the procedure in cases of ancient demesne, one does not see why

there should be a 'little writ' at all, as there was a remedy

against the lord's encroachments in the writ of

'Monstraverunt,'(45*) pleaded before the king's justices. As it

is, the case of disseisin by the lord, to whom the manor had come

from the crown, was treated simply as an instance of disseisin,

and brought under the operation of the writ of right, while the

'Monstraverunt' was restricted to exaction of increased services

and change of customs.(46*) The latter writ was a very peculiar

one, in fact quite unlike any other writ. The common-law rule

that each tenant in severalty has to plead for himself did not

apply to it; all join for saving of charges, albeit they be

several tenants.(46*) What is more, one tenant could sue for the

rest and his recovery profited them all; on the other hand, if

many had joined in the writ and some died or withdrew, the writ

did not abate for this reason, and even if but one remained able

and willing to sue he could proceed with the writ.(47*) These

exceptional features were evidently meant to facilitate the

action of humble people against a powerful magnate.(48*) But it

seems to me that the deviation from the rules governing writs at

common law is to be explained not only by the general aim of the

writ, but also by its origin.

    In form it was simply an injunction on a plaint. When for

some reason right could not be obtained by the means afforded by

the common law, the injured party had to apply to the king by

petition. One of the most common cases was when redress was

sought for some act of the king himself or of his officers, when

the consequent injunction to the common law courts or to the

Exchequer to examine the case invariably began with the identical

formula which gave its name to the writ by which privileged

villains complained of an increase of services; monstravit or

mons traverunt N. N.; ex parte N. N. ostensum est: -- these are

the opening words of the king's injunctions consequent upon the

humble remonstrations of his aggrieved subjects.(49*) Again, we

find that the application for the writ by privileged villains is

actually described as a plaint.(50*) In some cases it would be

difficult to tell on the face of the initiatory document, whether

we have to do with a 'breve de monstraverunt' to coerce the

manorial lord, or with an extraordinary measure taken by the king

with a view to settling his own interests.(51*)

    And this brings me to the main point. Although the writ under

discussion seems at first sight to meet the requirement of the

special case of manors alienated from the crown, on closer

inspection it turns out to be a variation of the peculiar process

employed to insist upon a right against the crown. Parallel to

the 'Monstraverunt' against a lord in the Common Pleas we have

the 'Monstraverunt' against the king's bailiff in the Exchequer.

The following mandate for instance is enrolled in the eventful

year 1265: 'Monstraverunt Regi homines castri sui de Brambur et

Schotone quod Henricus Spring constabularius castri de Brambur

injuste distringit eos ad faciendum alia servicia et alias

consuetudines quam facere consueverunt temporibus predecessorum

Regis et tempore suo. Ideo mandatum est vicecomiti quod venire

etc. predictum Henricum a die Pasche in xv dies ad respondendum

Regi et predictis hominibus de predicta terra et breve etc.'(52*)

There is not much to choose between this and the enrolment of a

'breve de monstraverunt' in the usual sense beyond the fact that

it is entered on a Roll of Exchequer Memoranda. In 1292 a mandate

of King Edward I to the Barons of the Exchequer is entered in

behalf of the men of Costeseye in Norfolk who complained of

divers grievances against Athelwald of Crea, the bailiff of the

manor. The petition itself is enrolled also, and it sets forth,

that whereas the poor men of the king of the base tenure in the

manor of Costeseye held by certain usages, from a time of which

memory runs no higher, as well under the counts of Brittany as

under the kings to whom the manor was forfeited, now bailiff

Athelwald distrains them to do other services which ought to be

performed by pure villains. They could sell and lease their lands

in the fields at pleasure, and he seizes lands which have been

sold in this way and amerces them for selling; besides this he

makes them serve as reeves and collectors, and the bailiff of the

late Queen Eleanor tallaged them from year to year to pay twenty

marks, which they were not bound to do, because they are no

villains to be tallaged high and low.(53*) Such is the substance

of this remarkable document, to which I shall have to refer again

in other connexions. What I wish to establish now is, that we

have on the king's own possessions the exact counterpart of the

'breve de monstraverunt.' The instances adduced are perhaps the

more characteristic because the petitioners had not even the

strict privilege of ancient demesne to lean upon, as one of the

cases comes from Northumberland, which is not mentioned in

Domesday, and the other concerns tenants of the honour of

Richmond.

    There can be no doubt that the tenantry on the ancient

demesne had even better reasons for appealing to immemorial

usage, and certainly they knew how to urge their grievances. We

may take as an instance the notice of a trial consequent upon a

complaint of the men of Bray against the Constable of Windsor.

Bray was ancient demesne and the king's tenants complained that

they were distrained to do other services than they were used to

do. The judgment was in their favour.(54*)

    The chief point is that the writ of 'Monstraverunt' appears

to be connected with petitions to the king against the exactions

of his officers, and may be said in its origin to be applicable

as much to the actual possessions of the crown as to those which

had been granted away from it. This explains a very remarkable

omission in our best authorities. Although the writ played such

an important part in the law of ancient demesne, and was so

peculiar in its form and substance, neither Bracton nor his

followers mention it directly. They set down 'the little writ of

right close' as the only writ available for the villain socmen.

As the protection in point of services is nevertheless distinctly

affirmed by those writers, and as the Monstraverunt appears in

full working order in the time of Henry III and even of

John,(55*) the obvious explanation seems to be that Bracton

regarded the case as one not of writ but of petition, a matter,

we might say, rather for royal equity than for strict law. Thus

both the two modes of procedure which are distinctive of the

ancient demesne, namely the 'parvum breve' and the

'Monstraverunt,' though they attain their full development on the

manors that have been alienated, seem really to originate on

manors which are in the actual possession of the crown.

    If we now examine the conditions under which the manors of

the ancient demesne were alienated by the crown, we shall at once

see that no very definite line could be drawn between those which

had been given away and those which remained in the king's hand.

The one class gradually shades off into the other. A very good

example is afforded by the history of Stoneleigh Abbey. In 1154

King Henry II gave the Cistercian monks of Radmore in

Staffordshire his manor of Stoneleigh in exchange for their

possessions in Radmore. The charter as given in the Register of

the Abbey seems to amount to a complete grant of the land and of

the jurisdiction. Nevertheless, we find Henry II drawing all

kinds of perquisites from the place all through his reign, and it

is specially noticed that his writs were directed not to the

Abbot or the Abbot's bailiffs, but to his own bailiffs in

Stoneleigh.(56*) In order to get rid of the inconveniences

consequent upon such mixed ownership, Abbot William of Tyso

bought a charter from King John, granting to the Abbey all the

soke of Stoneleigh.(57*) But all the same the royal rights did

not yet disappear. There were tenants connected with the place

who were immediately dependent on the king,(58*) and his bailiff

continued to exercise functions by the side of, and in

conjunction with, the officers of the Abbot.(59*) In the 50th

year of Henry III a remarkable case occurred: -- a certain

Alexander of Canle was tried for usurping the rights of the Abbot

as to the tenantry in the hamlet of Canle, and it came out that

one of his ancestors had succeeded in improving his position of

collector of the revenue into the position of an owner of the

rents. Although the rights which were vindicated against him were

the rights of the Abbot, still the king entered into possession

and afterwards transferred the possession to the Abbot.(60*) In

one word, the king is always considered as 'the senior lord' of

Stoneleigh; his lordship is something more direct than a mere

feudal over-lordship.(61*)

    We find a similar state of things at King's Ripton. The manor

had been let in fee farm to the Abbots of Ramsey. In case of a

tenement lapsing into the lord's hands, it is seized sometimes by

the bailiff of the king, sometimes by the bailiffs of the

Abbot.(62*) The royal writs again are directed not to the Abbot,

but to his bailiff. The same was the case at Stoneleigh,(63*) and

indeed this seems to have been the regular course on ancient

demesne manors.(64*) This curious way of ignoring the lord

himself and addressing the writ directly to his officers seems an

outcome of the fundamental assumption that of these manors there

was no real lord but the king, and that the private lord's

officers were acting as the king's bailiffs.

    According to current notions the demesnes of the crown ought

not to have been alienated at all. Although alienated by one king

they were considered as liable to be resumed by his

successors.(65*) And as a matter of fact such resumptions were by

no means unusual. Edward I gave an adequate expression to this

doctrine when he ordered an inquisition into the state of the

tenantry at Stoneleigh: -- he did not wish any encroachment made

on the old constitution of the manor, for he had always in mind

the possibility that his royal rights would be resumed by himself

or by one of his successors.(66*)

    If we turn to the court rolls of a manor which is actually in

the king's hand and compare them with those of a manor which he

has granted to some convent or some private lord, we see hardly

any difference between them. The rolls of the manor of Havering

at the Record Office, although comparatively late, afford a good

insight into the constitution of a manor retained in the king's

own hand. They contain a good many writs of right, and though,

naturally enough, the tenants do not bring actions against the

king, we find an instance in which the king brings an action

against his tenant, and pleads before a court which is held in

his own name.(67*) This is good proof that the condition of the

tenants was by no means dependent on the arbitrary action of the

manorial officers. When King Henry II granted Stoneleigh to the

Cistercians he displaced a number of 'rustics' from their

holdings, and while doing this he recognised their right and

enjoined the sheriff of Warwickshire to give them an equivalent

for what they had lost in consequence of the grant.(68*) The

notion from which all inquiry consequent upon a 'Monstraverunt'

starts is always this, that the tenants were holding by certain

(i.e. by fixed) services at the time when the manor was in the

king's own hand. The certainty is not created by the fact that

the manor passes away from the king to some one else; it exists

when the land is royal land and therefore cannot be destroyed on

land that has been alienated. So true is this that Bracton and

Britton give their often cited description of privileged

villainage without alluding to the question whether or no the

manor is still in the king's hand;(69*) Britton even applies this

description primarily to the king's own possessions by his way of

stating the law as the direct utterance of the king's command.

The well-known fact that the 'ferm' or rent of royal manors was

not always fixed, that we constantly hear of an increased rental

(incrementum) levied in addition to the old 'ferm', (assisa

redditus antiquitus assisus), can be easily reconciled with this

doctrine.(70*) The prosperity of the country was gradually

rising; both in agricultural communities and in towns new

tenements and houses, new occupations and revenues were growing,

and it was not the interest either of the communities or of the

lord to compress this development within an unelastic bond. In

principle the increased payments fell on this new growth on the

demesne, although this may in some cases have been due to

exactions against which the people could remonstrate only in the

name of immemorial custom, and only by way of petition since

nobody could judge the king. In principle, too, certainty of

condition was admitted as to the privileged villains on the

king's demesnes.(71*)

    This serves to explain the procedure followed by the court

when a question of services was raised by a writ of

'Monstraverunt.' The first thing, of course, was to ascertain

whether the manor was ancient demesne or not, and for this

purpose nothing short of a direct mention in Domesday was held to

be sufficient.(72*) When this question had been solved in the

affirmative, a jury had to decide what the customs and duties

were, by which the ancestors of the plaintiffs held at the time

when the crown was possessed of the manor. In principle it was

always considered that such had been the services at the time of

the Conquest,(73*) but practically, of course, there could be no

attempt to examine into such ancient history. The men of King's

Ripton actually pleaded back to the time of King Cnut, and

maintained that no prescription was available against their

rights as no prescription could avail against the king.(74*) The

courts naturally declined to go higher than men could remember,

but they laid down this limitation entirely as one of practice

and not of principle.(75*) Metingham demanded that the claimants

should make good their contention even for a single day in

Richard Coeur de Lion's time.(76*) The men of Wycle combine both

assertions in their contention against Mauger; they appeal to the

age of the first Norman kings, but offer to prove the certainty

of their services in the reigns of Richard and John.(77*)

    Now all that has been said hitherto applied to 'the tenants

in ancient demesne' indiscriminately, without regard to any

diversity of classes among them. Hitherto I have not noticed any

such diversity, and in so doing I am warranted by the

authorities. Those authorities commonly speak of 'men' or

'tenants in ancient demesne' without any further

qualification.(78*) Sometimes the expression 'condition of

ancient demesne' also is used. But closer examination shows a

variety of classes on the privileged soil, and leads to a number

of difficult and interesting problems.

    To begin with, the nature of the tenancy in general has been

much contested. As to the law of later times Mr Elton puts the

case in this way: 'There is great confusion in the law books

respecting this tenure. The copyholders of these manors are

sometimes called tenants in ancient demesne, and land held in

this tenure is said to pass by surrender and admittance. This

appears to be inaccurate. It is only the freeholders who are

tenants in ancient demesne, and their land passes by common law

conveyances without the instrumentality of the lord. Even Sir W.

Blackstone seems to have been misled upon this point. There are

however, as a rule, in manors of ancient demesne, customary

freeholders and sometimes copyholders at the will of the lord, as

well as the true tenants in ancient demesne.'(79*) Now such a

description seems strangely out of keeping with the history of

the tenure. Blackstone speaks of privileged copyhold as descended

from privileged villainage;(80*) and as to the condition in the

thirteenth century of those 'men' or 'tenants in ancient demesne'

of whom we have been speaking, there can be no doubt. Bracton and

his followers lay down quite distinctly that their tenure is

villainage though privileged villainage. The men of ancient

demesne are men of free blood holding in villainage.(81*) And to

take up the special point mentioned by Mr Elton -- conveyance by

surrender and admittance is a quite necessary feature of the

tenure:(82*) conveyance by charter makes the land freehold and

destroys its ancient demesne condition.(83*) But although this is

so clear in the authorities of the thirteenth century, there is

undoubtedly a great deal of confusion in later law books, and

reasons are not wanting which may account for this fact and for

the doctrine propounded by Mr Elton in conformity with certain

modern treatises and decisions.

    We may start with the observation, that privileged villains

or villain socmen are not the only people to be found on the soil

of the ancient demesne. There are free tenants there and pure

villains too.(84*) Free socage is often mentioned in these

manors, and it is frequently pleaded in order to get a trial

transferred to the Common Law Courts. When the question is raised

whether a tenement is free or villain socage, the fact that it

has been conveyed by feoffment and charter is treated, as has

just been pointed out, as establishing its freehold character and

subjecting it to the ordinary common law procedure.(85*) On the

other hand, registers and extents of ancient demesne manors

sometimes treat separately of 'nativi' or 'villani' as

distinguished from the regular customary tenants, and describe

their services as being particularly base.(86*) In trials it is

quite a common thing for a lord, when accused of having altered

the services, to plead that the plaintiffs were his villains to

be treated at will. Attempts were made in such cases to take

advantage of the general term 'men of ancient demesne,' and to

argue that all the population on the crown manors must be of the

same condition, the difference of rank applying only to the

amount and the kind of services, but not to their certainty,

which ought to be taken for granted.(87*) But strictly and

legally the lord's plea was undoubtedly good: the courts admitted

it, and when it was put forward proceeded to examine the question

of fact whether the lord had been actually seised of certain or

of uncertain services.(88*) It is of considerable importance to

note that the difference between villains pure and villains

privileged was sometimes connected with the distinction between

the lord's demesne and the tenant's land in the manor.(89*) The

demesne proper was frank fee in the hands of the lord, and could

be used by him at his pleasure. If he chose to grant it away to

villains in pure villainage, the holdings thus formed could have

no claim to rank as privileged land. It was assumed that some

such holdings had been formed at the very beginning, as it were,

that is at a time beyond memory of man, but tenements at will

could be created at a later time on approved waste or on soil

that had escheated to the lord and in this way passed through his

demesne.(90*) One of the reasons of later confusion must be

looked for in the fact that the pure villain holdings gradually

got to be recognised at law as copyhold or base customary

tenures. They were thus brought dangerously near to ancient

demesne socage, which was originally nothing but base customary

tenure. The very fact of copyhold thus gaining on villain socage

may have pushed this last on towards freehold. Already the Old

Natura Brevium does not know exactly how to make distinctions. It

speaks of three species of socagefree, ancient demesne, and base.

The line is soon drawn between the first two, but the third kind

is said to be held by uncertain services, and sued by writ of

'Monstraverunt' instead of having the writs of right and

'Monstraverunt' of ancient demesne socage.(91*) Probably what is

meant is a species of copyhold which is not socage, and the writ

of 'Monstraverunt' attributed to it may perhaps be the plaint or

petition which is the initial move in a suit for the protection

of copyhold in the manorial court.

    In the time of Henry III and of the Edwards the nature of

ancient demesne tenure was better understood. At the close of the

thirteenth century the lawyers distinguish three kinds of

men-free, villains, and socmen.(92*) In order to be quite

accurate people spoke of villain socmen or little socage(93*) in

opposition to free. But even at that time there were several

confusing features about the case. The certainty of condition

made the tenure of the villain socmen so like a freehold that it

was often treated as such in the manorial documents. In the

Stoneleigh Register the peculiar nature of socage in ancient

demesne is described fully and clearly. It is distinguished in so

many words from tenancy at will, and a detailed description of

conveyance by surrender in contrast with conveyance by charter

seems to give the necessary material for the distinction between

it and freehold.(94*) But still the fundamental notion of free

men holding in villainage gets lost sight of. Only some of the

cottiers are said to hold in villainage. The more important

tenants, the socmen holding virgates and half-virgates, are not

only currently described as freeholders in the Register, but they

are entered as such on the Warwickshire Hundred Roll.(95*) The

term 'parva sokemanria' is applied in the Stoneleigh Register

only to a few subordinate holdings which are undoubtedly above

the level of pure villainage, but cannot be definitely

distinguished from the other kinds of socage in the Register.

This may serve as an indication of the tendency of manorial

communities to consider privileged villainage as a free tenure,

but legal pleadings and decisions were also cresting confusion

for another reason, because they tended, as has been said, to

consider the whole body of men on the ancient demesne in one lump

as it were. The courts very often applied as the one test of

tenure and service the question whether a person was a descendant

by blood of men of ancient demesne or a stranger.(96*) In

connexion with this the court rolls testify to the particular

care taken to control any intrusion of strangers into the

boundaries of a privileged manor.(97*) This was done primarily in

the interests of the lord, but the tenantry also seem to have

sometimes been jealous of their prerogatives,(98*) and it is only

in the course of the fourteenth century that they begin to open

their gates to strangers, 'adventicii.'(99*) However this may be,

the practice of drawing the line between native stock and

strangers undoubtedly countenanced the idea that all the tenants

of native stock were alike, and in this way tended to confuse the

distinction between freeholders, pure villains, and villain

socmen.

    The courts made several attempts to insist on a firm

classification, but some of these were conceived in such an

unhappy spirit that they actually embroiled matters. The conduct

of the king's judges was especially misdirected in one famous

case which came up several times before the courts during the

thirteenth century. The tenants of Tavistock in Devonshire were

seeking protection against their lords, and appealing to the

right of ancient demesne. The case was debated two or three times

during Henry III's reign, and in 1279 judgment was given against

the plaintiffs by an imposing quorum, as many as eight judges

with the Chief Justice Ralph Hengham at their head. It was

conceded that Tavistock was ancient demesne, but the claimants

were held to be villains and not villain socmen, and this on the

ground that the Domesday description did not mention socmen, but

only villains.(100*) It seems strange to dispute a decision given

with such solemnity by men who were much better placed to know

about these things than we are, but there does not seem to be any

possible doubt that Hengham and his companions were entirely

wrong. Their decision is in contradiction with almost all the

recorded cases; it was always assumed that the stiff Domesday

terminology was quite insufficient to show whether a man was a

pure villain or a free man holding in villainage, which last

would be the villain socman in ancient demesne. If Hengham's

doctrine had been taken as a basis for decision in these cases,

no ancient demesne tenancy would have been recognised at all out

of the Danelaw counties, that is in far the greater part of

England, as Domesday never mentions socmen there at all. In the

Danelaw counties, on the other hand, the privilege would have

been of no use, as those who were called socmen there were

freeholders protected without any reference to ancient demesne.

Altogether the attempt to make Domesday serve the purpose of

establishing the mode of tenure for the thirteenth century must

be called a misdirected one. It was quite singular, as the courts

generally went back upon Domesday only with the object of finding

out whether a particular manor had been vested in the crown at

the time of the Conquest or not. It should be noted that Bracton

considered the case from a very different point of view, as one

may judge by the note he jotted down on the margin of his

Note-book against a trial of 1237-8. He says: 'Nota de villanis

Henrici de Tracy de Tawystoke qui nunquam fuerunt in manu Domini

Regis nec antecessorum suorum et loquebantur de tempore Regis

Edwardi coram W. de Wiltona.'(101*) Wilton's decision must have

been grounded on the assumption that the ancestors of the

claimants were strangers to the manor, or else that the manor had

never formed part of the ancient demesne. This would, of course,

be in direct contradiction to the opinion that the Tavistock

tenants were descended from the king's born villains.

    I cannot help thinking that Hengham's decision may have been

prompted either by partiality towards the lord of the manor or by

an ill-considered wish to compress the right of ancient demesne

within the narrowest bounds possible. In any case this trial

deserves attention by reason of the eminent authorities engaged

in drawing up the judgment, and as illustrating the difficulties

which surround the points at issue and lead to confusion both in

the decisions and in the treatment of them by law writers. In

order to gain firm ground we must certainly go back again to the

fundamental propositions laid down with great clearness by

Bracton. It was not all the tenants on ancient demesne soil that

had a right to appeal to its peculiar privileges-some had

protection at Common Law and some had no protection at all. But

the great majority of the tenants enjoyed special rights, and

these men of ancient demesne were considered to be free by blood

and holding in villainage. If the books had not noticed their

personal freedom in so many words, it would have been proved by

the fact that they were always capable of leaving their tenements

and going away at pleasure.

    Bracton does not restrict himself to this statement of the

case; he adds a few lines to give a historical explanation of it.

'At the time of the Conquest,' says he, 'there were free men

holding their lands freely, and by free services or free customs.

When they were ejected by stronger people, they came back and

received the same lands to be held in villainage and by villain

services, which were specified and certain.'(102*)

    The passage is a most interesting one, but it calls for some

comment. How is it that the special case of ancient demesne gets

widened into a general description of the perturbations

consequent upon the Conquest? For a general description it is; by

the 'stronger folk,' the 'potentiores,' are certainly not meant

the king and his officers only. On the other hand, how can it be

said of any but the ancient demesne tenants that they resumed

their holdings by certain though base services? The wording is

undoubtedly and unfortunately rather careless in this most

important passage, still the main positions which Bracton

intended to convey are not affected by his rather clumsy way of

stating them. Ancient demesne tenure, notwithstanding its

peculiarities, is one species of a mode of holding which was

largely represented everywhere, namely of the status of free men

holding in villainage; this condition had been strongly affected

if not actually produced by the Conquest. It is interesting to

compare the description of the Conquest, as given at greater

length but in a looser way, in the Dialogus de Scaccario. It is

stated there that those who had actually fought against the

Conqueror were deprived of their lands for ever after. Those who

for some reason had not actually joined in the contest were

suffered to hold their lands under Norman lords, but with no

claim to hereditary succession. Their occupation being uncertain,

their lords very often deprived them of their lands and they had

no means to procure restitution. Their complaints gave rise to a

discussion of the matter before the king, and it was held that

nothing could be claimed by these people by way of succession

from the time preceding the Conquest, and that actionable rights

could originate only in deeds granted by the Norman lords.(103*)

The Dialogus as compared with Bracton lays most stress on the

opposite side of the picture; the disabilities of persons holding

at will are set forth not only as a consequence of the state of

things following conquest de facto, but as the result of a legal

reconsideration of the facts. As a classification of tenures the

passage would not be complete, of course, since neither the

important species of free socage recognised by Domesday nor the

ancient demesne tenure appears. It is only the contrast between

villainage and holding by charter that comes out strongly. But in

one way the Dialogus reinforces Bracton, if I may be allowed to

use the expression: for it traces back the formation of a very

important kind of villainage to the Conquest, and connects the

attempts of persons entangled into it to obtain protection with

their original rights before the Conquest.

    Reverting now to the question of ancient demesne, we shall

have to consider what light these statements throw on the origin

of the tenure. I have noticed several times that ancient demesne

socage was connected in principle with the condition of things in

Saxon times, immediately before the Conquest. The courts had to

impose limitations in order to control evidence; the whole

institution was in a way created by limitation, because it

restricted itself to the T.R.E. of Domesday as the only

acceptable test of Saxon condition. But, notwithstanding all

these features imposed by the requirements of procedure, ancient

demesne drew its origin distinctly from pre-Conquest conditions.

The manors forming it are taken as the manors of St.

Edward.(104*) the tenants, whenever they want to make a solemn

claim, set forth their rights from the time of St. Edward,(105*)

or even Cnut.(106*) But does this mean that the actual privileges

of the tenure were extant in Saxon times? Surely not. Such things

as freedom from common taxation, exemption from toll, separate

jurisdiction, certainly existed in behalf of the king's demesnes

before the Conquest, but there is no intimation whatever that the

king's tenants enjoyed any peculiar right or protection as to

their holdings and services. The 'little writ of right' and the

'Monstraverunt' are as Norman, in a wide sense of the word, as

the freedom from serving on assizes or sending representatives to

parliament. But although there is no doubt that this tenure grew

up and developed several of its peculiarities after the Conquest,

it had to fall back on Saxon times for its substance,(107*) which

may be described in few words-legal protection of the peasantry.

The influence of Norman lawyers was exercised in shaping out

certain actionable rights, the effect of conquest was to narrow

to a particular class a protection originally conferred broadly,

and the action of Saxon tradition was to supply a general stock

of freedom and independent right, from which the privileged

condition of Norman times could draw its nourishment, if I may

put it in that way. It would be idle now to discuss in what

proportion the Saxon influence on the side of freedom has to be

explained by the influx of men who had been originally owners of

their lands, and what may be assigned to the contractual

character of Saxon tenant-right. This subject must be left till

we come to examine the evidence supplied by Saxon sources of

information. My present point is that the ancient demesne tenure

of the Conquest is a remnant of the condition of things before

the Conquest.(108*)

    It may well be asked why the destructive effects of Norman

victory were arrested on ancient demesne soil? Was not the king

as likely to exercise his discretion in respect of the peasantry

as any feudal lord, and is it likely that he would have let

himself be fettered by considerations and obligations which did

not bind his subjects? In view of such questions one is tempted

to treat the protection of the tenants on the ancient demesne

merely as a peculiar boon granted to the people whom the king had

to give away. I need not say that such an interpretation would be

entirely wrong. I hope I have been able to make out convincingly

that legal protection given against private lords on manors which

had been alienated was only an outgrowth from that certainty of

condition which was allowed on the king's own lands. I will just

add now that one very striking fact ought to be noticed in this

connexion; certainty of tenure and service is limited to one

particular class in the manor, although that class is the most

numerous one. If this privilege came into being merely by the

fixation of status at the time when a manor passed from the

crown, the state of the villain pure would have got fixed in the

same way as that of the villain socman. But it did not, and so

one cannot shirk the difficult question, What gave rise to the

peculiar protection against the lord when the lord happened to be

king?

    I think that three considerations open the way out of the

difficulty. To begin with, the king was decidedly considered as

the one great safeguard of Saxon tradition and the one defender

against Norman encroachments. he had constantly to hear the cry

about 'the laws of Edward the Confessor,' and although the claim

may be considered as a very vague one in general matters, it

became substantiated in this case of tenure and services by the

Domesday record. Then again, the proportion of free owners who

had lapsed into territorial dependence must have been much

greater on the king's land than anywhere else; it was quite usual

to describe an allodial owner from the feudal point of view as

holding under the king in a particular way, and villain socage

was only one of several kinds of socage after all. Last, but not

least, the protection against exactions was in reality directed

not against the king personally but against his officers, and the

king personally was quite likely to benefit by it almost as much

as his men. It amounted after all only to a recognition of

definite customs in general, to a special judicial organisation

of the manor which made it less dependent upon the steward, and

to the facilities afforded for complaint and revision of

judgments. As to this last it must be noted that the king's men

were naturally enough in a better position than the rest of the

English peasantry; the curse of villainage was that manorial

courts were independent of superior organisation as far as the

lower tenants were concerned. But courts in royal manors were the

king's courts after all, and as such they could hardly be severed

from the higher tribunals held in the king's name.

    I may be allowed to sum up the conclusions of this chapter

under the following heads: --

    1. The law of ancient demesne is primarily developed in

regard to the manors in the king's own hand.

    2. The special protection granted to villain socmen in

ancient demesne is a consequence of a certainty of condition as

much recognised in manors which the king still holds as in those

which he has alienated.

    3. This certainty of condition is derived from the Conquest

as the connecting link between the Norman and the Saxon periods.



NOTES:



1. Bracton, 209; cf 7 and 200. Britton, ii. 13.



2. Bracton, 209: 'Villenagium privilegiatum... tenetur de Rege a

Conquestu Angliae.' Cf. Blackstone, Law Tracts, ii. 128.



3. Madox, History of the Exchequer, i. 704: 'Tallagium dominiorum

et escaetarum et custodiarum.'



4. Bract. Note-book, 1237 (the prior of St. Swithin denies a

manor to be ancient demesne): '... per cc annos ante conquestum

Anglie [terre] date fuerunt priori et conventui et ab aliis quam

regibus.'



5. Y.B. Trin. 49 Edw. III, pl. 8 (Fitzherbert, Abr. Monstraver.

4): "... touts les demesnes qui fuerent en la maine Seint E. sont

aunciens demesne, mesque ils fuerent aliens a estraunge mains

quant le liver de Domesday se fist, come il avient del manor de

Totenham qui fut en autre maine a temps de Domesday fait, come en

le dit livers fait mencion, que il fuit adonques al Counte de

Cestre.'



6. Very curious pleadings occurred in 1323. Y.B. 15 Edw. II, p.

455: "Ber(wick) Ils dient en l'Exchequer que serra (corr. terra)

R. serra ecrit sur le margin en cas ou cest ancien demene en

Domesday, mes ceo fust escript sur le dyme foille apres sur un

title terra R., mesine (corr. mes une or mesqe?) R. fuit escript

sur le margin de chescun foille apres, e tout ceo la est anciene

demene a ceo quil nient (corr. dient), mes ascunes gens entendent

que les terres qui furent les demenes le Roy St. Edward sont

auncien demene, e autres dient fors les terres que le Conquerour

conquist, que furent en la seissin St. Edward le jour quil

mourust sont anciene demene.' Although a difference of opinion is

mentioned it is not material, for this reason, that the entry as

Terra Regis, at least T. R. E., is absolutely required to prove a

manor ancient demesne. I give the entry on the Plea Roll in App.

V.



7. I think only distress can be implied by the remark of Bereford

J. Y.B. 30/31 Edw. I, p. 19: 'Quant vous vendrez a loustel, fetes

de vostre archevileyn ceo qe vous vodrez.' The words are strange

and possibly corrupt.



8. Blackstone, Law Tracts, ii. 153: 'They cannot alienate

tenements otherwise than by surrender into the lord's hand.'

Bracton, 209.



9. In a most curious description of the customs of villain

sokemen of Stoneleigh, Warwick, in the Register of Stoneleigh

Abbey, I find the following entries: 'Item sokemanni predicti

filias suas non possunt maritare sine licencia domini prout patet

anno viij Regis E. filii Regis E. per rotulum curie in quo

continetur quod Matildis de Canle in plena curia fecit finem cum

domino pro ij sol. quia maritauit filiam Suam Thome de Horwelle

sine licencia domini.... Item anno Regis H. lvj continetur in

rotulo curie quod Willelmus Michel fuit in misericordia quia

maritauit filiam suam sine licencia domini et similiter decenarii

fuerunt in misericordia quia hoc concelauerunt.' As to the

Stoneleigh Register, see App. VI. Another instance of merchet in

an ancient demesne manor is afforded by the Ledecumbe (Letcombe)

Regis Court Rolls of 1272. Chapter House, County Bags, Berks. No.

3, m. 12: 'Johannes le Jeune se redemit ad maritandum et fecit

finem xij sol.... Johannes Atwel redemit filiam suam anno

predicto' (Record Office).



10. Henry II's charter to Stoneleigh Abbey: 'Quieta de schiris et

hundredis, et murdro et danegeldo, et placitis et querelis, et

geldis et auxiliis, et omni consuetudine et exactione' (Dugdale,

Monasticon, v. 447).



11. Close Roll, 12 Henry III, m. II, d: 'Monstrauerunt domino

Regi homines de Esindene et de Beyford, quod occasione

misericordiae c. librarum, in quam totus Comitatus Hertfordie

incidit coram iusticiariis ultimo itinerantibus... hidagium

quoddam assedit vicecomes super eos ad auxilium faciendum ceteris

de comitatu ad misericordiam illam acquietandam et inde eos

distringit. Quia vero predicti homines nec alii de dominicis

domini Regis sectam faciunt ad comitatum et ea racione non

tenentur ad misericordiam ceterorum de comitatu illo acquietandam

auxilium facere aut inde participes esse, mandatum est vicecomiti

Hertfordie quod homines predictos in hidagio et demanda pacem

habere permittat' (Record Office). Placita de Quo Warranto, 777,

778: 'Non quieti de communi amerciamento nisi tantum in Stonle.'



12. Viner, Abr. v. Anc. Dem. C2, 1; cf E, 20. Madox, Hist. of

Exch., i. 418, note l: 'Quieti de auxilio vicecomitis et

baillivorum suorum.'



13. Cor. Rege, Mich. 5 E. II, m. 77: '(Juratores dicunt quod

homines de Wycle) in itinere respondent per quatuor et prepositum

sicut cetere ville de corpore comitatus.' This against their

claim to hold in ancient demesne.



14. Viner, Abr. Anc. Dem. B. I, 4, 6.



15. Madox, Exch., i. 412, 698.



16. Stubbs, ii. 566, 567 (Libr. ed.); Madox, Exch., i. 751.



17. Cor. R. M. 5 E. II, m. 77: 'Quando communitas comitatus

talliatur... predicti homines taxantur sicut ceteri villani

ejusdem comitatus' (against the ancient demesne claim).



18. Fitzherbert, Abr. Monstauerunt, 6 (H. 32 E. III): '... quant

le roi taile les burghs a taunt come ils paia a taile pur tant il

nouS distreint.' Th.: 'Entend qe les feoffes le roy auront

taile?' quasi diceret non, 'car cest un regalte qui proprement

attient al roy et a nul auter.' Clam.: 'Tout aura il tail il

serra leue en due maner sil auront breve hors del chauncerie al

viconte, sc. quod habere facias racionable taile.' The men of

King's Ripton, Hunts., who were constantly wrangling about their

rights with the Abbot of Ramsey, the lord of the manor,

maintained that they had never been tallaged nisi tantummodo ad

opus Regis, and their claim was corroborated by an inspection of

the Exchequer Rolls (Madox, Exch., i. 757, n). Before granting a

writ of tallage to the Abbot of Stoneleigh in 1253, Henry III had

an inquisition made as to the precedents. It was found that,

Nunquam predictum manerium de Stonle talliatum fuit postquam

Johannes Rex predictum manerium dedit predicti Abbati et

Conventui, (Stoneleigh Reg., f 25).



19. The Law-books say so distinctly. Britton, ii. 13: 'Et pur ceo

qe teus sokemans sount nos gaynours de nos terres, ne voloms mie

qe teles gentz seint a nule part somouns de travailer en jurez ne

en enquestes, for qe en maners a queus il appendent.' Cf F1eta,

p. 4.



20. Natura Brevium, f. 3 b (ed. Pynson).



21. Y.B. H. 49 E. III, pl. 12 (Fitzherbert, Abr. Aunc. Dem. 42,

quotes pl. 7 instead of 12 by mistake): Belk(nap), 'Verite est qe

le terre est demandable par le briefe de droit patent en le court

le seigniour apres la confirmacion (sc. par chartre) par ce qe le

brief de droit serra commence en le court le seignior, mes apres

la confirmacion il ne serra demande en auncien demesne par brief

de droit close secundum consuetudinem,' etc.



22. Bracton actually calls the plea of ancient demesne an

exception of villainage, f 200: 'Si autem in sokagio villano,

sicut de dominico domini Regis, licet servitia certa sunt,

obstabit ei exceptio villenagii, quia talis sokmannus liberum

tenementum non habet quia tenet nomine alieno.' Cf Fitzherbert,

Abr. Aunc. Dem. 32.



23. Bract. Note-book, pl. 652: "Non debent extra manerium illud

placitare quia non possunt [ponere] se in magnam assisam nec

defendunt Se per duellum.' On the cases when an assize could be

taken as to tenements in ancient demesne, see the opinion printed

in Horwood's lntroduction to Y. B. 21/22 Edw. I, p. xviii.



24 Stoneleigh Reg., f. 76 sqq: 'Item in placito terre possunt

partes si voluerint ponere jus terre sue in duello campionum vel

per magnam assisam, prout patet in recordo rotuli de anno xlv

Regis Henrici inter Walterum H. et Johannem del Hul etc. et inter

Galfridum Crulefeld et Willelmum Elisaundre anno xx Regis Edwardi

filii Regis Henrici,' etc.



25. Bract. Note-book, 1973: 'Nota quod si manerium quod solet

esse de domi nico domini Regis datum fuerit alicui et postea

semel capta fuerit assisa noue uel mortis de consuetudine, iterum

capiantur assise propter consuetudinem.'



26. Britton, ii, 142.



27. If the lord brings an action against the tenant, ancient

demesne is no plea, Viner, Abr., Anc. Dem. G. 4. This was not

quite clear however, because ancient demesne is a good plea

whenever recovery in the action would make the land frank fee.



28. Y.B., M. 41 Edw. III, 22: 'Chold: Si le seigniour disseisie

son tenaunt il est en eleccion del tenant de user accion en le

court le seigniour ou en le court le roy' (Fitzherbert, Abr.

Aunc. Dem. 9). Liber assis. 41 Edw. III, pl. 7, f. 253:

'Wichingham: Si le tenant en auncien demesne fuit disseisi par le

seignior en auncien demesne il est a volunte le tenant de porter

lassise al comen ley ou en auncien demesne mes e contra si le

seignior soit disseisi par le tenant, il ne puit aillours aver

son recoverie que en le court le roy.'



29. Stoneleigh Register: 'Item anno regui Regis Eduardi filii

Regis Henrici vij Ricardus Peyto tulit breue de recto versus

abbatem de Stonle et alios de tenementis in Fynham in curia de

Stonle.' There are several instances in the Court Rolls of King's

Ripton, Hunts. See App. V.



30. Bract. Note-book, 834: 'Preceptum est vicecomiti quod

preciperet ballivis manerii Dom. Regis de Haueringes quod

recordari facerent in Curia Dom. Regis de H. loquelam que fuit in

eadem curia per breue Dom. Regis inter,' etc.: 652 is to the same

point. I must say, however, that I do not agree with Mr

Maitland's explanation, vol. II. p. 501, n. 4: 'John Fitz

Geoffrey (the defendant pleading ancient demesne) cannot answer

without the King. Tenet nomine alieno. Bract. f 200. The

privileges of tenants in ancient demesne are the King's

privileges.' John Fitz Geoffrey is the King's firmarius, and the

other defendants vouch him to warranty. After having pleaded to

the jurisdiction of the Court he puts in a second plea, 'salvo

predicto responso,' namely, that the tenement claimed is

encumbered by other and greater services than paying 15s. to hold

freely. This is clearly the farmer's point of view, and as such,

he cannot answer without the king. I lay stress on the point

because a person pleading ancient demesne, although not holding

nomine proprio in strict law, is compelled to answer without the

King in the manorial court and by the manorial writ.



31. I need not say that the 'little writ' did not lie against the

King himself. No writs did. Cp. Fleta, p. 4.



32. Y. B., 11/12 Edw. III, 325 (Rolls Ser.).



33. I shall have to speak of the constitution and usages of the

court in another chapter.



34. Actions on statutes could not be pleaded in ancient demesne

because, it was explained, the tenantry not being represented in

parliament, were no parties in framing the statute; Viner, Abr.

Anc. Dem. E. 19. Another explanation is given in Y. B., H. 8 Edw.

II, p. 265.



35. As a matter of course, any question as to whether a manor was

ancient demesne, and whether a particular tenement was within the

jurisdiction of it, could be decided only in the high courts.



36. Viner, Abr., I. 21.



37. Y. B., H. 3 Edw. III, 29: 'Caunt: Si le jugement soit une

foitz revers, la court auncien demesne ad perdu conusance de ce

ple a touts jours.'



38. Stoneleigh Reg.: 'Item si contingat quod error sit in

ludiciis eorum et pars ex eorum errore gravetur contra

consuetudines, pars gravata habebit breve Regis, ad faciendum

venire recordum et processum inter partes factos coram

justiciariis domini Regis de Banco; qui justiciarii inspecto

recordo et processu quod erratum est in processu iusto iudicio

emendabunt et ipsos sokemannos propter errorem et falsum iudicium

secundum quantitatem delicti ad multam condempnabunt.'



39. Bract. Note-book, 834: 'Et illi de curia qui veniunt quesiti,

si unquam tale factum fuit judicium in prefata curia, et quod

ostendant exemplum, et nichil inde ostendere possunt, nec

exemplum nec aliud.'



40. Y. B., 11/12 Edw. III, p. 325 (Rolls Ser.): 'Stonore: Dit qe

toutz les excepcions poent estre salve par usage del manoir

forspris un, cest a dire qe la ou il egarde seisine de terre par

defalte apres defalte la ou le tenant avait attourne en court qe

respoundi pur lui.' Cf. Y. B., H. 3 Edw. III, 29, and T. 3 Edw.

III, 29.



41. Bract. Note-book, pl. 834 and 1122 concern the royal manors

of Havering and Kingston.



42. I say against all men, because in the case of a stranger's

interfering with the privileged villain's rights, it was for him

to prove any exemption, e. g. conveyance by charter, which would

take the matter out of the range of the manorial court.



43. Britton, ii. 13: 'Et pur ceo qe nous voloms qe ils eyent tele

quiete, est ordeyne le bref de droit clos pledable par baillif

del maner de tort fet del un sokeman al autre, qe il tiegne les

plaintifs a droit selom les usages del maner par simples

enquestes.'



44. Natura brevium, f 4 b (ed. Pynson).



45. Stoneleigh Reg.: 'Si dominus a sokemanis tenentibus suis

exigat alias consuetudines quam facere consueuerunt quum manerium

fuit in manibus progenitorum Regis eos super hoc fatigando et

distringendo, prefati tenentes habent recuperare versus dominum

et balliuos suos per breve Regis quod vocatur Monstraverunt nobis

homines de soka de Stonle,' etc.



46. Viner, Abr. Anc. Dem. C2 3.



47. Fitzherbert, Abr. Monstraverunt, 5 (P. 19, Edw. III): 'Seton:

Cest un cas a par luy en cest breue de Monstrauerunt qe un purra

sue pur luy e tous les autres del ville tout ne soient pas nosmes

en le breve e par la suite de un tous les autres auront auantage

et cesty qe vient purra estre resceu e respondra par attourne pur

touts les auters coment qe unque ne resceu lour attournement;

issint qe cest suit ne breue nest semblable a auter.'



48. As it was the peasants had the greatest difficulty in

conducting these cases. In 1294 some Norfolk men tried to get

justice against Roger Bigod, the celebrated defender of English

liberties. They say that they have been pleading against him for

twenty years, and give very definite references. The jury

summoned declares in their favour. The earl opposes them by the

astonishing answer that they are not his tenants at all. It all

ends by the collapse of the plaintiffs for no apparent reason;

they do not come into court ultimately, and the jurors plead

guilty of having given a false verdict; see App. VII. In the case

of the men of Wycle against Mauger le Vavasseur, to which I have

referred several times, the trial dragged on for five years; the

court adjourned the case over and over again; the defendant did

not pay the slightest attention to prohibitions, but went on

ill-treating the tenantry. At last he carried off a verdict in

his favour; but the management of the trial certainly casts much

suspicion on it. Cf Placitorum Abbreviatio, 303.



49. Madox, History of the Exch., i. 723, c, d; 724, e; 725, f.



50. Bract. Note-book, pl. 1237: 'Homines prioris Sti Swithini...

questi fuerunt Dom. Regi.'



51. Madox, Exch., i. 725, u; the 'Monstraverunt' of the men of

King's Ripton quoted above on the question of tallage. This

matter of tallage could certainly be treated as an alteration of

services, and sent for trial to the Common Bench.



52. Exch. Memoranda, Q. R. 48/49 Henry III, m. 11. The position

of the castle of Bamborough was certainly a peculiar one at the

time. Cf Close Roll, 49 Henry III, m. 7, d.



53. Exch. Memoranda, Q. R. Trin. 20 Edw. I, m. 21, d. I give the

documents in full in App. VIII. The petitioners are not villains,

but they are tenants of base tenure. They evidently belong to the

class of villain socmen outside the ancient demesne, of which

more hereafter.



54. Placitorum Abbrev. 25: 'Consideratum est quod constabularius

de Windesore de quo homines de Bray questi fuerunt quod ipse

vexabat eos de serviciis et consuetudinibus indebitis et tallagia

insueta ab eis exigebat accipiat ab eis tallagia consueta et ipsi

homines alia servicia et consuetudines quas facere solent

faciant.' (Pasch. et Trin., I John.)



55. Madox, Exch. I. 41 I, U: 'Homines de Branton reddunt compotum

de x libris, ut Robertus de Sachoill eis non distringat ad

faciendum ei alias consuetudines quam Regi facere consueverunt

dum fuerunt in manu sua.' (Pipe Roll 13 Jo., 7, 10 b, Devenesc).



56. Dugdale, Monasticon. v. 443; Stonleigh Reg. f 14 b. Cf Court

Rolls of Ledecumbe Regis (Chapter House, County Bags, Berks, A.

3): 'Anno domini MCCLXVIII, solverunt homines de Ledecumbe Regis

C. sol. ad scaccarium domini Regis, pro redditu domini Regis et

predicti homines habent residuum in custodia sua excepta porcione

prioris Montis Acuti de tempore Suo et porcione prioris de

Bermundseye de tempore suo.' The manor had been let in fee farm

to the monks of Cluny, who demised it to the Prior of Montacute,

who in his turn let it to the Prior of Bermondsey.



57. Stoneleigh Reg. f 15 a: 'Totam sokam de Stonleya et omnes

redditus et consuetudines et rectitudines quas Henricus rex pater

noster ibi habuit salua regali justicia nostra. Uigore quarum

chartarum prefatus Abbas et conventus habent et possident totam

sokam de Stonle que quondam pertinuit ad le Bury (sic) in dicta

soka existens edificatum, ubi quidam comes quondam de licencia

Regis moram traxit. Qui locus nune edificiis Carens vocatur le

Burystede iuxta Crulefeld prout fossatis includitur, et est locus

nemorosus.'



58. Stoneleigh Reg. f 13 a: 'Isti duo tenent (burgagia in

Warrwick) per seruicium sustinendi unum plumbum in manerio de

Stonle competens monasterio Regis.'



59. Placita de Quo Warranto, 778: 'Item clamat quod Ballivus dom.

Regis in manerio de Stonleye nullam faciet districtionem seu

attachiamenta sine presencia Ballivi Abbatis. '



60. See App. VI.



61. Stoneleigh Reg. 13 a: 'W. W. tenet unum burgagium per

seruicium inveniendi domino regi seniori domino de Stonle quartam

partem unius tripodis.'



62. King's Ripton Court Rolls, Augment. Off. Rolls, xxiii. 94, m.

10: 'Dicta Matildis optulit se versus Margaretam Greylaund de

placito dotis, que non venit. Ideo preceptum est capere in manum

domini Regis medietatem mesuagii etc. -- pro defectu ipsius

Margarete. Eadem Matildis optulit se uersus Willelmum vicarium

qui non uenit. Ideo preceptum est capere in manum domini Regis

medietatem quinque acrarum terre etc. (Curia de Riptone Regis die

Lune in festo sanctorum Protessi et Marciniani anno [r. r. E.

xxiv. et J. abb. x]); m. 10, d. -- Qui venit et quantum ad aliam

acram dicit, quod non est tenens set quod Abbas seysiuit illam in

manum suam. (Curia -- in festo Assumpcionis -- anno supra

dicto).' In the first case the seizure corresponds to the 'cape

in manum' of a freehold. As there could be no such thing in the

caSe of villainage, and the procedural seizure was resumption by

the lord, the point is worth notice and may be explained by the

King's private right still lingering about the manor. The last

case is one of escheat or forfeiture.



63. Stoneleigh Reg. 75 v: 'Item si aliquis deforciatur de

tenemento suo et tulerit breve Regis clausum balliuis manerii

versus deforciantes, dictum breve non debet frangi nisi in

curia.'



64. Natura brevium, 13: 'Balliuis suis.'



65. Britton, i. 221: 'Rois aussi ne porrount rien aliener les

dreits de lour coroune ne de lour reaute, qe ne soit repellable

par lour successours.'



66. Stoneleigh Reg. 30: 'Nos attendentes, quod huiusmodi

alienaciones et consuetudinum mutaciones eciam in nostri et

heredum nostrorum preiudi. cium et exheredacionem cedere possent,

si manerium illud in manus nostras aliquo casu deuenerit

sustinere nolumus sicut nec debemus manerium illud aut ea que ad

illud pertinent aliter immutari quam esse solebant temporibus

predictis. '



67. The writs are directed sometimes to the bailiffs of the

Archbishop of Canterbury and of the Duke of Albemarle, who had

the manor in custody for King Richard II, but in the twenty-third

year they are inscribed to the King's bailiffs. (Augmentation

Court Rolls, xiv. 38). As to the trial mentioned in the text see

App. IX.



68. Stoneleigh Reg. II a: 'Precipio tibi quod sine dilacione

deliberes Abbati de Stonleia omnes terras et tenuras quas ego

dedi et carta mea confirmaui. Et de terra quam rustici uersus

calumpniantur et quam ego ei dedi et concessi, inquire si rectum

in ea habuerunt et si rectum in ea habent, dona eis rusticis

alibi in terra mea excambium ad valenciam.'



69. Bracton, f 209: 'Ad quemcumque manerium peruenerit.'



70. Madox. Firma Burgi, 54; Pipe Rolls, passim. Cf Rot. Cur.

Regis Ric., p. 15: 'Homines de Kingestone-c. sol.... pro respectu

tenendi villam suam ad eandem firmam quam reddere solebant

tempore Henrici Regis.'



71. Madox, Exch. 1437, z: 'Homines de Lechton x marcas pro

habenda inquisicione per proxima halimota et per legales milites

et alios homines de visneto, quas consuetudines ipsi fecerunt

tempore Henrici Regis Patris.' (Pipe Roll. 4 John) Cf. 442, a:

'Homines de Stanleya reddunt compotum de uno palefrido, ut

inquiratur per sacramentum legalium hominum, quas consuetudines

et quae servitia homines de manerio de Stanleia facere

consueverunt Regi Henrico patri Ricardi Regis dum essent in manu

sua.' (Pipe Roll, 9 John.)



72. Y. B., Trin., 49 E. III, pl. 8 (Fitzherbert, Abr. Monstrav.

4): 'Han. mist auant record de Domesday qui parla ut supra; --

Terra sancti Stephani en le title qui parla de ceo maner que il

fuit en Sa maine. Et auxi il mist auant chartre le Roy que ore

est, par quel le roy reherse quil ave viewe la chartre le roy

Henri le primer, et reherce tout le chartre, et ceo chartre

voilet que Henri aue viewe par ceo parolle inspeximus la chartre

le roy William Conquerour qui aue done graunte e confirme mesme

le manor a un Henri Butle, a luy, et a ces heirs a ceo iour, quel

chartre issint volent inspeximus cartam domini Edwardi Regis

Anglie issint par le recorde et par les chartres est expressement

reherce par le roy qui ore est, que William Conquerour fuit en

possession de ceo maner, Seinct Edward auxint, en quel cas ceo

serra aiudge auncient demesne tantamont come si la terre ust

estre en la main Seint Edward par expresse parolx en le Domesday.

Belknap: Le comen fesance de chartres est de faire parolle en le

chartre dedimus concessimus et confirmauimus et uncore le chartre

est bon assets al part, mesque le roy nauer riens a ceo temps,

issint que riens passe par ceo paroll dedimus mes il aUer par

parole de confermement, issint que il nest my proue par ce

chartre que ils auoient la possession, pur ceo que les chartres

poient estre effectuels a auter entent, scilicet, en nature de

confermement, et auxi ces chartres fait par Seint E. et W.

Conquerour ne sont my monstres a ore pur record, issint que

mesque il furent monstre, et auxi purroit estre proue que le

maner fuit en lour possession, nous ne puissomus pas aiudger la

terre auncien demesne, pur ceo que auncien demesne sera aiudge

par le liuer de domesday qui est de record, et nemy en autre

maner. Et puis les plaintifs fuerent nonsues.'



73. Fitzherbert, Abr. Cause de remover ple, 18 (Y. B., M., 21

Edw. III): 'Wilby: Il conuient que il count en le monstrauerunt

que il luy distreint pur auters customes que ses auncestres ne

fecerunt en temps W. Conquerour, cas le monstrauerunt ne gist pas

forsque en cas ou plusiours services sont demandez que ces

auncestres ne solent faire en cel temps.'



74. Coram Rege, Tr. 3 Edw. I, m. 14, d: 'Et unde predicti homines

(de Kyngesripton) queruntur quod temporibus Cnout regis quo

manerium illud fuit in manu dicti antecessoris sui tenuerunt

tenementa sua per seruicia subscripta, videlicet reddendi pro

qualibet virgata terre 5 solidos, etc. Et omnes antecessores sui

tenuissent tenementa sua per predicta seruicia usque ad

conquestum Anglie, et a conquestu usque ad tempus regis Henrici

aui regis Johannis aui domini regis nunc, usque ad tempus

cuiusdam Abbatis de Rameseye Roberti Dogge nomine qui tempore

Henrici Regis distrinxit antecessores suos ad dandum relevium pro

voluntate sua, etc. Et Abbas dicit quod non debet eis ad hoc

breue respondere, quia desicut in narracione Sua non faciunt

mencionem quod ipsi extitissent in tali statu in quo fuerunt

tempore regis Knout, quem statum ipsi clamant habere, tempore

aliorum regum de quo memoria haberi possit nec de quo breue de

recto currit nec aliqua verificacio per patriam fieri possit....

Et Reginaldus et alii bene cognoscunt quod ipse Abbas et

predecessores sui exstiterunt in seysina percipiendi ab ipsis et

antecessoribus suis predicta seruicia indebita a tempore predicti

Henrici regis. Set desicut istud breue quod conceditur in fauorem

dominicorum domini Regis non habet prescriptionem temporis,

petunt judicium si [racione?] aliclljus longiqui termini debeant

ab actione excludi sua.'



75. Y. B., M., 15 Edw. II, p. 455: 'Bereford: Coment puit cest

brief vous servir la ou il (the defendant) dist qe luy et ces

predecessors ont este de vous et de vos auncestres (seisi) de

tout temps come, etc., et vos ont taille, etc. Devoms nous

enguerre (enquerre corr.) si vos feistes touz services en temps

le Roy St. Edward, ou non de temps que vos avez pris title?

Devon: Sir navyl (nanyl corr.), mais nous disons qe touz les

tenants qui tindrent en temps St. Edward tinderent, etc. (par

certains services)... tanqe a ore xv ans devant le brief purchace

etc. e ceo puit home enquere.'



76. Y. B., 21/22 Edw. I, 499 et sqq.



77. Coram Rege, Pasch. 1 Edw. II, m. 26: 'Postquam idem manerium

ad manus antecessorum predicti Maugeri deuenit usque ad tempus

memorie, videlicet temporibus regum Ricardi, Johannis et statum

illum toto tempore predicto pacifice continuaverunt et

habuerunt.' Coram Rege, M. 5 Edw. II, m. 77: 'Unde queruntur quod

cum ipsi homines et eorum antecessores tempore Regum Anglie

progenitorum domini Regis nunc, videlicet tempore Regis Willelmi

Conquestoris et Willelmi Regis filii sui et eciam tempore Regis

Henrici primi solebant tenere terras suas per quaedam certa

seruicia videlicet,' etc.



78. I will here cite Bract. Note-book, pl. 1237, as an instance,

although there is hardly any call for quotation on this point.



79. Law of Copyhold, 8. Cf the same author's Tenures in Kent,

182.



80. Blackstone, Law Tracts, ii., especially pp. 128, 129.



81. Bracton: 'liberi de condicione... tenentes villenagium.'

Britton: 'hommes de franc saunc.'



82. Stoneleigh Reg., 75: 'Item si quis de voluntate et assensu

domini facto fine cum domino voluerit dare tenementum suum ad

opus alicuius, ueniet in curia cum virga et sursum reddet

huiusmodi tenementum ad manum domini sine carta ad opus ementis

vel cui datur et ballivus domini habitis prius herietis et aliis

de iure domino debitis dictum tenementum emptori seu cui dabitur

et heredibus suis secundum consuetudinem manerii habendum et

tenendum liberabit in (cum corr.?) virga. Et dictus recipiens

tunc faciet finein cum domino prout possunt conuenire.... Item

extraneus non debet vocari ad warantum in placito terre in curia

de Stonle quia sokemanni non possunt feoffare alios per cartas

cum ipsi nullas habeant de rege. Set si quos feoffauerint de

licencia domini sine carta, ipsos feoffant secundum consuetudinem

manerii prout continetur in rotulo curie de anno xx Regis Edwardi

filii Regis Edwardi in placito terre inter,' etc.



83. Placitorum Abbrev. 233, Berks. Cf Britton, i. 287, note c.



84. Bracton, f 7.



85. Jurate et Assise, 45 Henry III, Placitorum Abbr., p. 150: 'Et

Galfridus de Praule bene cognoscit quod predictum manerium est

antiquum dominicum Dom. Regis set dicit quod predictum tenementum

est liberum tenementum ita quod assisa debet inde fieri.... Dicit

enim quod ipse feofatus est de predicto tenemento de quodam

Willelmo Harold per cartam suam quam profert.... Et juratores

quesiti si antecessores ejusdem Willelmi feofati fuerunt per

cartam vel si aliquis de tenura illa unquam placitaverunt per

diversa brevia vel non, dicunt quod non recolunt.'



86. Stoneleigh Reg., 12: 'Fuerunt eciam tunc quatuor natiui siue

serui in le lone quorum quilibet nouum mesuagium et unum

quartronum terre cum pertinenciis per seruicia subscripta

videlicet leuando furcas, etc.... et debebant... redimere

sanguinem suum et dare auxilium domino ad festum Sti. Michaelis

scilicet ayde et facere braseum Domini et alia seruicia

seruilia.' As to some details, see Dugdale, Antiquities of

Warwickshire, i. 176.



87. Coram Rege, Pasch. I Edw. II, m. 26. '(Maugerus) defendit vim

et injuriam quando, etc. Et dicit quod qualitercunque iidem

homines asserant se et antecessores suos tenentes, etc. certa

seruicia dominis de Wycle antecessoribus ipsius Maugeri et sibi

fecisse et facere debere, quod omnes antecessores sui domini de

eodem manerio extiterunt seisiti de predictis hominibus et eorum

antecessoribus tenentibus tenementa quae ipsi modo tenent ibidem

ut de uillanis suis taillabilibus alto et basso ad voluntatem

ipsorum dominorum et redempcionem sanguinis et alia villana

seruicia et incerta et villanas consuetudines faciendo a tempore

quo non extat memoria.... Et predicti homines dicunt quod ipsi

sunt tenentes de antiquo dominico, etc., prout curie satis liquet

et quod omnes tenentes in dominico Regis per certa seruicia et

certas consuetudines tenent et tenere debent, quidam per maiora

et quidam per minora secundum consuetudinem, set semper per

certa,' etc. Coram Rege, Mich. 5 Edw. II, m. 77, v: 'Nec dedici

potest quia tenentes de antiquo dominico certa seruicia et certas

consuetudines tenentur facere et non ad voluntatem dominorum.'



88. Y. B., M., 15 Edw. II, p. 455: 'Bouser: Auxint bien sont

tenans enauncien demesne ascuns vileins et ascuns autres come

ailleurs et les sokemans plederent par le petit brief de droit et

les vileyns nient. Herle: Il semble que assets est il traverse de

votre brief, car vous dites que vous tenez par certeyn service...

et il dit que vous estes Son vilein et que il et ses predecessors

ont este seisiz de tailler vous et vos auncestres haut et bas,

etc. Et stetit verificare.' Cf Bract. Note-book, pl. 1230.



89. Bracton, 209: 'Item est manerium domini regis et dominicum in

manerio, et sic plura genera hominum in manerio, vel quia ab

initio vel quia mutato villenagio.' The meaning of this badly

worded passage is made clearer by a comparison with f 7: 'In

dominico domini regis plura sunt genera hominum; sunt enim ibi

servi sive nativi ante conquestum, in conquestu, et post, et

tenent villenagia et per villana servitia et incerta qui usque in

hodiernum diem villanas faciunt consuetudines et incertas et

quicquid eis preceptum fuerit (dum tamen licitum et honestum)....

Est etiam aliud genus hominum in maneriis domini regis, et tenent

de dominico et per easdem consuetudines et servitia villana, per

quae supradicti (villani socmanni) et non in villenagio, nec sunt

servi nec fuerunt in conquestu, ut primi, sed per quandam

conventionem quam cum dominis fecerunt.' Cf Elton, Tenures of

Kent, 180.



90. Fitzherbert, Abr. Monstrav. 3 (Pasch. 41 Edw. III). 'Kirt:

Les tenements queux ils teignent fuerent en auncien temps entre

les maines les villeins queux deuirrent sans heire perque les

tenements fuerent seisies en maine le seigneur et puis le

senescal le seigneur lessa mesme ceux terres par rolle a mesme

ceux ore tenants a tener a volunte del seigneur fesaunt certain

services; issi nt ne sont ils forsque tenants a volunte le

seigneur.'



91. Natura Brevium, f 105. Cf 16.



92. Y. B., 21/22 Edw. I, p. 499: 'Treis maners de gents.'



93. Bracton, f. 209: Fitzherbert, Monstrav. 3 (Pasch. 41 Edw.

III): 'Belknap: Mesmes les tenementz en auncien temps fuerent en

mains le petit sokmans, et eux fierent teux services comme gents

de petits sokemans fierent en auncien temps et eux les teignent

comme gents de petit sokmans.'



94. Stoneleigh Reg., 32: 'Et quod in eodem manerio sunt diuerse

tenure secundum consuetudinem manerii illius totis temporibus

retroactis usitatam, videlicet quidam tenentes eiusdem manerii

tenent terras et tenementa sua in sokemanria de feodo et

hereditate de qua quidem tenura talis habetur et omni tempore

habebatur consuetudo, videlicet quod quando aliquis tenens

eiusdem tenure terram suam alicui alienare uoluerit, veniet in

curiam coram ipso Abbate vel eius senescallo et per uirgam sursum

reddat in manum domini terram sic alienandam.... Et si aliquis

terram aliquam huiusmodi tenure infra manerium predictum per

cartam uel sine carta absque licentia dicti Abbatis alienauerit

aliter quam per sursum reddicionem in curia in forma predicta,

quod terra sic extra curiam alienata domino dicti manerii erit

forisfacta in perpetuum. Dicunt eciam quod quidam sullt tenentes

eiusdem manerii ad voluntatem eiusdem Abbatis. Et si quis

eorundem tenencium terram sic ad voluntatem tentam alienauerit in

feodo, quod liceat dicto Abbati terram illam intrare et illam

tanquam sibi forisfactam sibi in perpetuum retinere.'



95. A comparison of the data in the Stoneleigh Register and in

the Roll is given in App. VI. Cf Bract. Note-book, pl. 834:

'Legales homines de manerio de Havering.'



96. Coram Rege, Mich. 5 Edw. I, m. 77: '(Juratores) quesiti si

predicti Margeria et alii et omnes antecessores a tempore quo non

extat memoria terras suas successiue de heredibus in heredes

tenuerint uel ipsi aut aliquis antecessorum suorum sunt vel

fuerint aduenticii, dicunt quod ignorant.'



97. Court Rolls of King's Ripton, Augment. off. xxiii. 94, m. 7:

'Memorandum quod Concessum est Rogero de Kenlowe habendum

introitum ad Caterinam filiam Thome prepositi cum uno quarterio

terre in villa de Ryptone Regis pro duabus solidis in gersuma,

ita tamen quod mortua dicta Katerina ille qui propinquior est

heres de sanguine predicte Katerine gersumabit dictum quarterium

terre secundum consuetudinem manerii et ville.' A. r. r. Edw.

xxiii, m. 8, v: 'Nicholaus de Aula reddit sursum unam dimidiam

acram terre ad opus Willelmi ad portam de Broucton.... Et

preceptum preposito respondere de exitibus eiusdem terre quia est

extraneus... Johannes Arnold reddit sursum duas rodas terre ad

opus Hugonis Palmeri... Et preceptum est quod ponatur in

seysinam, quia est de sanguine de Riptone Regis.'



98. Court Rolls of King's Ripton, Augment. Off. xxiii. 94, m. 15:

'Curia de Kingsripton tenta die Jovis proxima post translacionem

St Benedicti anno r. r. E. xxix et dom. Joh. [abb. xv. Venit]

Willelmus fil. Thome Unfroy de Kingesripton et reddidit sursum in

manibus senescalli totum jus quod [habuit] in illis tribus acris

terre in campis de Kingesriptone quondam Willelmi capellani de

eadem [villa ad opus filiorum] Rogeri de Kellawe extranei

legitime procreatorum de Katerina filia Thome prepositi que est

de con[dicione sokemannorum?] bondorum de Kingesripton....

Rogerus de Kellawe extraneus qui se maritauit cuidam Katerine

filie Thome prepositi de Kingesripton que est de nacione et

condicione eiusdem ville venit et petiit in curia nomine filiorum

suorum ex legitimo matrimonio exeuntium de corpore prefate

Katerine illas vi acras terre.... (Juratores dicunt) quod nichil

inde sciunt nec aliquid super isto articulo presentare volunt ad

presens. Et sic infecto negocio maximo contemptu domini et

balliuorum suorum extra curiam recesserunt. Et ideo preceptum est

balliuis quod die in... faciant de eisdem juratis xl solidos ad

opus domini.'



99. Stoneleigh Reg., 30 (Edward II injunction): 'Et quidam

forinseci qui sokemanni non sunt auctoritate Sua propria et per

negligenciam dicti Abbatis et conuentus, ut dicitur, a quibusdam

sokemannorum illorum quasdam terras et tenementa alienaverunt.

Nos igitur super premissis plenius certiorari uolentes

assignavimus vos una cum his, quos vobis associaveritis, ad

inquirendum qui sokemanni huiusmodi terras et tenementa ibidem

alienauerunt huiusmodi forinsecis aut extrinsecis et quibus,'

etc. Cf the Statute of I Richard II, Stat. I. cap. 6. It was

altogether a dangerous transaction for the socmen, because they

were risking their privileges thereby. It must have been

lucrative.



100. Placitorum Abbrev., p. 270 (Coram Rege, Mich. 7/8 Edw. I):

'Et eciam comperto in libro de Domesday quod non fit aliqua

mencio de sokemannis set tantummodo de villanis et servis et

eciam comperto per inquisicionem quod multi eorum sunt adventicii

quibus tenementa sua tradita fuerunt ad voluntatem dominorum

suorum... consideraverunt quod predictus Galfridus eat inde sine

die et quod predicti homines teneant tenementa predicta in

predicto manerio per servilia servicia si voluerint, salvo statu

corporum suorum, et quod de cetero non possunt clamare aliquod

certum statum et sint in misericordia pro falso clameo.'



101. Bract. Note-book, pl. 1227.



102. Bracton, f. 7.



103. Dialogus de Scaccario, i. 10: 'Post regni conquisitionem,

post justam rebellium subversionem, cum rex ipse regisque

proceres loca nova perlustrarent, facta est inquisitio diligens,

qui fuerint qui contra regem in bello dimicantes per fugam Se

salvaverint. His omnibus et item haeredibus eorum qui in bello

occubuerunt, spes omnis terrarum et fundorum atque redituum, quos

ante possederant, praeclusa est; magnum namque reputabant frui

vitae beneficio sub inimicis. Verum qui vocati ad bellum nec dum

convenerant, vel familiaribus vel quibuslibet necessariis

occupati negotiis non interfuerant, cum tractu temporis devotis

obsequiis gratiam dominorum possedissent, sine spe successionis,

sibi tantum pro voluptate (voluntate?) tamen dominorum possidere

coeperunt. Succedente vero tempore cum dominis suis odiosi passim

a possessionibus pellerentur, nec esset qui ablata restitueret,

communis indigenarum ad regem pervenit querimonia, quasi sic

omnibus exosi et rebus spoliati ad alienigenas transire

cogerentur. Communicato tandem super his consilio, decretum est,

ut quod a dominis suis exigentibus meritis interveniente pactione

legitima poterant obtinere, illis inviolabili jure concederentur;

ceterum autem nomine successionis a temporibus subactae gentis

nihil sibi vendicarent.'



104. Stoneleigh Reg., 4 a: 'Que quidem maneria existencia in

possessione et manu domini regis Edwardi per universum regnum

vocantur antiquumn dominicum corone regis Anglie prout in libro

de Domesdav continetur.'



105. 'Loquebantur de tempore Sti Edwardi Regis coram W. de

Wilton.'



106. The men of King's Ripton.



107. I do not think there is any ground for the suggestion thrown

out by M. Kovalevsky in the Law Quarterly, iv. p. 271, namely,

that the law of ancient demesne was imported from Normandy.

Whatever the position of the villains was in the Duchy, Norman

influence in England made for subjection, because it was the

influence of conquest. It must be remembered that in a sense the

feudal law of England was the hardest of all in Western Europe,

and this on account of the invasion.



108. Stubbs, Const. Hist. I. 454: 'In those estates, which, when

they had been held by the crown since the reign of Edward the

Confessor, bore the title of manors in ancient demesne, very much

of the ancient popular process had been preserved without any

change, and to the present day some customs are maintained in

them which recall the most primitive institutions.' I shall have

to speak about the mode of holding the courts in another chapter.



Chapter 4



Legal Aspect of Villainage. Conclusions



    I have been trying to make out what the theories of the

lawyers were with regard to villainage in its divers

ramifications. Were we to consider this legal part of the subject

merely as a sort of crust superposed artificially over the

reality of social facts, we should have to break through the

crust in order to get at the reality. But, of course, the law

regulating social conditions is not merely an external

superstructure, but as to social facts is both an influence and a

consequence. In one sense it is a most valuable product of the

forces at play in the history of society, most valuable just by

reason of the requirements of its formalism and of those

theoretical tendencies which give a very definite even if a

somewhat distorted shape to the social processes which come

within its sphere of action.

    The formal character of legal theory is not only important

because it puts things into order and shape; it suggests a

peculiar and efficient method of treating the historical

questions connected with law. The legal intellect is by its

calling and nature always engaged in analysing complex cases into

constitutive elements, and bringing these elements under the

direction of principles. It is constantly struggling with the

confusing variety of life, and from the historian's point of view

it is most interesting when it succumbs in the struggle. There is

no law, however subtle and comprehensive, which does not exhibit

on its logical surface seams and scars, testifying to the

incomplete fusing together of doctrines that cannot be brought

under the cover of one principle. And so a dialectic examination

of legal forms which makes manifest the contradictions and

confused notions they contain actually helps us to an insight

into the historical stratification of ideas and facts, a

stratification which cannot be abolished however much lawyers may

crave for unity and logic.

    In the particular case under discussion medieval law is

especially rich in such historical clues. The law writers are

trying hard to give a construction of villainage on the basis of

the Roman doctrine of slavery, but their fabric gives way at

every point. It would be hardly a fair description to say that we

find many survivals of an older state of things and many

indications of a new development. Everything seems in a state of

vacillation and fermentation during the thirteenth century. As to

the origin of the servile status the law of bastards gets

inverted; in the case of matrimony the father-rule is driving the

mother-rule from the ground; the influence of prescription is

admitted by some lawyers and rejected by others. As to the means

whereby persons may issue out of that condition, the views of

Glanville and Bracton are diametrically opposed, and there are

still traces in practice of the notion that a villain cannot buy

his freedom and that he cannot be manumitted by the lord himself

in regard to third persons. In their treatment of services in

their reference to status the courts apply the two different

tests of certainty and of kind. In their treatment of tenure they

still hesitate between a complete denial of protection to

villainage and the recognition of it as a mode of holding which

is protected by legal remedies. And even when the chief lines are

definitely drawn they only disclose fundamental contradictions in

all their crudeness.

    In civil law, villains are disabled against their lords but

evenly watched against strangers; even against a lord legal

protection is lingering in the form of an action upon covenant

and in the notion that the villain's wainage should be secure. In

criminal and in police law villains are treated substantially as

free persons: they have even a share, although a subordinate one,

in the organisation of justice. The procedure in questions of

status is characterised by outrageous privileges given to the

lord against a man in 'a villain nest,' and by distinct favour

shown to those out of the immediate range of action of the lord.

The law is quite as much against giving facilities to prove a

man's servitude as it is against granting that man any rights

when once his servitude has been established. The reconciliation

of all these contradictions and anomalies cannot be attempted on

dogmatic grounds. The law of villainage must not be constructed

either on the assumption of slavery, Or on that of liberty, or on

that of colonatus or ascription. It contains elements from each

of these three conditions, and it must be explained historically.

    The material hitherto collected and discussed enables us to

distinguish different layers in its formation. To begin with, the

influence of lawyers must be taken into account. This is at once

to be seen in the treatment of distinctions and divisions. The

Common Law, as it was forming itself in the King's Court,

certainly went far to smoothe down the peculiarities of local

custom. Even when such peculiarities were legally recognised, as

in the case of ancient demesne, the control and still more the

example of the Common Law Courts was making for simplification

and reducing them wore or less to a generally accepted standard.

The influence of the lawyers was exactly similar in regard to

subdivisions on the vertical plane (if I may use the expression):

for these varieties of dependence get fused into general

servitude, and in this way classes widely different in their

historical development are brought together under the same name.

The other side of this process of simplification is shown where

legal theory hardens and deepens the divisions it acknowledges.

In this way the chasm between liberty and servitude increases as

the notion of servitude gets broader. In order to get sharp

boundaries and clear definitions to go by, the lawyers are

actually driven to drop such traits of legal relations as are

difficult to manage with precision, however great their material

importance, and to give their whole attention to facts capable of

being treated clearly. This tendency may account for the ultimate

victory of the quantitative test of servitude over the

qualitative one, or to put it more plainly, of the test of

certainty of services over the discussion of kind of services.

Altogether the tendency towards an artificial crystallisation of

the law cannot be overlooked.

    In the work of simplifying conditions artificially the

lawyers had several strong reagents at their disposal. The mighty

influence of Roman law has been often noticed, and there can be

no doubt that it was brought to bear on our subject to the

prejudice of the peasantry and to the extinction of their

independent rights. It would not have been so strong if many

features of the vernacular law had not been brought half way to

meet it. Norman rules, it is well known, exercised a very potent

action on the forms of procedure;(1*) but the substantive law of

status was treated very differently in Normandy and in England,

and it is not the influx of Norman notions which is important in

our case, but the impetus given by them to the development of the

King's Courts. This development, though connected with the

practice of the Duchy, cannot be described simply or primarily as

Norman. Once the leaven had been communicated, English lawyers

did their own work with great independence as well as ingenuity

of thought, and the decision of the King's Court was certainly a

great force. I need not point out again to what extent the law

was fashioned by the writ procedure, but I would here recall to

attention the main fact, that the opposition between 'free' and

'unfree' rested chiefly on the point of being protected or not

being protected by the jurisdiction of the King's Court.

    If we examine the action of lawyers as a whole, in order to

trace out, as it were, its social bias, we must come to the

conclusion that it was exercised first in one direction and then

in the opposite one. The refusal of jurisdiction may stand as the

central fact in the movement in favour of servitude, although

that movement may be illustrated almost in every department, even

if one omits to take into account what may be mere instances of

bad temper or gross partiality. But the wave begins to rise high

in favour of liberty even in the thirteenth century. It does not

need great perspicuity to notice that, apart from any progress in

morals or ideas, apart from any growth of humanitarian notions,

the law was carried in this direction by that development of the

State which lays a claim to and upon its citizens, and by that

development of social intercourse which substitutes agreement for

bondage. Is it strange that the social evolution, as observed in

this particular curve, does not appear as a continuous crescendo,

but as a wavy motion? I do not think it can be strange, if one

reflects that the period under discussion embraces both the

growth and the decay of feudalism, embraces, that is, the growth

of the principle of territorial power on the ruins of the tribal

system and also the disappearance of that principle before the

growing influence of the State.

    Indirectly we have had to consider the influence of

feudalism, as it was transmitted through the action of its

lawyers. But it may be viewed in its direct consequences, which

are as manifest as they are important. In England, feudalism in

its definite shape is bound up with conquest.(2*) and it is well

known that, though very much hampered on the political side by

the royal power, it was exceptionally complete on the side of

private law by reason of its sudden, artificial, and enforced

introduction. One of the most important results of conquest from

this point of view was certainly the systematic way in which the

subjection of the peasantry was worked out. If we look for

comparison to France as the next neighbour of England and a

country which has influenced England, we shall find the same

elements at work, but they combine in a variety of modes

according to provincial and local peculiarities. Although the

political power of the French baron is so much greater than that

of an English lord, the roturier often keeps his distance from

the serf better than was the case in England. In France

everything depends upon the changing equilibrium of local forces

and circumstances. In England the Norman Conquest produced a

compact estate of aristocracy instead of the magnates of the

continent, each of whom was strong or weak according to the

circumstances of his own particular case; it produced Common Law

and the King's courts of Common Law; and it reduced the peasantry

to something like uniform condition by surrounding the liberi et

legales homines with every kind of privilege. The national

colouring given by the Dialogus de Scaccario to the social

question of the time is not without meaning in this light: -- the

peasants may be regarded as the remnant of a conquered race, or

as the issue of rebels who have forfeited their rights.

    The feudal system once established produced certain effects

quite apart from the Conquest, effects which flowed from its own

inherent properties. The Conquest had cast free and unfree

peasantry together into the one mould of villainage; feudalism

prevented villainage from lapsing into slavery. I have shown in

detail how the manor gives a peculiar turn to personal

subjection. Its action is perceivable in the treatment of the

origin of the servile status. The villain, however near being a

chattel, cannot be devised by will because he is considered as an

annex to the free tenement of the lord. The connexion with a

manor becomes the chief means of establishing and proving seisin

of the villain. On the other hand, in the trial of status,

manorial organisation led to the sharp distinction between

persons in the power of the lord and out of it. This fact touches

the very essence of the case. The more powerful the manor became,

the less possible was it to work out subjection on the lines of

personal slavery. Without entering into the economic part of the

question for the present, merely from the legal point of view it

was a necessary consequence of the rise of a local and

territorial power that the working people under. Its sway were

subjected by means of its territorial organisation and within its

limited sphere of local action. Of course, the State upheld some

of the lord's rights even outside the limits of the manor, but

these were only a pale reflection of what took place within the

manor, and they were more difficult to enforce in proportion as

the barriers between the manors rose higher; it became very

difficult for one lord to reclaim runaways who were lying within

the manor of another lord.

    If we remove those strata of the law of villainage which owe

their origin to the action of the feudal system and to the action

of the State, which rises on the ruins of the feudal system, we

come upon remnants of the pre-feudal condition. They are by no

means few or unimportant, and it is rather a wonder that so much

should be preserved notwithstanding the systematic work of

conquest, feudalism, and State. When I speak of pre-feudal

condition I do not mean to say, of course, that feudalism had not

been in the course of formation before the Norman Conquest. I

merely wish to oppose a social order grounded on feudalism to a

social order which was only preparing for it and developing on a

different basis. The Conquest brought together the free and

unfree. Our survivals of the state of things before the Conquest

group themselves naturally in one direction, they are

manifestations of the free element which went into the

constitution of villainage. It is not strange that it should be

so, because the servile element predominated in those parts of

the law which had got the upper hand and the official

recognition. A trait which goes further than the accepted law in

the direction of slavery is the difficulties which are put by

Glanville in the way of manumission. His statement practically

amounts to a denial of the possibility of manumission, and such a

denial we cannot accept. His way of treating the question may

possibly be explained by old notions as to the inability of a

master to put a slave by a mere act of his will on the same level

with free men.

    However this may be, our survivals arrange themselves with

this single possible exception in the direction of freedom.

Perhaps such facts as the villain's capacity to take legal action

against third persons, and his position in the criminal and

police law, ought not to be called survivals. They are certain

sides of the subject. They are indissolubly allied to such

features of the civil law as the occasional recognition of

villainage as a protected tenure, and the villain's admitted

standing against the lord when the lord had bound himself by

covenant. In the light of these facts villainage assumes an

entirely different aspect from that which legal theory tries to

give it. Procedural disability comes to the fore instead of

personal debasement. A villain is to a great extent in the power

of his lord, not because he is his chattel, but because the

courts refuse him an action against the lord. He may have rights

recognised by morality and by custom, but he has no means to

enforce them; and he has no means to enforce them because

feudalism disables the State and prevents it from interfering.

The political root of the whole growth becomes apparent, and it

is quite clear, on the one hand, that liberation will depend to a

great extent on the strengthening of the State; and, on the other

hand, that one must look for the origins of enslavement to the

political conditions before and after the Conquest.

    One undoubtedly encounters difficulties in tracing and

grouping facts with regard to those elements of freedom which

appear in the law of villainage. Sometimes it may not be easy to

ascertain whether a particular trait must be connected with legal

progress making towards modern times, or with the remnants of

archaic institutions. As a matter of fact, however, it will be

found that, save in very few cases, we possess indications to

show us which way we ought to look.

    Another difficulty arises from the fact that the law of this

period was fashioned by kings of French origin and lawyers of

Norman training. What share is to be assigned to their formal

influence? and what share comes from that old stock of ideas and

facts which they could not or would not destroy? We may hesitate

as to details in this respect. It is possible that the famous

paragraph of the so-called Laws of William the Conqueror,

prescribing in general terms that peasants ought not to be taken

from the land or subjected to exactions,(3*) is an insertion of

the Norman period, although the great majority of these Laws are

Saxon gleanings. It is likely that the notion of wainage was

worked out under the influence of Norman ideas; the name seems to

show it, and perhaps yet more the fact that the plough was

specially privileged in the duchy. It is to be assumed that the

king, not because he was a Norman but because he was a king, was

interested in the welfare of subjects on whose back the whole

structure of his realm was resting. But the influence of the

strangers went broadly against the peasantry, and it has been

repeatedly shown that Norman lawyers were prompted by anything

but a mild spirit towards them. The Dialogus de Scaccario is very

instructive on this point, because it was written by a royal

officer who was likely to be more impartial than the feudatories

or any one who wrote in their interest would be, and yet it makes

out that villains are mere chattels of their lord, and treats

them throughout with the greatest contempt. And so, speaking

generally, it is to the times before the Conquest that the stock

of liberty and legal independence inherent in villainage must be

traced, even if we draw inferences merely on the strength of the

material found on this side of the Conquest. And when we come to

Saxon evidence, we shall see how intimately the condition of the

ceorl connects itself with the state of the villain along the

main lines and in detail.

    The case of ancient demesne is especially interesting in this

light. It presents, as it were, an earlier and less perfect

crystallisation of society on a feudal basis than the manorial

system of Common Law. It steps in between the Saxon soc and tun

on the one hand, and the manor on the other. It owes to the

king's privilege its existence as an exception. The procedure of

its court is organised entirely on the old pattern and quite out

of keeping with feudal ideas, as will be shown by-and-by.

Treating of it only in so far as it illustrates the law of

status, it presents in separate existence the two classes which

were fused in the system of the Common Law; villain socmen are

carefully distinguished from the villains, and the two groups are

treated differently in every way. A most interesting fact, and

one to be taken up hereafter, is the way of treating the

privileged group as the normal one. Villain socmen are the men of

ancient demesne; villains are the exception, they appear only on

the lord's demesne, and seem very few, so far as we can make a

calculation of numbers. Villain socmen enjoy a certainty of

condition which becomes actual tenant-right when the manor passes

from the crown into a private lord's hand. As to its origin there

can be no doubt -- ancient demesne is traced back to Saxon times

in as many words and by all our authorities.

    A careful analysis of the law of ancient demesne may even

give us valuable clues to the condition of the Saxon peasantry.

The point just noticed, namely, that the number of villain socmen

is exceedingly large and quite out of proportion to that of other

tenants, gives indirect testimony that the legal protection of

the tenure was not due merely to an influx of free owners

deprived of their lands by conquest. This is the explanation

given by Bracton, but it is not sufficient to account for the

privileged position of almost all the tenants within the manor. A

considerable part of them surely held before the Conquest not as

owners and not freely, but as tenants by base services, and their

fixity of tenure is as important in the constitution of ancient

demesne as is the influx of free owners. If this latter cause

contributed to keep up the standard of this status, the former

cause supplied that tradition of certainty to which ancient

demesne right constantly appeals.

    Another point to be kept firmly in view is that the careful

distinction kept up on the ancient demesne between villain socmen

and villains, proves the law on this subject to have originated

in the general distribution of classes and rights during the

Saxon period, and not in the exceptional royal privilege which

preserved it in later days; I mean, that if certainty of

condition had been granted to the tenantry merely because it was

royal tenantry, which is unlikely enough in itself, the certainty

would have extended to tenants of all sorts and kinds. It did

not, because it was derived from a general right of one class of

peasants to be protected at law, a right which did not in the

least preclude the lord from using his slaves as mere chattels.

    And so I may conclude: an investigation into the legal aspect

of villainage discloses three elements in its complex structure.

Legal theory and political disabilities would fain make it all

but slavery; the manorial system ensures it something of the

character of the Roman colonatus; there is a stock of freedom in

it which speaks of Saxon tradition.



NOTES:



1. Brunner, Entstehung der Schwurgericht, has made an epoch on

the discussion of this phenomenon.



2. I shall treat at length of the Norman Conquest in my third

essay.



3. Leg. Will. Conq. i, 29 (Schmid, p. 340).



Chapter 5



The Servile Peasantry of Manorial Records



    It would be as wrong to restrict the study of villainage to

legal documents as to disregard them. The jurisprudence and

practice of the king's courts present a one-sided, though a very

important view of the subject, but it must be supplemented and

verified by an investigation of manorial records. With one class

of such documents we have had already to deal, namely with the

rolls of manorial courts, which form as it were the

stepping-stone between local arrangements and the general

theories of Common Law. So-called manorial 'extents' and royal

inquisitions based on them lead us one step further; they were

intended to describe the matter-of-fact conditions of actual

life, the distribution of holdings, the amount and nature of

services, the personal divisions of the peasantry, their evidence

is not open to the objection of having been artificially treated

for legal purposes. Treatises on farming and instructions to

manorial officers reflect the economic side of the system, and an

enormous number of accounts of expenditure and receipts would

enable the modern searcher, if so minded, to enter even into the

detail of agricultural management.(1*) We need not undertake this

last inquiry, but some comparison between the views of lawyers

and the actual facts of manorial administration must be

attempted. Writers on Common Law invite one to the task by

recognising a great variety of local customs; Bracton, for

instance, mentioning two notable deviations from general rules in

the department of law under discussion. In Cornwall the children

of a villain and of a free woman were not all unfree, but some

followed the father and others the mother.(2*) In Herefordshire

the master was not bound to produce his serfs to answer criminal

charges.(3*) If such customs were sufficiently strong to

counteract the influence of general rules of Common Law, the

vitality of local distinctions was even more felt in those cases

where they had no rules to break through, It may be even asked at

the very outset of the inquiry whether there is not a danger of

our being distracted by endless details. I hope that the

following pages will show how the varieties naturally fall into

certain classes and converge towards a few definite positions,

which appear the more important as they were not produced by

artificial arrangement from above. We must be careful however,

and distinguish between isolated facts and widely-spread

conditions. Another possible objection to the method of our study

may be also noticed here, as it is connected with the same

difficulty. Suppose we get in one case the explanation of a

custom or institution which recurs in many other cases; are we

entitled to generalise our explanation? This seems methodically

sound as long as the contrary cannot be established, for the

plain reason that the variety of local facts is a variety of

combinations and of effects, not of constitutive elements and of

causes. The agents of development are not many, though their

joint work shades off into a great number of variations. We may

be pretty sure that a result repeated several times has been

effected by the same factors in the same way; and if in some

instances these factors appear manifestly, there is every reason

to suppose them to have existed in all the cases. Such

reflections are never convincing by themselves, however, and the

best thing to test them will be to proceed from these broad

statements to an inquiry into the particulars of the case.

    The study of manorial evidence must start from a discussion

as to terminology. The names of the peasantry will show the

natural subdivisions of the class. If we look only to the unfree

villagers, we shall notice that all the varieties of denomination

can easily be arranged into four classes: one of these classes

has in view social standing, another economic condition, a third

starts from a difference of services, and a fourth from a

difference of holdings. The line may not be drawn sharply between

the several divisions, but the general contrast cannot be

mistaken.

    The term of most common occurrence is, of course, villanus.

Although its etymology points primarily to the place of dwelling,

and indirectly to specific occupations, it is chiefly used during

the feudal period to denote servitude. It takes in both the man

who is personally unfree and stands in complete subjection to the

lord, and the free person settled on servile land. Both classes

mentioned and distinguished by Bracton are covered by it. The

common opposition is between villanus and libere tenens, not

between villanus and liber homo. It is not difficult to explain

such a phraseology in books compiled either in the immediate

interest of the lords or under their indirect influence, but it

must have necessarily led to encroachments and disputes: it has

even become a snare for later investigators, who have sometimes

been led to consider as one compact mass a population consisting

of two different classes, each with a separate history of its

own. The Latin 'rusticus' is applied in the same general way. lt

is less technical however, and occurs chiefly in annals anD other

literary productions, for which it was better suited by its

classical Derivation. But when it is used in opposition to other

terms, it stands exactly as villanus. that is to say, it is

contrasted with libere tenens.(4*)

    The fundamental distinction of personal status has left some

traces in terminology. The Hundred Rolls, especially the

Warwickshire one,(5*) mention servi very often. Sometimes the

word is used exactly as villanus would be.(6*) Tenere in

servitute and tenere in villenagio are equivalent.(7*) But other

instances show that servus has also a special meaning. Cases

where it occurs in an 'extent' immediately after villanus, and

possibly in opposition to it, are not decisive.(8*) They may be

explained by the fact that the persons engaged in drawing up a

custumal, jotted down denominations of the peasantry without

comparing them carefully with what preceded. A marginal note

servi would not be necessarily opposed to a villani following it;

it may only be a different name for the same thing. And it may be

noted that in the Hundred Rolls these names very often stand in

the margin, and not in the text. But such an explanation would be

out of place when both expressions are used in the same sentence.

The description of Ipsden in Oxfordshire has the following

passage: item dietus R. de N. hanet de proparte sua septem servos

villanos. (Rot. Hundr. ii. 781, b: cf. 775, b, Servi Custumarii.)

It is clear that it was intended, not only to describe the

general condition of the peasantry, but to define more

particularly their status. This observation and the general

meaning of the word will lead us to believe that in many cases

when it is used by itself, it implies personal subjection.

    The term nativus has a similar sense. But the relation

between it and villanus is not constant; sometimes this latter

marks the genus, while the former applies to a species; but

sometimes they are used interchangeably,(9*) and the feminine for

villain is nieve (nativa). But while villanus is made to appear

both in a wide and in a restricted sense, and for this reason

cannot be used as a special qualification, nativus has only the

restricted sense suggesting status.(10*) In connection with other

denominations nativus is used for the personally unfree.(11*)

When we find nativus domini, the personal relation to the lord is

especially noticed.(12*) The sense being such, no wonder that the

nature of the tenure is sometimes described in addition.(13*) Of

course, the primary meaning is, that a person has been born in

the power of the lord, and in this sense it is opposed to the

stranger -- forinsecus, extraneus.(14*) In this sense again the

Domesday of St. Paul's speaks of 'nativi a principio' in

Navestock.(15*) But the fact of being born to the condition

supposes personal subjection, and this explains why nativi are

sometimes mentioned in contrast with freemen,(16*) without any

regard being paid to the question of tenure. Natives, or villains

born, had their pedigrees as well as the most noble among the

peers. Such pedigrees were drawn up to prevent any fraudulent

assertion as to freedom, and to guide the lord in case he wanted

to use the native's kin in prosecution of an action de nativo

habendo. One such pedigree preserved in the Record Office is

especially interesting, because it starts from some stranger,

extraneus,(17*) who came into the manor as a freeman, and whose

progeny lapses into personal villainage; apparently it is a case

of villainage by prescription.

    The other subdivision of the class-freemen holding unfree

land(18*) -- has no special denomination. This deprives us of a

very important clue as to the composition of the peasantry, but

we may gather from the fact how very near both divisions must

have stood to each other in actual life. The free man holding in

villainage had the right to go away, while the native was legally

bound to the lord; but it was difficult for the one to leave land

and homestead, and it was not impossible for the other to fly

from them, if he were ill-treated by his lord or the steward.

Even the fundamental distinction could not be drawn very sharply

in the practice of daily life, and in every other respect, as to

services, mode of holding, etc., there was no distinction. No

wonder that the common term villanus is used quite broadly, and

aims at the tenure more than at personal status.

    Terms which have in view the general economic condition of

the peasant, vary a good deal according to localities. Even in

private documents they are on the whole less frequent than the

terms of the first class, and the Hundred Rolls use them but very

rarely. It wOUld be very wrong to imply that they were not widely

spread in practice. On the contrary, their vernacular forms vouch

for their vitality and their use in common speech. But being

vernacular and popular in origin, these terms cannot obtain the

uniformity and currency of literary names employed and recognised

by official authority. The vernacular equivalent for villanus

seems to have been niet or neat.(19*) It points to the regular

cultivators of the arable, possessed of holdings of normal size

and performing the typical services of the manor.(20*) The

peasant's condition is here regarded from the economical side, in

the mutual relation of tenure and work, not in the strictly legal

sense, and men of this category form the main stock of the

manorial population. The Rochester Custumal says(21*) that neats

are more free than cottagers, and that they hold virgates. The

superior degree of freedom thus ascribed to them is certainly not

to be taken in the legal sense, but is merely a superiority in

material condition. The contrast with cottagers is a standing

one,(22*) and, being the main population of the village, neats

are treated sometimes as if they were the only people there.(23*)

The name may be explained etymologically by the Anglo-Saxon

geneat, which in documents of the tenth and eleventh century

means a man using another person's land. The differences in

application may be discussed when we come to examine the Saxon

evidence.

    Another Saxon term - gebur - has left its trace in the burus

and buriman of Norman records. The word does not occur very

often, and seems to have been applied in two different ways-to

the chief villains of the township in some places, and to the

smaller tenantry, apparently in confusion with the Norman

bordarius, in some other.(24*) The very possibility of such a

confusion shows that it was going out of common use. On the other

hand, the Danish equivalent bondus is widely spread. It is to be

found constantly in the Danish counties.(25*) The original

meaning is that of cultivator or 'husband' -- the same in fact as

that of gebur and boor. Feudal records give curious testimony of

the way in which the word slid down into the 'bondage' of the

present day. We see it wavering, as it were, sometimes exchanging

with servus and villanus, and sometimes opposed to them.(26*)

Another word of kindred meaning, chiefly found in eastern

districts, is landsettus, with the corresponding term for the

tenure;(27*) this of course according to its etymology simply

means an occupier, a man sitting on land.

    Several terms are found which have regard to the nature of

services. Agricultural work was the most common and burdensome

expression of economical subjection. Peasants who have to perform

such services in kind instead of paying rents for them are called

operarii.(28*) Another designation which may be found everywhere

is consuetudinarii or custumarii.(29*) It points to customary

services, which the people were bound to perform. When such

tenants are opposed to the villains, they are probably free men

holding in villainage by customary work.(30*) As the name does

not give any indication as to the importance of the holding a

qualification is sometimes added to it, which determines the size

of the tenement.(31*)

    In many manors we find a group of tenants, possessed of small

plots of land for the service of following the demesne ploughs.

These are called akermanni or carucarii (32*), are mostly

selected among the customary holders, and enjoy an immunity from

ordinary work as long as they have to perform their special

duty.(33*) On some occasions the records mention gersumarii, that

is peasants who pay a gersuma, a fine for marrying their

daughters.(34*) This payment being considered as the badge of

personal serfdom, the class must have consisted of men personally

unfree.

    Those names remain to be noticed which reflect the size of

the holding. In one of the manors belonging to St. Paul's

Cathedral in London we find hidarii.(35*) This does not mean that

every tenant held a whole hide. On the contrary, they have each

only a part of the hide, but their plots are reckoned up into

hides, and the services due from the whole hide are stated.

Virgatarius(36*) is of very common occurrence, because the

virgate was considered as the normal holding of a peasant. It is

curious that in consequence the virgate is sometimes called

simply terra, and holders of virgates -- yerdlings.(37*) Peasants

possessed of half virgates are halfyerdlings accordingly. The

expressions 'a full villain'(38*) and 'half a villain' must be

understood in the same sense. They have nothing to do with rank,

but aim merely at the size of the farm and the quantity of

services and rents. Ferlingseti are to be met with now and then

in connexion with the ferling or ferdel, the fourth part of a

virgate.(39*)

    The constant denomination for those who have no part in the

common arable fields, but hold only crofts or small plots with

their homesteads, is 'cotters' (cotsetle, cottagiarii, cottarii

(40*), etc.). They get opposed to villains as to owners of normal

holdings.(41*) Exceptionally the term is used for those who have

very small holdings in the open fields. In this case the

authorities distinguish between greater and lesser cotters (42*),

between the owners of a 'full cote' and of 'half a cote.'(43*)

The bordarii, so conspicuous in Domesday, and evidently

representing small tenants of the same kind as the cottagers,

disappear almost entirely in later times.(44*)

    We may start from this last observation in our general

estimate of the terminology. One might expect to find traces of

very strong French influence in this respect, if in any. Even if

the tradition of facts had not been interrupted by the Conquest,

names were likely to be altered for the convenience of the new

upper class. And the Domesday Survey really begins a new epoch in

terminology by its use of villani and bordarii. But, curiously

enough, only the first of these terms takes root on English soil.

Now it is not a word transplanted by the Conquest; it was in use

before the Conquest as the Latin equivalent of ceorl, geneat, and

probably gebur. Its success in the thirteenth and fourteenth

centuries is a success of Latin, and not of French, of the

half-literary record language over conversational idioms, and not

of foreign over vernacular notions. The peculiarly French

'bordier' on the other hand, gets misunderstood and eliminated.

Looking to Saxon and Danish terms, we find that they hold their

ground tenaciously enough; but still the one most prevalent

before the Conquest - ceorl - disappears entirely, and all the

others taken together cannot balance the diffusion of the

'villains.' The disappearance of ceorl may be accounted for by

the important fact that it was primarily the designation of a

free man, and had not quite lost this sense even in the time

immediately before the Conquest. The spread of the Latin term is

characteristic enough in any case. It is well in keeping with a

historical development which, though it cannot be reduced to an

importation of foreign manners, was by no means a mere sequel to

Saxon history.(45*) A new turn had been given towards

centralisation and organisation from above, and villanus, the

Latin record term, illustrates very aptly the remodelling of the

lower stratum of society by the influence of the curiously

centralised English feudalism.

    The position of the peasantry gets considered chiefly from

the point of view of the lord's interests, and the classification

on the basis of services comes naturally to the fore. The

distribution of holdings is also noticed, because services and

rents are arranged according to them. But the most important fact

remains, that the whole system, though admitting theoretically

the difference between personal freedom and personal subjection,

works itself out into Uniformity on the ground of unfree tenure.

Freemen holding in villainage and born villains get mixed up

under the same names. The fact has its two sides. On the one hand

it detracts from the original rights of free origin, on the other

it strengthens the element of order and legality in the relations

between lord and peasant. The peasants are custumarii at the

worst -- they work by custom, even if custom is regulated by the

lord's power. In any case, even a mere analysis of terminological

distinctions leads to the conclusion that the simplicity and

rigidity of legal contrasts was largely modified by the influence

of historical tradition and practical life.

    Our next object must be to see in what shape the rights of

the lord are presented by manorial documents. All expressions of

his power may be considered under three different heads, as

connected with one of the three fundamental aspects of the

manorial relation. There were customs and services clearly

derived from the personal subjection of the villain, which had

its historical root in slavery. Some burdens again lay on the

land, and not on the person. And finally, manorial exactions

could grow from the political sway conferred by feudal lordship.

It may be difficult to distinguish in the concrete between these

several relations, and the constant tendency in practice must

have been undoubtedly directed towards mixing up the separate

threads of subjection. Still, a general survey of manorial rights

has undoubtedly to start from these fundamental distinctions.

    There has been some debate on the question whether the lord

could sell his villains. It has been urged that we have no traces

of such transactions during the feudal period, and that therefore

personal serfdom did not exist even in law.(46*) It can be

pointed out, on the other side, that deeds of sale conveying

villains apart from their tenements, although rare, actually

exist. The usual form of enfranchisement was a deed of sale, and

it cannot be argued that this treatment of manumission is a mere

relic of former times, because both the Frank and the Saxon

manumissions of the preceding period assume a different shape;

they are not effected by sale. The existing evidence entitles one

to maintain that a villain could be lawfully sold, with all his

family, his sequela, but that in practice such transactions were

uncommon.(47*) The fact is a most important one in itself. The

whole aspect of society and of its work would have been different

if the workman had been a saleable commodity passing easily from

hand to hand. Nothing of the kind is to be noticed in the

medieval system. There is no slave market, and no slave trade,

nothing to be compared with what took place in the slave states

of North America, or even to the restricted traffic in Russia

before the emancipation. The reason is a curious one, and

forcibly suggested by a comparison between the cases when such

trade comes into being, and those when it does not. The essential

condition for commercial transfer is a protected market, and such

a market existed more or less in every case when men could be

bought and sold. An organised state of some kind, however

slightly built, is necessary as a shelter for such transfer. The

feudal system proved more deficient in this respect than very raw

forms of early society, which make up for deficiencies in State

protection by the facilities of acquiring slaves and punishing

them. The landowner had enough political independence to prevent

the State from exercising an efficient control over the dependent

population, and for this very reason he had to rely on his own

force and influence to keep those dependents under his sway.

Personal dependence was locally limited, and not politically

general, if one may use the expression. It was easy for the

villain to step out of the precincts of bondage; it was all but

impossible for the lord to treat his man as a transferable

chattel. The whole relation got to be regulated more by internal

conditions than by external pressure, by a customary modus

vivendi, and not by commercial and state-protected competition.

This explains why in some cases political progress meant a

temporary change for the worse, as in some parts of Germany and

in Russia: the State brought its extended influence to bear in

favour of dependence, and rendered commercial transactions

possible by its protection. In most cases, however, the influence

of moral, economical, and political conceptions made itself felt

in the direction of freedom, and we have seen already that in

England legal doctrine created a powerful check on the

development of servitude by protecting the actual possession of

liberty, and throwing the burden of proof in questions of status

on the side contending against such liberty.

    But not all the consequences of personal servitude could be

removed in the same way by the conditions of actual life. Of all

manorial exactions the most odious was incontestably the

merchetum, a fine paid by the villain for marrying his

daughter.(48*) It was considered as a note of servile descent,

and the man free by blood was supposed to be always exempted from

it, however debased his position in every other respect. Our

authorities often allude to this payment by the energetic

expression 'buying one's blood' (servus de sanguine suo emendo).

It seems at first sight that one may safely take hold of this

distinction in order to trace the difference between the two

component parts of the villain class. In the status of the

socman, developed from the law of Saxon free-men, there was

usually nothing of the kind. The maritagium of military tenure of

course has nothing in common with it, being paid only by the

heiress of a fee, and resulting from the control of the military

lord over the land of his retainer. The merchetum must be paid

for every one of the daughters, and even the granddaughters of a

villain; it bad nothing to do with succession, and sprang from

personal subjection.

    When the bride married out of the power of the lord a new

element was brought to bear on the case: the lord was entitled to

a special compensation for the loss of a subject and of her

progeny.(49*) When the case is mentioned in manorial documents,

the fine gets heightened accordingly, and sometimes it is even

expressly stated that an arbitrary payment will be exacted. The

fine for incontinence naturally connects itself with the merchet,

and a Glastonbury manorial instruction enjoins the Courts to

present such cases to the bailiffs; the lord loses his merchet

from women who go wrong and do not get married.(50*)

    Such is the merchet of our extents and Court rolls. As I

said, it has great importance from the point of view of social

history. Still it would be wrong to consider it as an unfailing

test of status. Although it is often treated expressly as a note

of serfdom (51*), some facts point to the conclusion that its

history is a complex one. In the first place this merchet fine

occurs in the extents sporadically as it were. The Hundred Rolls,

for instance, mention it almost always in Buckinghamshire, and in

some hundreds of Cambridgeshire. In other hundreds of this last

county it is not mentioned. However much we lay to the account of

casual omissions of the compilers, they are not sufficient to

explain the general contrast. It would be preposterous to infer

that in the localities first mentioned the peasants were one and

all descended from slaves, and that in those other localities

they were one and all personally free. And so we are driven to

the inference, that different customs prevailed in this respect

in places immediately adjoining each other, and that not all the

feudal serfs descended from Saxon slaves paid merchet.

    If, on the one hand, not all the serfs paid merchet, on the

other there is sufficient evidence to show that it was paid in

some cases by free people. A payment of this kind was exacted

sometimes from free men in villainage, and even from socage

tenants, I shall have to speak of this when treating of the free

peasantry; I advert to the fact now in order to show that the

most characteristic test of personal servitude does not cover the

whole ground occupied by the class, and at the same time spreads

outside of its boundary.

    This observation leads us to several others which are not

devoid of importance. As soon as the notion arose that personal

servitude was implied by the payment of merchet, -- as soon as

such a notion got sanctioned by legal theory, the fine was

extended in practice to cases where it did not apply originally.

We have direct testimony to the effect that feudal lords

introduced it on their lands in places where it had never been

paid (52*), and one cannot help thinking that such administrative

acts as the survey of 1279-1280, the survey represented by the

Hundred Rolls, materially helped such encroachments. The juries

made their presentments in respect of large masses of peasantry,

under the preponderating influence of the gentry and without much

chance for the verification of particular instances. The

description was not false as a whole, but it was apt to throw

different things into the same mould, and to do it in the

interest of landed proprietors. Again, the variety of conditions

in which we come across the merchet, leads us to suppose that

this term was extended through the medium of legal theory to

payments which differed from each other in their very essence:

the commutation of the 'jus primae noctis,' the compensation paid

to the lord for the loss of his bondwoman leaving the manor, and

the fine for marriage to be levied by the township or the

hundred, were all thrown together. Last, but not least, the vague

application of this most definite of social tests corroborates

what has been already inferred from terminology, namely, that the

chief stress was laid in all these relations, not on legal, but

on economic distinctions. The stratification of the class and the

determination of the lord's rights both show traits of legal

status, but these traits lose in importance in comparison with

other features that have no legal meaning, or else they spread

over groups and relations which come from different quarters and

get bound up together only through economic conditions.

    The same observations hold good in regard to other customs

which come to be considered as implying personal servitude.(53*)

Merchet was the most striking consequence of unfreedom, but

manorial documents are wont to connect it with several others. It

is a common thing to say that a villain by birth cannot marry his

daughter without paying a fine, or permit his son to take holy

orders, or sell his calf or horse, that he is bound to serve as a

reeve, and that his youngest son succeeds to the holding after

his death.(54*) This would be a more or less complete

enumeration, and I need not say that in particular cases

sometimes one and sometimes another item gets omitted. The

various pieces do not fit well together: the prohibition against

selling animals is connected with disabilities as to property,

and not derived directly from the personal tie;(55*) as for the

rule of succession, it testifies merely to the fact that the

so-called custom of Borough English was most widely spread among

the unfree class. The obligation of serving as a reeve or in any

other capacity is certainly derived from the power of a lord over

the person of his subject; he had it always at his discretion to

take his man away from the field, and to employ him at pleasure

in his service. Lastly, the provision that the villain may not

allow his son to receive holy orders stands on the same level as

the provision that he may not give his daughter in marriage

outside the manor: either of these prohibited transactions would

have involved the loss of a subject.

    We must place in the same category all measures intended to

prevent directly or indirectly the passage of the peasantry from

one place to the other. The instructions issued for the

management of the Abbot of Gloucester's estates absolutely forbid

the practice of leaving the lord's land without leave.(56*)

Still, emigration from the manor. from time to time the could not

be entirely stopped, inhabitants wandered away in order to look

out for fieldwork elsewhere, or to take up some craft or trade.

In this case they had to pay a kind of poll-tax (chevagium),

which was, strictly speaking, not rent: very often it was very

insignificant in amount, and was replaced by a trifling payment

in kind, for instance, by the obligation to bring a capon once a

year.(57*) The object was not so much to get money as to retain

some hold over the villain after he had succeeded in escaping

from the lord's immediate sway. There are no traces of a

systematic attempt to tax and ransom the work of dependents who

have left the lord's territory nothing to match the thorough

subjection in which they were held while in the manor. And thus

the lord was forced in his own interest to accept nominal

payments, to concentrate his whole attention on the subjects

under his direct control, and to prevent them as far as possible

from moving and leaving the land. In regulations for the

management of estates we often find several paragraphs which have

this object in view. Sometimes the younger men get leave to work

outside the lord's possessions, but only while their father

remains at home and occupies a holding. Sometimes, again, the

licence is granted under the condition that the villain will

remain in one of his lord's tithings(58*), an obligation which

could be fulfilled only if the peasant remained within easy reach

of his birth-place, Special care is taken not to allow the

villains to buy free land in order to claim their freedom on the

strength of such free possession.(59*) Every kind of personal

commendation to influential people is also forbidden.(60*)

    Notwithstanding all these rules and precepts, every page of

the documents testifies to frequent migrations from the manors in

opposition to the express will of the landowners. The surveys

tell of serfs who settle on strange land even in the vicinity of

their former home.(61*) It is by no means exceptional to find

mention of enterprising landlords drawing away the population

from their neighbours' manors.(62*) The fugitive villain and the

settler who comes from afar are a well-marked feature of this

feudal society.(63*)

    The limitations of rights of property have left as distinct

traces in the cartularies as the direct consequences of personal

unfreedom. These two matters are connected by the principle that

everything acquired by the slave is acquired by his master; and

this principle finds both expression and application in our

documents. On the strength of it the Abbot of Eynsham takes from

his peasant land which had been bought by the latter's

father.(64*) The case dates from the second half of the

fourteenth century, from a time when the social conflict had

become particularly acute in consequence of the Black Death, and

of the consequent attempts on the part of landlords to stretch

their rights to the utmost. But we have a case from the

thirteenth century: the Prior of Barnwell quotes the

abovementioned rule in support of a confiscation of his villain's

land.(65*) -- In both instances the principle is laid down

expressly, but in other cases peasants were deprived of their

property without any formal explanation.

    Of course, one must look upon such treatment as exceptional.

But an important and constant result of the general conception is

to be found in some of the regular feudal exactions. The villain

has no property of his own, and consequently he cannot transmit

property. Strictly speaking, there is no inheritance in

villainage. As a matter of fact the peasant's property did not

get confiscated after his death, but the heirs had to surrender a

part of it, sometimes a very considerable one. A difference is

made between chattels and land. As to the first, which are

supposed to be supplied by the lord, the duty of the heir is

especially onerous, On the land of the Bishopric of Lichfield,

for instance, he has to give up as heriot the best head of horned

cattle, all horses, the cart, the caldron, all woollen cloth, all

the bacon, all the swine except one, and all the swarms of

bees.(66*) The villains of St. Alban's have to give the best head

of cattle, and all house furniture.(67*) But in most cases only

the best beast is taken, and if there be no cattle on the

tenement, then money has to be paid instead.(68*) The Cartulary

of Battle is exceptionally lenient as to one of the Abbey's

manors:(69*) it liberates from all duty of the kind those who do

not own any oxen, It sometimes happens, on the other hand, that

the payment is doubled; one beast is taken from the late occupier

by way of heriot, and the other from his widow for the life

interest which is conceded to her after the death of her

husband.(70*) Such 'free bench' is regulated very differently by

different customs. The most common requirement is, that the widow

may not marry again and must remain chaste. In Kent the widow has

a right to half the tenement for life, even in case of a second

marriage; in Oxfordshire, if she marries without the lord's

leave, she is left in possession only during a year and a

day.(71*)

    In all these instances, when a second payment arises

alongside of the heriot, such a payment receives also the name of

heriot because of this resemblance, although the two dues are

grounded on different claims, The true heriot is akin in name and

in character to the Saxon 'here-geat' -- to the surrender of the

military outfit supplied by the chief to his follower. In feudal

times and among peasants it is not the war-horse and the armour

that are meant, ox and harness take their place, but the

difference is not in the principle, and one may even catch

sometimes a glimpse of the process by which one custom shades off

into the other. On the possessions of St. Mary of Worcester, for

instance, we find the following enactment:(72*) Each virgate has

to give three heriots, that is a horse, harness, and two oxen;

the half-virgate two heriots, that is a harnessed horse and one

ox; other holdings give either a horse or an ox. In such

connexion the payment has nothing servile about it, and simply

appears as a consequence of the fact or assumption that the

landlord has provided his peasant with the necessary outfit for

agricultural work. And still the heriot is constantly mentioned

along with the merchet as a particularly base payment, and though

it might fall on the succession of a free man holding in

villainage, it is not commonly found on free land. the fact that

this old Saxon incident of dependence becomes in the feudal

period a mark of servile tenure, is a fact not without

significance.

    It is otherwise with the relief (relevium), the duty levied

for the resumption of the holding by the heir: it extends equally

to military tenure and to villainage. Although the heriot and

relief get mixed up now and then, their fundamental difference is

realised by the great majority of our documents and well grounded

on principle. In one case the chattels are concerned, in the

other the tenement; one is primarily a payment in kind, the other

a money-fine. As to the amount of the relief the same

fluctuations may be traced as in the case of the heriot. the most

common thing is to give a year's rent; but in some instances the

heir must settle with the lord at the latter's will, or ransom

the land as a stranger, that is by a separate agreement in each

single case.(73*) Fixed sums occur also, and they vary accord ing

to the size and quality of the holding.(74*)

    On the boundary between personal subjection and political

subordination we find the liability of the peasantry to pay

tallage. It could be equally deduced from the principle that a

villain has nothing of his own and may be exploited at will by

his master or from the political grant of the power of taxation

to the representative of feudal privilege. the payment of

arbitrary tallage is held during the thirteenth century to imply

a servile status.(75*) Such tallage at will is not found very

often in the documents, although the lord sometimes retained his

prerogative in this respect even when sanctioning the customary

forms of renders and services. Now and then it is mentioned that

the tallage is to be levied once a year,(76*) although the amount

remains uncertain.

    As a holder of political power the lord has a right to

inflict fines and amercements on transgressors.(77*)  The

Court-rolls are full of entries about such payments, and it seems

that one of the reasons why very great stress was laid on

attendance at the manorial Courts was connected with the

liability to all sorts of impositions that was enforced by means

of these gatherings. tenants had to attend and to make

presentments, to elect officers, and to serve on juries; and in

every case where there was a default or an irregularity of any

kind, fines flowed into the lord's exchequer.

    Lastly, we may classify under the head of political

exactions, monopolies and privileges such as those which were

called banalites in France: they were imposed on the peasantry by

the strong hand, although there was no direct connexion between

them and the exercise of any particular function of the State.

English medieval documents often refer to the privileged mill, to

which all the villains and sometimes the freemen of the Soke were

bound to bring their corn.(78*) there is also the manorial fold

in which all the sheep of the township had to be enclosed.(79*)

In the latter case the landlord profited by the dung for manuring

his land. Special attention was bestowed on supervising the

making of beer. Court-rolls constantly speak of persons fined for

brewing without licence. Every now and then we come across the

wondrous habit of collecting all the villagers on fixed days and

making them drink Scotale,(80*) that is ale supplied by the lord

-- for a good price, of course.

    Let us pass now to those aspects of manorial usage which are

directly connected with the mode of holding land. I may repeat

what I said before, that it would be out of the question to draw

anything like a hard and fast line between these different sides

of one subject. How intimately the personal relation may be bound

up with the land may be gathered, among other things, from the

fact that there existed an oath of fealty which in many places

was obligatory on villains when entering into possession of a

holding. This oath, though connected with tenure, bears also on

the personal relation to the lord.(81*) The oath of fealty taken

by the tenant in villainage differed from that taken by the

freeholder in that it contained the words, 'I will be justified

by you in body and goods;' and again the tenant in villainage,

though he swore fealty, did no homage; the relationship between

him and his lord was not a merely feudal relationship; the words,

'I become your man,' would have been out of place, and there

could be no thought of the lord kissing his villain. But however

intimate the connexion between both aspects of the question, in

principle the tenure was quite distinct from the status, and

could influence the condition of people who were personally free

from any taint of servility.

    The legal definition of villainage as unfree tenure does not

take into account the services or economic quality of the tenure,

and lays stress barely on the precarious character of the

holding.(82*) The owner may take it away when he pleases, and

alter its condition at will. The Abingdon Chronicle tells us

(83*) that before the time of Abbot Faritius it was held lawful

on the manors of the Abbey to drive the peasants away from their

tenements. The stewards and bailiffs often made use of this

right, if anybody gave them a fee out of greed, or out of spite

against the holder. Nor was there any settled mode of succession,

and when a man died, his wife and children were pitilessly thrown

out of their home in order to make place for perfect strangers.

An end was put to such a lawless condition of things by Faritius'

reforms: he was very much in want of money, and found it more

expedient to substitute a settled custom for the disorderly rule

of the stewards. But he did not renounce thereby any of his

manorial rights: he only regulated their application. The legal

feature of base tenure -- its insecurity -- was not abolished on

the Abingdon estates. Our documents sometimes go the length of

explaining that particular plots are held without any sort of

security against dispossession. We find such remarks in the

Warwickshire Hundred Rolls for instance.(84*) Sometimes the right

is actually enforced: in the Cartulary of Dunstable Priory we

have the record of an exchange between two landlords, in

consequence of which the peasants were removed from eight hides

of land by one of the contracting parties.(85*)

    The villain is in no way to be considered as the owner of the

plot of land he occupies; his power of disposing of it is stinted

accordingly, and he is subjected to constant control from the

real owner. He cannot fell timber. oaks and elms are reserved to

the lord.(86*) He cannot change the cultivation of the land of

his own accord; it would be out of the question, for instance, to

turn a garden-close into arable without asking for a

licence.(87*) He is bound to keep hedges and ditches in good

order, and is generally responsible for any deterioration of his

holding. When he enters into possession of it, he has to find a

pledge that he will perform his duties in a satisfactory

manner.(88*) There can be no thought of a person so situated

alienating the land by an act of his own will; he must surrender

it into the hand of the lord, and the latter grants it to the new

holder after the payment of a fine. The same kind of procedure is

followed when a tenement is passed to the right heir in the

lifetime of the former possessor.(89*) A default in paying rents

or in the performance of services, and any other transgression

against the interests of the lord, may lead to forfeiture.(90*)

The lord takes also tenements into his hand in the way of

escheat, in the absence of heirs. Court-rolls constantly mention

plots which have been resumed in this way by the lord.(91*) The

homage has to report to the steward as to all changes of

occupation, and as to the measures which are thought necessary to

promote the interests of the landowner and of the tenantry.(92*)

    As to the treatment of tenure in manorial documents, it is to

be noticed that a distinction which has no juridical meaning at

all becomes all important in practice. At common law, as has been

said repeatedly, the contrast between free land and servile land

resolves itself into a contrast between precarious occupation and

proprietary right. This contrast is noticed occasionally and as a

matter of legal principle by manorial documents (93*) quite apart

from the consequences which flow from it, and of which I have

been speaking just now. But in actual life this fundamental

feature is not very prominent; all stress is laid on the

distinction between land held by rent and land held by labour. In

the common phraseology of surveys and manorial rolls, the

tenements on which the rent prevails over labour are called 'free

tenements,' and those on the contrary which have to render labour

services, bear the names of 'servile holdings.' This fact is

certainly not to be treated lightly as a mere result of deficient

classification or terminology. It is a very important one and

deserves to be investigated carefully.

    In the ancient survey of Glastonbury Abbey, compiled in 1189,

the questions to be answered by the jury are enumerated in the

following way: 'Who holds freely' and how much, and by what

services, and by whose warrant, and from what time? Has land

which ought to perform work been turned into free land in the

time of Bishop Henry, or afterwards? By whose warrant was this

change made, and to what extent is the land free? Is the demesne

land in cultivation, or is it given away in free tenure or

villain tenure; is such management profitable, or would it be

better if this land was taken back by the lord?'(94*) The

contrast is between land which provides labour and land which

does not; the former is unfree, and villain tenure is the tenure

of land held by such services; portions of the demesne given away

freely may eventually be reclaimed. The scheme of the survey made

in answer to these questions is entirely in keeping with this

mode of classification. All holdings are considered exclusively

from the economic point of view; the test of security and

precarious occupation is never applied. It is constantly noticed,

on the other hand, whether a plot pays rent or provides labour,

whether it can be transferred from one category into the other,

on what conditions demesne land has been given to peasants, and

whether it is expedient to alter them. Let us take the following

case as an instance: John Clerk had in the time of Bishop Henry

one virgate in Domerham and holds it now, and another virgate in

Stapelham for ten shillings. When he farmed the Domerham manor he

left on his own authority the virgate in Stapelham and took half

a virgate in Domerham, as it was nearer. This half virgate ought

to work and is now free. And the virgate in Stapelbam, though it

was free formerly, has to work now, after the exchange.(95*) The

opposition is quite clear, and entirely suited to the list of

questions addressed to the jury. The meaning of the terms free

and freedom is also brought out by the following example. Anderd

Budde holds half a virgate of demesne land, from the time of

Bishop Henry, by the same services as all who hold so much. The

village has to render as gift twenty-nine shillings and six

pence. Six pence are wanting (to complete the thirty shillings?)

because Anderd holds more freely than his ancestors used to.(96*)

    Such phraseology is by no means restricted to one document or

one locality. In a Ramsey Cartulary we find the following entry

in regard to a Huntingdonshire manor: 'Of seven hides one is

free; of the remaining six two virgates pay rent. The holder pays

with the villains; he pays merchet and joins in the boon-work as

the villains. The remaining five hides and three virgates are in

pure villainage.'(97*) The gradation is somewhat more complex

here than in the Somersetshire instance: besides free land and

working land we have a separate division for mixed cases. But the

foundation is the same in both documents. Earlier surveys of

Ramsey Abbey show the same classification of holding into free

and working virgates (liberae, ad opus(98*)).

    In opposition to free service, that is rent, we find both the

villenagium (99*) and the terra consuetudinaria or

custoniaria,(100*) burdened with the usual rural work. Sometimes

the document points out that land has been freed or exempted from

the common duties of the village;(101*) in regard to manorial

work the village formed a compact body. The notion which I have

been explaining lies at the bottom of a curious designation

sometimes applied to base tenure in the earlier documents of our

period -- terra ad furcam et flagellum,(102*) fleyland. The Latin

expression has been construed to mean land held by a person under

the lord's jurisdiction, under his gallows and his whip, but this

explanation is entirely false. The meaning is, that a base

holding is occupied by people who have to work with pitchfork and

flail, and may be other instruments of agriculture,(103*) instead

of simply paying rent. In view of such a phraseology the same

tenement could alternately be considered as a free or a servile

one, according to its changing obligations.(104*) Some surveys

insert two parallel descriptions of duties which are meant to fit

both eventualities; when the land is ad opus, it owes such and

such services; when it is ad censum, it pays so much rent. It

must be added, that in a vast majority of cases rent-paying land

retains some remnants of services, and, vice versa, land

subjected to village-work pays small rents;(105*) the general

quality of the holding is made to depend on the prevailing

character of the duties.

    The double sense in which the terms 'free tenure' and

'servile tenure' are used should be specially noticed, because it

lays bare the intimate connexion between the formal divisions of

feudal law and the conditions of economic reality. I have laid

stress on the contrast between the two phraseologies, but, of

course, they could not be in use at the same time without

depending more or less on each other. And it is not difficult to

see, that the legal is a modification of the economic use of

terms, that it reduces to one-sided simplicity those general

facts which the evidence of every day life puts before us in a

loose and complex manner; that land is really free which is not

placed in a constant working submission to the manor, in constant

co-operation with other plots, similarly arranged to help and to

serve in the manor. However heavy the rent, the land that pays it

has become independent in point of husbandry, its dependence

appears as a matter of agreement, and not an economic tie. When a

tenement is for economic purposes subordinated to the general

management of the manor, there is almost of necessity a degree of

uncertainty in its tenure; it is a satellite whose motions are

controlled by the body round which it revolves. On the other

hand, mere payments in money look like the outcome of some sort

of agreement, and are naturally thought of as the result of

contract.

    Everything is subject to the will and pleasure of the lord;

but this will and pleasure does not find expression in any

capricious interference which would have wantonly destroyed order

and rule in village life. Under cover of this will, customs are

forming themselves which regulate the constantly recurring events

of marriage, succession, alienation, and the like. Curious

combinations arise, which reflect faithfully the complex elements

of village life. An instruction for stewards provides, for

instance, that one person ought not to hold several tenements;

where such agglomerations exist already they ought to be

destroyed, if it can be done conveniently and honestly.(106*) In

one of the manors of St. Paul of London the plots held by the

ploughmen are said to be resumable by the lord without any injury

to hereditary succession.(107*) 'The rule of hereditary

succession' is affirmed in regard to normal holdings by this very

exception. We find already the phrase of which the royal courts

availed themselves, when in later days they extended their

protection to this base tenure: the tenants hold 'by the custom

of the manor.'(108*) On the strength of such custom the life of

the unfree peasantry takes a shape closely resembling that of the

free population; transactions and rights spring into being which

find their exact parallel in the common law of the 'free and

lawful' portion of the community. Walter, a villain of St.

Alban's, surrenders into the hand of the monastery two

curtilages, which are thereupon granted to his daughter and her

husband for life, upon condition that after their death the land

is to revert to Walter or to his heirs.(109*) An Essex villain

claims succession by hereditary right, for himself and his

heirs.(110*) I have already spoken of the 'free bench' to be

found equally on free and unfree land. In the same way there

exists a parallel to the so-called 'Curtesy of England' in the

practice of manorial courts; if the son inherits land from his

mother during his father's life, the latter enjoys possession

during his life, or, it may be. only until his son comes of age.

In view of all this manorial documents have to draw a distinction

between tenements in villainage and land held at the will of the

lord, not in the general, but in the special and literal sense of

the term.(111*) From a formal point of view, villain tenure by

custom obtained its specific character and its name from a

symbolical act performed in open Court by the steward; a rod was

handed over to the new holder by the lord's representative, and a

corresponding entry made in the roll of the Court. Hence the

expression tenere per virgam aut per rotulum Curie.(112*)

    I ought perhaps to treat here of the different and

interesting forms assumed by services and rents as consequences

of manorial organisation. But I think that this subject. will be

understood better in another connexion, namely as part of the

agrarian system. One side only of it has to be discussed here.

Everywhere customs arise which defend the villains from

capricious extortions on the part of the lord and steward. These

customs mostly get 'inbreviated'(113*) described in surveys and

cartularies, and although they have no legally binding power,

they certainly represent a great moral authority and are followed

in most cases.

    A very characteristic expression of their influence may be

found in the fact that the manorial rolls very often describe in

detail, not only what the peasants are bound to do for the lord,

but what the lord must do for the peasants; especially when and

how he is to feed them. Of course, the origin of such usage

cannot be traced to anything like a right on the part of the

villain; it comes from the landlord's concessions and good-will,

but grace loses its exceptional aspect in this case and leads to

a morally binding obligation.(114*) When the villain brings his

yearly rent to his lord, the latter often invites him to his

table.(115*) Very common is the practice of providing a meal for

the labourers on the boon-days, the days on which the whole

population of the village had to work for the lord in the most

busy time of the summer and autumn. Such boon-work was considered

as a kind of surplus demand; it exceeded the normal distribution

of work. It is often mentioned accordingly that such service is

performed out of affection for the lord, and sometimes it gets

the eloquent name of 'love-bene.' In proportion as the manorial

administration gets more work done in this exceptional manner, it

becomes more and more gracious in regard to the people. 'Dry

requests' (siccae precariae) are followed by 'requests with beer'

(precariae cerevisiae). But it was not beer alone that could be

got on such days. Here is a description of the customs of Borle,

a manor belonging to Christ Church, Canterbury, in Essex. 'And

let it be known that when he, the villain, with other customers

shall have done cutting the hay on the meadow in Raneholm, they

will receive by custom three quarters of wheat for baking bread,

and one ram of the price of eighteen pence, and one pat of

butter, and one piece of cheese of the second sort from the

lord's dairy, and salt, and oatmeal for cooking a stew' and all

the morning milk from all the cows in the dairy, and for every

day a load of hay. He may also take as much grass as he is able

to lift on the point of his scythe. And when the mown grass is

carried away, he has a right to one cart. And he is bound to

carry sheaves, and for each service of this kind he will receive

one sheaf, called "mene-schef." And whenever he is sent to carry

anything with his cart, he shall have oats, as usual, so much,

namely, as he can thrice take with his hand.(116*)

    All such customs seem very strange and capricious at first

sight. But it is to be noticed that they occur in different forms

everywhere, and that they were by no means mere oddities; they

became a real and sometimes a heavy burden for the landlord. The

authorities, the so-called 'Inquisitiones post mortem'

especially, often strike a kind of balance between the expense

incurred and the value of the work performed. By the end of the

thirteenth century it is generally found that both ends are just

made to meet in cases of extra work attended by extra feeding,

and in some instances it is found that the lord has to lay out

more than he gets back.(117*) The rise in the prices of

commodities had rendered the service unprofitable. No wonder that

such 'boon-work' has to be given up or to be commuted for money.

    These regularly recurring liberationes or liberaturae as they

are called, that is, meals and provender delivered to the

labourers, have their counterpart in the customary arrangement of

the amount and kind of services. I shall have to speak of their

varieties and usual forms in another connexion, but it must be

noticed now, that these peasants unprotected at law were under

the rule of orderly custom. W e have seen already that the

payments and duties which followed from the subjection of the

villains were for the most part fixed according to constant rules

in each particular case. The same may be said of the economical

pressure exercised in the shape of service and rent. It did not

depend on the caprice of the lord, although it depended

theoretically on his will. The villains of a manor in

Leicestershire are not bound to work at weeding the demesne

fields unless by their own consent, that is by agreement.(118*) A

baker belonging to Glastonbury Abbey is not bound to carry loads

unless a cart is provided him.(119*) A survey of Ely mentions

that some peasants are made to keep a hedge in order as extra

work and without being fed. But it is added that the jurors of

the village protest against such an obligation, as heretofore

unheard of.(120*) All these customs and limitations may, of

course, be broken and slighted by the lord, but such violent

action on his part will be considered as gross injustice, and may

lead to consequences unpleasant for him -- to riots and

desertion.

    It is curious that the influence of custom makes itself felt

slowly but surely among the most debased of the villains. The

Oxfordshire Hundred Roll treats for instance of the servi of

Swincombe. They pay merchet; if any of them dies without making

his will the whole of his moveable property falls to the lord.

They are indeed degraded. And still the lord does not tallage

them at pleasure, they are secure in the possession of their

waynage (salvo contenemento).(121*)

    We may sum up the results already obtained by our analysis of

manorial documents in the following propositions: --

    1. The terminology of the feudal period and the treatment of

tenure in actual life testify to the fact that the chief stress

lay more on tenure than on status, more on economical condition

than on legal distinctions.

    2. The subdivisions of the servile class and the varieties of

service and custom show that villainage was a complex mould into

which several heterogeneous elements had been fused.

    3. The life of the villain is chiefly dependent on custom,

which is the great characteristic of medieval relations, and

which stands in sharp contrast with slavery on the one hand and

with freedom on the other.



NOTES:



1. Thorold Rogers has made great use of this last class of

manorial documents in his well-known books.



2. Bracton, 271 b.



3. Bracton, 124.



4. Cartulary of Malmesbury (Rolls Series), ii. 186: 'Videlicet

quod prefatus Ricardus concessit praedictis abbati et conventui

et eorum tenentibus, tam rusticis, quam liberis quod ipsi terras

suas libere pro voluntate sua excolant.'



5. As to the Warwickshire Hundred Roll in the Record Office, see

my letter in the Athenaeum, 1883, December 22.



6. Rot. Hundred. ii. 471, a: 'Libere tenentes prioris de

Swaveseia.... Henricus Palmer 1 mesuagium et 3 rodas terre

reddens 12 d. et 2 precarias. Servi Adam scot tenet 10 acras

reddens 4s. et 6 precarias.... Cotarii.....'



7. Rot. Hundred. ii. 715. a: 'In servitute tenentes. Assunt et

ibidem 10 tenentes qui tenent 10 virgatas terre in villenagio et

operantur ad voluntatem domini et reddunt per annum 25 s.'



8. Rot. Hundred. ii. 690. 691: 'Villani servi-custumarii. Et

tenent ut villani, ut servi, ut libere tenentes.' Rot Hundred.

ii. 544, b: 'De custumariis Johannes Samar tenet 1 mesuagium et 1

croft.... per servicium 3 sol. 2 d. et secabit 2 acras et dim.,

falcabit per 1 diem. De servis. Nicholaus Dilkes tenet 15 acras

-- et faciet per annum 144 opera et metet 2 acras. De aliis

servis.... De cotariis.... De aliis cotariis.'



9. Rot. Hundred. ii. 528, a: 'Henr. de Walpol habet latinos

(corr. nativos), qui tenent 180 acras terre et redd. 10 libr. et

8 sol. et 4 d. et ob. Nomina eorum qui tenent de Henrico de

Walpol in villenagio.' Chapter House, County Boxes, Salop. 14, c:

'Libere tenentes.... Coterelli.... Nativi.'



10. Hale, in his Introduction to the Domesday of St. Paul's,

xxiv, speaks of the 'nativi a principio' of Navestock, and

distinguishes them from the villains. 'The ordinary praedial

services due from the tenentes or villani were not required to be

performed in person, and whether in the manor or out of it the

villanus was not in legal language "sub potestate domini." Not so

the nativus.' Hale's explanation is not correct, but the twofold

division is noticed by him.



11. Domesday of St. Paul's, 157 (Articuli visitationis): 'An

villani sive custumarii vendant terras. Item, an nativi

custumarii maritaverunt filias-vel vendiderint vitulum -- vel

arbores -- succidant.' A Suffolk case is even more clear.

Registrum cellararii of Bury St. Edmunds, Cambridge University

Gg. iv. 4, f 30, b: 'Gersumarius vel custumarius qui nativus

est.... Antecessor recognovit se nativum domini abbatis in curia

domini regis.'



12. Cartulary of Eynsham in Oxfordshire, MS. of the Chapter of

Christ Church in Oxford, N. 27, p. 25, a: 'In primis Willelmus le

Brewester nativus domini tenet de dictis prato et terris...'



13. Eynsham Cartulary, 49, b: 'Johannes Kolyns nativus domini

tenet I virgatam terre cum pertinenciis in bondagio.'



14. Cartulary of St. Mary of Worcester (Camden Series), 15. a:

'Nativi, cum ad aetatem pervenerint nisi immediate serviant

patri-faciant 4 benripas et forinsici similiter.' Survey of

Okeburn, Q. R, Anc. Miscell. Alien Priories, 2/2: 'Aliquis

nativus non potest recedere sine licencia neque catalla amovere

nec extraneus libertatem dominorum ad commorandum ingrediat sine

licentia.'



15. Domesday of St. Paul's, 80: 'Nativi a principio. Isti tenent

terras operarias.'



16. Queen's Remembrancer's Miscellanies, 902-62: 'Rotuli de

libertate de Tynemouth, de liberis hominibus, non de nativis.'



17. Queen's Remembrancer's Miscellanies, 902 77: 'Nativi de

Sebrighteworth (Proavus extraneus).' See App. X.



18. Warwickshire Hundr. Roll, Queen's Remembrancers Miscellaneous

Books, 29, 19, b: 'Johannes le Clerc tenet 1 virg. terre pro

eodem sed est libere condicionis.' Augment. Off., Duchy of

Lancaster, Court Rolls, Bundle 32, 283: 'Unum mesuagium et 19

acre terre in Holand que sunt in manu domini per mortem W. qui

eas tenuit in bondagio, Ipse fuit liber, quia natus fuit extra

libertatem domini.'



19. Glastonbury Inquisitions of 1189 (Roxburghe Series), 48:

'Radulfus niet tenet dimidiam virgatam.'



20. Glastonbury Inquis. Roxburghe Series), 26: 'Rogerus P. tenet

virg. terre: pro una medietate dat. xxx d et pro alia medietate

operatur sicut neth et seminat dimidiam acram pro churset et dat

hueortselver.' Ibid. 22: 'Osbertus tenet I viriatam terre

medietatem pro ii sol. et dono et pro alia medietatc Operatur

quecumque jussus fuerit sicut neth' Cartulary of Abingdon (Rolls

Series, ii. 304: 'Illi sunt ncti de villa. Aldredus de Brueria 5

sol. pro dimidia hida et arat et varectat et seminat acram suo

semine et trahit foenum et bladuin.' Ibid. ii. 302: 'Bernerius et

filius suus tenent unam cotsetland unde reddunt cellario

monachorum 6 sestaria mellis et Camerae 31 d.' 'De netis.

Robertus tenet dimidiam hidam unde reddit 5 sol. et 3 den. et

arabit acram et seminabit semine sUo et trahet foenum et bladum.

Hoc de netis.'



21. Black Book of Rochester Cathedral (ed. Thorpe, 10. a:

Consuetudines de Hedenham et de Cudintone. Dominus potest ponere

ad opera quem. cumque voluerit de netis suis in die St. Martini.

Et sciendum quod neti idem sunt quod Neiatmen qui aliquantulum

liberiores sunt quam cotmen, qui omnes habent virgatas ad minus.'



22. Cartulary of Shaftesbury, Harl. MSS. 61, f 60: 'Et habebit

unum animal quietum in pastura, si est net, et de aliis

herbagium. Et si idem fuerit cotsetle debet operari 2 diebus.'

Ibid. 59: 'Tempore Henrici Regis fuerunt in T 18 Neti sed modo

non sunt nisi 11 et ex 7 qui [non] sunt Nicholaus tenet terram

[trium] et 4 sunt in dominico; et 7 cotmanni fuerunt tempore

Henrici Regis qui non sunt modo, quorum trium tenet terram

Nicholaus et 4 sunt in dominico.' Ibid. 65: 'Cotsetle... debet

metere quantum unus nieth... et debet collocare messem vel...

aliud facere... dum Neth messem attrahat... pannagium sicut

Neth.' Ibid. 89: 'Si moriatur cotsetle pro diviso dabit 12 d. et

vidua tenebit pro illo id divisum tota vita sua. Si moriatur

neatus dabit melius catellum et pro hoc tenebit quietus.'



23. Glastonbury Inquis. 51: 'Et nieti tenent 9 acras unde reddunt

3 s,' Ibid. 47; 'Nieti habent unum pratum pro 5s.'



24. Glastonbury Inquis. 105: 'Ernaldus buriman dimidiam virgatam,

Iohannes burimannus dimidiam virgatam.' Cf Custumal of Bleadon,

p. 189; Cartulary of Shaftesbury, Harl. MSS. 61, f. 45.



25. It is to be found sometimes out of the Danish shires, e.g. in

Oxfordshire. Rot. Hundred. ii, 842, b: 'Bondagium: Johannes

Bonefaunt tenet unam virgatam terre de eodem Roberto... reddit...

11 sol. pro omni servicio et scutagium quando currit 20 d.' Of

course there were isolated Danish settlenments outside the

Denelaw.



26. Rot. Hundred. ii. 486, a: 'Tenentes Alicie la Blunde. Bondi.'

A. habet in eadem villa 2 villanos, quorum quilibet tenet

mesuagium cum 30 a. Id. Al. hab. 1 bondum qui ten. 20 a.

Custumarii, Id. Al. habet 1 villanum, qui tenet I mes. cum 44 a.'

Rot Hundred. ii. 486, a: 'De W. le Blunde. Villani., R. de

Badburnham. Bondi cotarii.' Cf Ibid. 422, b; 423, a: 'Libere

tenentes.... Custumarii.... Bondi.'



27. Ramsey Inquisitions, Galba, E. x. 34: 'W.L. tenet in

landsetagio 12 a. pro 9 den. et ob. R. 24 a. de landsetagio et 12

a. de novo.' Cartulary of Ramsey (Rolls Series), i. 426: 'G. C.

dat dim. marcam ut K. filius suus fiat heusebonde de 6 a. terrae

de lancetagio.' Registr. Cellararii of Bury St Edmund's,

Cambridge University, Gg. iv. 4, f 400, b: '9 acre unde 4 a.

fuerunt libere et 5 lancettagii.' Cartulary of Ramsey Rolls

Series), i. 425: 'S. Cl. recognovit, quod 24 a., quas tenet, sunt

in lanceagio dom. Abbatis salvo corpore suo et quod faciet omnes

consuetudines serviles.... lancectus nacione.'



28. Domesday of St. Paul's, 17: 'Item omnes operarii dimidiae

virgatae debent invenire vasa et utensilia ter in anno ad

braciandum.' Cf 28.



29. Rot. Hundred. ii. 422, 423. Cf 507, a: 'Libere tenentes...

Nicholaus Trumpe 3 a. terre cum mesuagio et red. per ann. 20 d.

Custumarii... Nicholaus Trumpe ten. I a. terre et redd. 2 sol.'



30. Exch. Q. R. Misc. Alien Priories, 2/2. (Chilteham): '....

Redditus villanorum de 126 villanis 41 libre, 14 s. II d. Item

sunt 70 custumarii qui debent arare bis per annum cum 17

carucis.... Item sunt 25 villani qui debent herciare quilibet

eorum per 2 dies,' etc.



31. Cartulary of St. Peter of Gloucester (Rolls Series), iii.

203: 'Omnes consuetudinarii majores habebunt tempore falcationis

prati unum multonem, farinam, et salem ad potagium. Et minores

consuetudinarii habebunt quilibet eorum I panem et omnes I caseum

in communi, unam acr. frumenti pejoris campi de dominico et unum

carcasium multonis, et unum panem ad Natale.'



32. Cartulary of Malmesbury (Rolls Series), i. 154, 155. Cf. i.

186, 187. Cartulary of St. Mary of Worcester (Camden Society),

43, b; Rot. Hundred. ii. 775, b.



33. Rot Hundred. ii. 602, a. Cf Exch. Q. R. Alien Priories, 2/2:

'Item sunt in eadem villata de Wardeboys 6 dimidias virgatas --

que vocantur Akermannelondes, quorum W.L. tenet 1/2 virgatam pro

qua ibit ad carucam Abbatis si placeat abbati vel dabit sicut

illi qui tenent 6 Maltlondes preter 15d.' Rot. Hundred. i. 208:

'Utrum akermanni debent servicium suum vel servicii

redempcionem.'



34. Registr. Cellararii of Bury St. Edmund's, Cambridge

University, Gg. iv. 4, f 26: 'Gersumarii (Custumarii).... Gersuma

pro filia sua maritanda.' Ibid. 108, b: 'Tenentes 15 acrarum

custumarii -- omnes sunt gersumarii ad voluntatem domini.'

Cartulary of Bury St. Edmund's, Harl. MSS. 3977, f 87, d:

'Nichol. G. gersumarius tenet 30 a. pro 8 sol. que solent esse

custumarie.' I may add on the authority of Mr. F. York Powell

that landsettus (land-seti), as well as akermannus (aker-madr)

and gersuma (gorsemi), are certainly Danish loan-words, which

accounts for their occurrence in Danish districts.



35. Hale, Introduction to the Domesday of St. Paul's, XXV: 'If we

compare the services due from the Hidarii with those of the

libere tenentes on other manors, it will be evident, that the

Hidarii of Adulvesnasa belonged to the ordinary class of villani,

their distinction being probably only this, that they were

jointly, as well as severally, bound to perform the services due

from the hide of which they held part.'



36. Eynsham Inquest, 49, a: 'Summa (prati) xvi a. et iv perticas

que dimide. bantur xi virgatariis et rectori ut uni eorum et quia

jam supersunt tantummodo 4 virgatarii et rector, dominus habet in

manu sua 7 porciones dicti prati.'



37. Cartulary of Battle, Augmentatlon Office, Miscell. Books, 57,

f. 35, s: 'yherdlinges.... custumarii.' Ibid. 42, b: 'Majores

Erdlinges scil. virgarii. Halferdlinges (majores cottarii)

Minores cottarii.'



38. Black Book of Peterborough, 164: 'In Scotere et in Scaletorp

-- 24 plenarii villani et 2 dimidii villani Plenarii villani

operantur 2 diebus in ebdomada.'



39. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Series), 23: 'Operatur ut alii

ferlingseti.'



40. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Series), 137: 'Cotsetle debent

faldiare ab Hoccade usque ad festum S. Michaelis.' Cartulary of

St. Peter of Gloucester (Rolls Series), iii. 71: 'Burgenses

Gloucestriae reddunt una cum aliis tenentibus ad manerium

Berthonae praedictae per annum de coteriis cum curtillagiis in

suburbio Gloucestriae quorum nomina non recolunt 29 solidos 7 d.

de redditu assiso.' Ibid. iii. 116: 'Cotlandarii: Johannes le

Waleys tenet unum mesuagium cum curtillagio et faciet 8 bederipas

et 3 dies ad fenum levandum, et valent 131/2d.'



41. Norfolk Feodary, Additional MSS. 2, a: 'Et idem Thomas tenet

de predicto Roberto de supradicto feodo per predictum servicium

sexaginta mesuagia; 21 villani de eodem Thoma tenent. Item idem

Thomas tenet de predicto Roberto 9 cotarios, qui de eo tenent in

villenagio.' Cf Rot. Hundred. ii. 440, a.



42. Cartulary of Battle, Augment. Office, Misc. Books, 57, f. 37,

b. ' Virgarii.... Cotarii, qui tenent dimid. virgatam.' Ibid. 36,

b: 'Cottarii majores et minores.'



43. Glastonbury Inquis. (Roxburghe Series), 114: 'Rad. Forest.

1/2 cotsetland pro 18 d. et operatur sicut dimidius cotarius sed

non falcat.'



44. Glastonbury Inquis. ( Roxburghe Series), 14: 'Predictus W.

habet tres bordarios in auxilium officii sui. llli tres bord.

habent corredium suum in aula abbatis, in qua laborant.' Terrae

Templariorum, Queen's Rem. Misc. Books, 16, f. 27. 'Unusquisque

bordarius debet operari una die in ebdomada.' Cf. 27, b.



45. The history of the terms in Saxon times and the terminology

of the Domesday Survey will be discussed in the second volume. My

present object is to establish the connexion between feudal facts

and such precedents as are generally accepted by the students of

Saxon and early Norman evidence.



46. Thorold Rogers, History of Agriculture and Prices, i. p 71.



47. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., i. f 225, b (Bodleian Libr.):

'Noverit universitas vestra me vendidisse domino Ricardo vicario

de Domerham Philippum Hardyng nativum meum pro 20 solidis

sterling unde ego personam ipsius Philippi ab omni nativitate et

servitute liberavi.' Cf. Gloucester Cartulary (Rolls Series), ii.

4. Madox, Formulare Anglicanum, 416, gives several deeds of sale

and enfranchisement by sale. Dr Stubbs had some doubts about the

time of these transactions, but deeds of sale of the twelfth and

thirteenth centuries occur, and are preserved in the Record

Office. See Deputy Keeper's Reports, XXXVI. p. 178.



48. Glastonbury Inquis., tempore abb. Michaelis, Addit. MSS.

17,450, f 7: 'Petrus filius Margarete tenet virgatam terre.. nec

potest filiam suam maritare sine licentia domini vel ballivorum.'

Cf Cartulary of Newent, Add MSS. 15, 668, f 46: 'emit filiam

suam.' Cartulary of St. Peter of Gloucester (Rolls Series), iv.

219: 'Item, quod quilibet praepositus habeat potestatem

concedendi cuicunque nativae, ut possit se maritare tam extra

terram domini quam infra, acceptis tamen salvis plegiis pro ea de

fine faciendo ad proximam curiam; cum si forte praesentiam

ballivi expectasset in partibus remotioribus agentis casu

interveniente forte nunquam gauderet promotione maritali.'



49. Cartulary of Christ Church, Canterbury, Harl. MSS. I006, f

55: 'Tenens de monday land, si filiam infra villam maritaverit 16

d. et si extra homagium 2 sol.' Black Book of Coventry, Ashmol.

MSS. 864, f 5: 'Radulfus Bedellus de 10 hidis tenet I virgatam

terre et prati. Et dabit merchettam pro filia sua maritanda, si

eam maritaverit extra villenagium Episcopi.'



50. Cartulary of Glastonbury, Wood MSS. i. (Bodleian), f 111. S:

'Si nul de neffes folement se porte de son corps parque le

seignour perd la vente de eux.'



51. Warwickshire Hundred Roll, Queen's Rem. Misc. Books, No. 26,

f 26, a: 'Redempcio carnis et Sanguinis et alia servicia ad

voluntatem domini.' Rot. Hundred. ii. 335, b: 'In villenagio 8

virgate terre quarum quelibet debet ei per annum 6 s. vel opera

ad valorem, tenentes etiam illarum sunt servi de sanguine suo

emendo ad voluntatem dicti Abbatis et ad alia facienda, que ad

servilem condicionem pertinent. In cottariis cotagia 6 de eadem

servitute et condicione.'



52. How very difficult it was sometimes to decide the question,

whether merchet had been paid or not, may be seen from the

following instances: Coram Rege, 27 Henry III, m. 3: 'Et non

possunt inquirere nec scire quod tempore Johannis Regis dederunt

merchettum vel heryettum sed bene credunt quod hoc fuit ex

permissione ipsius Regis et non per aliquam convencionem, quam

fecerat eis pro predictis 50 libris.' Cartulary of Ramsey (Rolls

Series), i. 441: 'De merchetto nesciunt sine majori consilio.'



53. Y. B. 21/22 Edw. I, p. 107.



54. Note-book of Bracton, pl. 1230.



55. Gloucester Cartulary (Rolls Series), iii. 218: 'Item quod non

permittitur, quod aliquis vendat equum masculum vel bovem sibi

vitulatum sine licentia, nisi consuetudo se habeat in

contrarium.' Rot. Hlindred. ii. 628, a: 'Si habeat equum

pullanum, bovem vel vaccam ad vendendum, dominus propinquior erit

omnibus aliis et vendere non debent sine licentia domini.'

Rochester Cartulary (ed. Thorpe), 2, a: 'Si quis habuerit pullum

de proprio jumento aut vitulum de propria vacca et pervenerit ad

perfectam etatem, non poterit illos vendere, nisi prius ostendat

domino Suo et sciat utrum illos velit emere sicut alios.' Rot.

Hundred. ii. 463, a: 'Item si ipse habeat pullum vel boviculum et

laboraverit cum illo non potest vendere sine licentia domini, sed

si non laboraverit licitum.'



56. Cartulary of St. Mary of Beaulieu, Nero, A. xii. f 93, b:

'Pro filio coronando et pro licencia recedendi faciet sicut

illi.' Cartulary of St. Peter of Gloucester (Rolls Series), iii.

218: 'Item quod nullo masculo tribuatur licentia recedendi a

terra domini sine licentia superioris hoc proviso, quod

consuetudines a servis dominus debitas ad plenum recipiat,

contradicentes attachiando ut inde respondeant ad curiam.'



57. Duchy of Lancaster Court Rolls, Bundle 85, No. 1157 (Record

Office: 'Et quia non sunt residentes dant chevagium., Lancaster

Court Rolls, Bundle 62, No. 750, m. I: 'Johannes le Grust dat

comiti ii solidos et ii capones ut possit manere ubi sibi

placuerit.'



58. Lancaster Court Rolls, Bundle 62, No. 750, m. 3: 'Capones de

reditu ut custumarii possint manere super terram Radulfi de

Wernore sed dictus Will. erit in visu franciplegii dom. comitis.'



59. Suffolk Court Rolls (Bodleian), 3: 'Preceptum inquirere

nomina eorum qui terram servilem vendiderunt per cartam et

quibus, et qui sunt qui terram liberam adquisierunt et ibi

resident et prolem suscitant et ob hoc libertatem sibi

vindicant.' Cartulary of St. Alban's, 454: 'Ubi villani emunt

terras liberorum de catallis nostris.'



60. Cart. Glouc. (Rolls Ser.), iii. 217: 'Item, inhibeatur

nativis domini manerii ne aliquid alicui dent per annum in

recognitione, ut aliquo gaudeant patrocinio.'



61. Lancaster Court Rolls, Bundle 62, No. 756, m. I: 'Nativus

receptatus apud Latfeld sine licentia domini.'



62. Cartulary of Shaftesbury, Harl. MSS. 61, f 59: 'Fugitivi

domine, R. fil. Al. manet in Br. Sub Willelmo.' Ramsey Inqu.,

Galba E. x. f. 27, b: 'Isti sunt nativi abbatis: E. et O. manent

apud Gomcestre.' Ibid. 51: 'A. est nativus domini abbatis, sed

dicit se esse hominem episcopi.' Cartulary of Shaftesbury, Harl.

MSS. 61, f 59: 'Nicholaus habet 4 nativos domine, partiln terram

tenentes in calumpnia domine partim super terram Nicholai.'



63. Coram Rege, Pasch. 7 Edw. I, m. 7: 'Villanus fugitivus an in

villenagio tenens et adventicius.'



64. Eynsham Inqu. (Chapter of Christ Church, Oxford), 25, a:

'Quas Adam pater ipsius adquisivit et quia quicquid servis

adquiritur domino adquiritur faciat inde dominus quod sibi

videatur expediens.'



65. Register of St. Mary of Barnwell, Harl. MSS. 3601, f 60:

'Quidam villanus de Bertone tenuit unum mesuagium de duobus

dominis...... quicquid servus acquirit acquiritur domino suo.'



66. Black Book of Coventry, Ashmol. MSS. 864, f 6: 'Et cum

obierit, dominus habebit suum melius animal et nihilominus

habebit omnes equos masculos, carrectam ferratam, ollum eneum,

pannum laneum integrum, bacones integros, omnes porcos excepta

una sue, et omnes ruscos apium, si qua hujusmodi habuerit.'



67. Formulary of St. Alban's, Camb. Univ., Ee. iv. 20.



68. Lancaster Court Rolls. Bundle 32, No. 283: 'Petrus filius

Gerardi nativus domini defunctus est et habuit in bonis domino

pertinentibus unam vaccam que appreciatur ad 5 sol. et venditur

W. instauratori.' Cartulary of Christ Church, Canterbury, Addit.

MSS. 6157, f 25, b: 'Et sciendum, quod si quis custumarius domini

in ipso manerio obierit, dominus habebit de herietto meliorem

bestiam. Et si bestiam non habuerit, dabit domino pro herietto 2

sol. 6d.'



69. Cartulary of Battle, Augment. Off. Misc. Books, No. 57, f 21,

a: 'Et post mortem cujuslibet predictorum nativorum dominus

habebit pro herieto melius animal, si quod habuerit, si vero

nullam vivam bestiam habeant, dominus nullum herietum habebit ut

dicunt. Filii vel filiae predictorum nativorum dabunt pro

ingressu tenementi post mortem antecessorum suorum tantum sicut

dant de redditu per annum.



70. Gloucester Cartulary, iii. 193: 'Et post decessum suum

dominus.habebit. melius auerium ejus nomine herieti, et de

relicta similiter. Et post mortem ejus haeres faciet voluntatem

domini, antequam terram ingrediatur.'



71. Gloucester Cartulary (Rolls Series), iii. 208: 'Dicunt etiam

quod relicta sua non potest in dicta terra maritari sine licentia

domini.' Cartulary of Christ Church, Canterbury, Add. MSS. 6159,

f 25, b: 'Si autem per licenciam domini se maritaverit, heredes

predicti defuncti predictum tenementum per licenciam domini

intrabunt et uxorem relictam dicti defuncti de medietate dicti

tenementi dotabunt.' Rot. Hundred. ii. 768, b: 'Item si obierit,

dominus habebit melius auerium nomine herietti et per illum

heriettum sedebit uxor ejus vidua per annum et unum diem et si

ulterius vidua esse voluerit faciet voluntatem domini.' -- The

custom in some of the manors of St. Peter of Gloucester was

peculiar. Gloucester Cartulary (Rolls Series), iii. 88: 'Matilda

relicta Praepositi tenet dim. virg. contin. 24 a. (8 sol.) Et

tenet ad terminum vitae abbatis... Et debet redimere filium et

filiam ad voluntatem domini... Et si obierit, dominus habebit

melius auerium nomine domini, et aliud melius auerium nomine

rectoris, et de marito cum obierit similiter.' When the lord was

an ecclesiastical corporation he not unfrequently got two beasts,

one as a heriot and the other as a mortuary due to him as rector

of the parish.



72. Worcester Cartulary (Camden Series), 102: 'De antiquis

consuetudinibus villanorum, quaelibet etiam virgata dabit iii

heriet, sc. equum cum hernesio et duos boves, et dimidia virgata

duos heriet, sc. equum cum hernesio et bovem. Alii autem dabunt

equum vel bovem.'



73. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Series), 89, a: 'Item non vendet

bovem vel equum de sua nutritura sine licencia domini, nec

coronare faciet filium nec maritabit filiam sine licencia domini,

dabit heriettum melius animal, faciet finem cum domino pro

ingressu habendo ad voluntatem domini communiter per 40 solidos

et omnia alia faciet que nativo incumbunt.' The relief ought to

be discussed in connexion with the obligations of the holding. I

speak of it here because the documents mention it almost always

with the heriot.



74. Cartulary of St. Mary of Beaulieu, Nero, A. XX. f 84, b: 'Pro

filio coronando, filia maritanda, fine terre... secundum

qualitatem personarum et quantitatem substancie et terre.'



75. Rot. Hundred. ii. 747, a: 'Debet talliari ad voluntatem

domini quolibet anno.'



76. Ibid. ii. 528, b: 'Et debet talliari ad voluntatem domini

semel in anno et debet gersummare filiam et fieri prepositus ad

voluntatem domini.'



77. Cartulary of Battle, Augment. Off. Misc. Books, No. 57, f 93,

a: 'Amerciamenta tenentium, qui redditum tempore statuto non

persoluerunt.' Reg. Cellararii of Bury St. Edmund's, Cambridge

Univ., Gg. iv. 4. 52, b; cf. Eynsham Inqu. ii. a: (Inquisitio de

statu villani): 'Subtraxerunt sectam curie a longo tempore

dicendo se esse liberos.'



78. Formulary of St. Alban's, Cambridge Univ., Ee. iv. 20, f 165,

a: 'Servilia-videlicet secta curie de tribus septimanis in tres

et secta molendini.' We find it denied in the king's court that a

free man can be bound to do suit to the lord's mill; Bracton's

Note-book, p. 161: 'Nota quod liber homo non tenetur sequi

molendinum domini sui nisi gratis velit.'



79. Bury St. Edmund's, Registrum album, Cambridge Univ., Ee. iii.

60, f 155, b: 'Liberi excepti a falda domini.'



80. As to Scotale, See Stubbs, Const. Hist. 165.



81. Reg. Cellararii of Bury St. Edmund's, Cambridge Univ., Gg.

iv. 4. 30, b: 'Per fidelitatem custumarii... et per alias

consuetudines serviles.'



82. Y. B. 2O/21 Edward I, p. 41: 'Kar nent plus neit a dire, Jeo

tenk les tenements en vileynage, ke neit a dire ke, Jeo tenk les

tenements demendez ver moy a la volunte le Deen,' etc. See above,

Chapter II.



83. Chron. Mon. de Abingdon, ii. 25 (Rolls Series).



84. Exch. Q. R., Misc. Books, No. 29, f 8, a: 'Habet 22 Servos

tenentes 35 acras terre ad voluntatem domini ill servagio.' f 10,

b: 'Habet ibidem 25 servos tenentes 12 virgatas terre et dimidiam

in servagio... et possunt omnes removeri pro voluntate domini.'



85. Harl. MSS. 1885, f. 7: 'Volens autemn dominus de Wahell

retinere ad opus suum totum parcum de Segheho... abegit omnes

rusticos qui in predicto loco iuxta predictum boscum manebant.'

Cf Cor. Rege, Pasch. a4 Edw. I, Oxon. 9.



86. Battle Abbey, Augment. Off. Misc. Books, 57, f 21, a:

'Etmemorandum quod omnes supradicti nativi non possunt...

prostrare maremium crescens in tenementis que tenent sine

licencia et visu ballivi vel servientis domini et hoc ad

edificandum et non aliter.' Add. Charters, 5290, (transgressiones

Stephani Chenore)... fecit vastum... in boscis quos idem

Stephanus tenuit de domino in bondagio cum de quercis fraxinis

pomariis et aliis arboribus vastos (ramos?) asportavit.'



87. Suffolk Court Rolls (Bodleian), 2, a: 'Rob. Gl. assertavit

pomaria sua et fecit wastum super vilenagium Comitis.'



88. Suffolk Court Rolls (Bodleian): 'Quia Henricus bercarius

plegios non potuit invenire ad heredificandum mesuagium quod fuit

W. C. et ibi attractum suum facere.'



89. Duchy of Lancaster Court Rolls (Record Off., Bundle 32, No.

285: 'Emma... venit et sursum reddit I cotagium et 5 acras et

dimidiam terre quas tenuit de domino in bondagio. Et venit Thomas

filius ejus et capit dictam terram et dat ad ingressum 10

solidos.' B. 62, No. 750: 'Galfridus percarius venit et tradidit

terram suam... domino comiti pro paupertate. Robertus filius eius

postea venit et finem fecit pro habenda seisina dicte terre.'



90. Duchy of Lancaster Court Rolls, B. 43, No. 484: 'Dicit etiam

quod dicta terra capta est in manu domini Edmundi pro redditibus

et serviciis inde a retro existentibus.' Essex Court Rolls, 3

(Bodleian): 'Preceptum est capere in manu prioris totam residuam

terram custumariam quam Matildis le Someters predicta tenet de

feodo prioris quia vendidit de terra sua custumaria... libere per

cartam contra consuetudinem manerii.'



91. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Series), 65; Gloucester

Cartulary (Rolls Series), iii. 196.



92. Capitula halimoti, Bodleian MSS., Wood, i. f III, b: 'Si nul

soit en un graunt tenement e ne puisse les droitures de son

tenement sustener e un aultre homme en un petit tenement que

meutz tendroit le graunt tenement al prow le seigneur e le

tenement.'



93. Rot. Hundred. ii. 321, a: In villenagio tres virgatae et

dimidia.... Et sunt tenentes illarum servi de sanguine suo

emendo.... In libere tenentibus pro certis serviciis per annum,'

etc.



94. Glastonbury Inquis. (Roxburghe Series), 21: 'Quantum quisque

teneat, omne ejus servitium; quis tenet libere et quantum et quo

servitio et quo guaranto et quo tempore; si aliqua terra fuerit

facta libera in tempore Henrici episcopi, vel postea, que debuit

operari; quo guaranto hoc fuit, et in quantum sit libera; si

dominicum sit occupatum vel foras positum in libertate vel

vilenagio, et si ita fuerit domino utilius sicut est vel

revocatum.'



95. Ibid. 130: 'J. clericus tenuit in tempore Henrici episcopi

apud Domerham unam virgatam quam adhuc tenet et aliam virgatam

apud Stapelham pro 10 solidis. Recepta villa de Domerham ad

firmam, ipse propria auctoritate dimisit virgatam de Stapelham et

dimidiam virgatam in Domerham in excambium cepit quia propinquior

fuit. Hec dimidia virgata operari solet, nunc autem est libera.

Virgata vero de Stapelham post illud excambium operari solet que

ante hoc libera fuit.'



96. Ibid. 121: 'De dono xxix solidi et vi denarii. Et de Anderdo

deficiunt vj den. quia tenet liberius quam predecessores sui

solebant tenere.'



97. Ramsey Cartulary (Rolls Series), i. 364: 'De his septem hydis

est una hyda libera. De sex hydis, quae restant, tenet Marsilia

filia A. de R. duas virgatas ad censum. Quinque hydae et tres

virgatae, quae restant, tenentur in puro villenagio.'



98. Galba, E. x. f 38.



99. Extensio de terris Roberti de Sto. Georgio (Lincoln) Inquis.

p. mort. 30 Henry IlI, No. 36: 'Idem habuit in villenagio 13

bovatas terre et 3 partes unius bovate que 9 rustici tenent et

quelibet bovata valet per annum 5 sol. pro omni servicio...

habuit in liberis serviciis unam bovatam quam Radulfus filius G.

de eo telluit per cartam pro 2 solidis per annum pro omni

servicio.,



100. Bury St. Edmund's, Reg. Cellararii, Cambr. Univ., Gg. iv. 4,

f 32, a: 'W. de Bruare tenet i rodam custumarie et per alias

consuetudines serviles... alteram libere et per servicium 2

denariorum.' Cf Gloucester Cartulary (Rolls Series), iii. 65.



101. Battle Abbey, Reg. Augment. Off. Misc. Books, No. 57, f 72,

b: 'Isti prenominati (liberi tenentes) sunt quieti per redditum

suum de communibus servitiis, debent tamen. herietum et

relevium.' Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., i. p. iii.: 'Si nul soit

enfraunchi de ces ouveraignes dont la uile le est le plus

charge.'



102. Ramsey Inqu., Galba, E. x. 39, d: 'Walterus abbas fecit R.

francum de terra patris sui que fuerat ad furcam et flagellum....

Multos de servicio rusticorum francos fecit.' Ramsey Cartulary

(Rolls Series), i. 487: '... quaelibet virgata de fleyland.' The

same land appears as, quaelibet virgata operaria quae non fuerit

posita ad censum.'



103. Spalding Priory, Reg., Cole MSS., vol. 43, f. 272: 'De

tenentibus terram operariam de priore in Spalding.. W. de A.

tenet 40 acras terre pro quibus debet operari qualibet die per

annum ad voluntatem Domini ad quocumque opus Dominus voluerit,

cum Carecta, Cortina, Vanga, Flagello, Tribulo, Furca, Falce.'

Coram Rege, Mich., 51/52 Henry III, m. b: 'Et similiter predictus

Petrus distringit eos pro consuetudinibus et servitiis que nec

antecessores eorum nec ipsi facere consueverunt ut cum furcis et

flagellis.'



104. Eynsham Cartulary, Christ Church MSS., No. 97, f 6, a:

'Willelmus F. tenet unum cotagium et quartam partem unius virgate

terre qui facere con. suevit pro rata porcione sicut virgatarius.

Modo ponitur ad firmam dum domina placet ad 6 solidos, 8 d.,'

etc. Cf Domesday of St. Paul's (Camden Series), 81. This is in

substance the difference between, bondagium et husbandland,'

Inquis. p. mort. 46 Henry III, No. 25; Hexham Priory Cartulary

(Surtees Series), p. xx.



105. Domesday of St. Paul's (Camden Series), 49.



106. St. Alban's Formulary, Cambridge Univ., Ee. iv. 20: 'Ne uno

homini plures terre tradantur, et si modo UnuS plures tcnet,

div.idantur, si commode et honeste fieri poterit.'



107. Domesday of St. Paul's (Camden Series), 52; Duchy of

Lancaster Court Rolls, B. 62, No. 750: 'Et quia huiusmodi

tenementum nullus potest vendicare hereditarie ut de aliis

villenagiis successive.'



108. Hereford Rolls, 8 (Bodleian): 'Et concessum est ei tenere

dictum mesuagium et unam acram terre sibi et heredibus suis

secundum consuetudinem manerii per servicia inde debita et

consueta.' Essex Rolls, 8 (Bodleian): 'Amicia de R. que tenet ex

consuetudine manerii.'



109. Extractus Rotulorum de Halimotis, Cambridge Univ, Dd. vii.

22, f I, a.



110. Essex Rolls, 8 (Bodleian), m. 6: 'Johannes filius W.B. venit

et clamavit unum mesuagium et quatuor acras terre cum

pertinenciis ut jus et hereditatem suam post mortemn dicti W.

patris sui faciendo inde dominis predictis servicia debita et

consueta nomine villenagii et dat domino ad inquirendum de jure

suo et si sit plene etatis et heres dicti W. nec ne,' etc.



111. Eynsham Cartulary, Christ Church MSS., No. 27, f II, b:

'Matildis B. tenet de domino unum cotagium cum curtilagio in

voluntate domini., Cf Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Series), 66;

Gloucester Cartulary (Rolls Series), iii. 134; Domesday of St.

Paul's (Camden Series), 23.



112. Reg. Cellararii Mon. Bury St Edmund's, Cambridge Univ., Gg.

iv. 4. f. 52, b: '(Curia 7 Edw. II)... dicunt quod quidam

Robertus Heth pater dictorum R. W. et J. tenuit de conventu per

virgam in villa de Berton magna... Et quia dedixerunt cepisse

dictam terram per virgam ideo potest seisiri dicta terra in manum

domini.' Registr. album vestiarii abbatiae S. Edmundi, Cambridge

Univ., Ee. iii. 60, f 188, b: 'Tenentes de mollond... tenent per

virgam in curia.' Eynsham Cartulary, Christ Church MSS., No. 97:

'Ricardus W. tenet unum cotagium et duas acras terrae campestres

per rotulum curie pro 3 sol.' Cf 12, a.



113. Note-book of Bracton, pl. 1237.



114. Ely Register, Cotton, Claudius, C. xi. f iii. b: 'Habebit

duas pugillatas avene ex gratia, ut juratores dicunt, per longum

tempus usitata.'



115. Warwickshire Roll. Exch. Q.R. No. 29, f. 94, b: 'Servus....

cum fecerit exennium.... comedet cum domino.'



116. Christ Church, Canterbury, Cartulary, Add. MSS. 6159, f 22,

b. Cf Gloucester Cartulary (Rolls Series), iii. 203.



117. Custumal of Battle Abbey (Camden Ser.), 30: 'Et debet

herciare per duos dies.... pretium operis iiij. d. Et recipiet de

domino utroque die repastus pretii iij d. Et sic erit dominus

perdens j.d. Et sic nichil valet illa herciatio ad opus domini.'



118. Coram Rege, Pasch., 14 Edw. I, Lege, 18: 'Villani circulare

(sic) non consueverunt nisi ex voluntate.'



119. Glastonbury Inqu. (Roxburghe Series), 82: 'Sed non debet

carriare nisi dominus prestaverit suum plaustrum.'



120. Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi, f 30, b: 'Sed juratores dicunt

quod nunquam hoc fecerunt nec de iure facere debent.'



121. Rot. Hundred. ii. 758, a: 'Servi... nec potest filiam

maritare nec uxorem ducere sine licencia domini; debet et salvo

contellemento suo talliari et ad omnia auxilia communia scottare

et lottare secundum facultatem suam,' etc.



Chapter 6



Free Peasantry



    I the heading of this chapter may not be misunderstood. It

would be difficult to speak of free peasantry in the modern sense

at the time with which we are now dealing. Some kind or form of

dependence often clings even to those who occupy the best place

among villagers as recognised free tenants, and in most cases we

have a very strong infusion of subjection in the life of

otherwise privileged peasants. But if we keep to the main

distinctions, and to the contrast which the authorities

themselves draw between the component elements of the peasant

class, its great bulk will arrange itself into two groups: the

larger one will consist of those ordinarily designated as

villains; a smaller, but by no means an insignificant or scanty

one, will present itself as free, more or less protected by law,

and more or less independent of the bidding of the lord and his

steward. There is no break between the two groups; one status

runs continuously into the other, and it may be difficult to

distinguish between the intermediate shades; but the fundamental

difference of conception is clearly noticeable as soon as we come

to look at the whole, and it is not only noticeable to us but was

noticed by the contemporary documents.

    In very many cases we are actually enabled to see how freedom

and legal security gradually emerge from subjection. One of the

great movements in the social life of the thirteenth and

fourteenth centuries is the movement towards the commutation of

services for money rents. In every survey we find a certain

number of persons who now pay money, whereas they used to do

work, and who have thus emancipated themselves from the most

onerous form of subjection.(1*) In the older documents it is

commonly specified that the lord may revert to the old system,

give up the rents, and enforce the services.(2*) In later

documents this provision disappears, having become obsolete, and

there is only a mention of certain sums of money. The whole

process, which has left such distinct traces in the authorities,

is easily explained by England's economic condition at that time.

Two important factors co-operated to give the country an

exceptionally privileged position. England was the only country

in Europe with a firmly constituted government. The Norman

Conquest had powerfully worked in the sense of social feudalism,

but it had arrested the disruptive tendencies of political

feudalism. The opposition between the two races, the necessity

for both to keep together, the complexity of political questions

which arose from conquest and settlement on the one hand, from

the intercourse with Normandy and France on the other, -- all

these agencies working together account for a remarkable

intensity of action on the part of the centripetal forces of

society, if I may use the expression: there was in England a

constant tendency towards the concentration and organisation of

political power in sharp contrast with the rest of Europe where

the state had fallen a prey to local and private interests. One

of the external results of such a condition was the growth of a

royal power supported by the sympathy of the lower English-born

classes, but arranging society by the help of Norman principles

of fiscal administration. Not less momentous was the formation of

an aristocracy which was compelled to act as a class instead of

acting as a mere collection of individuals each striving for his

own particular advantage; as a class it had to reckon with, and

sometimes represent, the interests and requirements of other

classes. In all these respects England was much ahead of Germany,

where tribal divisions were more powerful than national unity,

and the state had to form itself on feudal foundations in

opposition to a cosmopolitan Imperial power; it was not less in

advance of France, where the work of unification, egotistically

undertaken by the king, had hardly begun to get the upper hand in

its conflict with local dynasties; not less in advance of Italy,

so well situated for economic progress, but politically wrecked

by its unhappy connexion with Germany, the anti-national

influence of the Papacy, and the one-sided development of

municipal institutions. By reason of its political advantages

England had the start of other European countries by a whole

century and even by two centuries. The 'silver streak' acted

already as a protection against foreign inroads, the existence of

a central power insured civil order, intercourse between the

different parts of the island opened outlets to trade, and

reacted favourably on the exchange of commodities and the

circulation of money.

    Another set of causes operated in close alliance with these

political influences. The position of England in relation to the

European market was from the first an advantageous one. besides

the natural development of seafaring pursuits which lead to

international trade, and always tend to quicken the economic

progress, there were two special reasons to account for a speedy

movement in the new direction: the woollen trade with Flanders

begins to rise in the twelfth century, and this is the most

important commercial feature in the life of North-Western Europe;

then again, the possession of Normandy and the occupation of

Aquitaine and other provinces of France by the English opened

markets and roads for a very brisk commercial intercourse with

the Continent. As an outcome of all these political and

economical conditions we find the England of the thirteenth

century undoubtedly moving from natural husbandry to the

money-system.

    The consequences are to be seen on every side in the

arrangements of state and society. The means of government were

modified by the economic change. Hired troops took the place of

feudal levies; kings easily renounced the military service of

their tenants and took scutages which give them the means of

keeping submissive and well-drilled soldiers. The same process

took place all through the country on the land of secular and

ecclesiastical lords. They all preferred taking money which is so

readily spent and so easy to keep, which may transform itself

equally well into gorgeous pageants and into capital for carrying

on work, instead of exacting old-fashioned unwieldly ploughings

and reapings or equally clumsy rents in kind.

    On the other hand, the peasants were equally anxious to get

out of the customary system: through its organisation of labour

it involved necessarily many annoyances, petty exactions and

coercion; it involved a great waste of time and energy. The

landlord gained by the change, because he received an economic

instrument of greater efficiency; the peasant gained because he

got rid of personal subjection to control; both gained; for a

whole system of administration, a whole class of administrators,

stewards, bailiffs, reeves, a whole mass of cumbrous accounts and

archaic procedure became unnecessary.

    In reality the peasantry gained much more than the lord. Just

because money rents displaced the ploughings and reapings very

gradually, they assumed the most important characteristic of

these latter -- their customary uniformity; tradition kept them

at a certain level which it was very difficult to disturb, even

when the interests of the lord and the conditions of the time had

altered a great deal. Prices fluctuate and rise gradually, the

buying strength of money gets lowered little by little, but

customary rents remain much the same as they were before. Thus in

process of time the balance gets altered for the benefit of the

rent payer. I do not mean to say that such views and such facts

were in full operation from the very beginning: one of the chief

reasons for holding the Glastonbury inquest of 1189 was the wish

to ascertain whether the rents actually corresponded to the value

of the plots, and to make the necessary modifications. But such

fresh assessments were very rare, it was difficult to carry them

into practice, and the general tendency was distinctly towards a

stability of customary rents.

    The whole process has a social and not merely an economical

meaning. Commutation, even when it was restricted to agricultural

services, certainly tended to weaken the hold of the lord on his

men. Personal interference was excluded by it, the manorial

relation resolved itself into a practice of paying certain dues

once or several times a year; the peasant ceased to be a tool in

the husbandry arrangements of his master. The change made itself

especially felt when the commutation took place in regard to

entire villages:(3*) the new arrangement developed into the

custom of a locality, and gathered strength by the number of

individuals concerned in it, and the cohesion of the group. In

order not to lose all power in such a township, the lords usually

reserved some cases for special interference and stipulated that

some services should still be rendered in kind.(4*)

    Again, the conversion of services into rents did not always

present itself merely in the form just described: it was not

always effected by the mere will of the lord, without any legally

binding acts. Commutation gave rise to actual agreements which

came more or less under the notice of the law. We constantly find

in the Hundred Rolls and in the Cartularies that villains are

holding land by written covenant. In this case they always pay

rent. Sometimes a villain, or a whole township, gets emancipated

from certain duties by charter,(5*) and the infringement of such

an instrument would have given the villains a standing ground for

pleading against the lord. it happened from time to time that

bondmen took advantage of such deeds to claim their liberty, and

to prove that the lord had entered into agreement with them as

with free people.(6*) To prevent such misconstruction the lord

very often guards expressly against it, and inserts a provision

to say that the agreement is not to be construed against his

rights and in favour of personal freedom.(7*)

    The influence of commutation makes itself felt in the growth

of a number of social groups which arrange themselves between the

free and the servile tenantry without fitting exactly into either

class. Our manorial authorities often mention mol-land and

mol-men.(8*) The description of their obligations always points

one way: they are rent-paying tenants who may be bound to some

extra work, but who are very definitely distinguished from the

'custumarii,' the great mass of peasants who render labour

services.(9*) Kentish documents use 'mala' or 'mal' for a

particular species of rent, and explain the term as a payment in

commutation of servile customs.(10*) In this sense it is

sometimes opposed to gafol or gable -- the old Saxon rent in

money or in kind, this last being considered as having been laid

on the holding from all time, and not as the result of a

commutation.(11*) Etymologically there is reason to believe that

the term mal is of Danish origin,(12*) and the meaning has been

kept in practice by the Scotch dialect.(13*) What immediately

concerns our present purpose is, that the word mal-men or mol-men

is commonly used in the feudal period for villains who have been

released from most of their services by the lord on condition of

paying certain rents. Legally they ought to remain in their

former condition, because no formal emancipation has taken place;

but the economical change reacts on their status, and the

manorial documents show clearly how the whole class gradually

gathers importance and obtains a firmer footing than was strictly

consistent with its servile origin.(14*)

    In the Bury St. Edmund's case just quoted in a footnote the

fundamental principle of servility is stated emphatically, but

the statement was occasioned by gradual encroachments on the part

of the molmen, who were evidently becoming hardly distinguishable

from freeholders.(15*) And in many Cartularies we find these

molmen actually enumerated with the freeholders, a very striking

fact, because the clear interest of the lord was to keep the two

classes asunder, and the process of making a manorial 'extent'

and classifying the tenants must have been under his control. As

a matter of fact, the village juries were independent enough to

make their presentments more in accordance with custom than in

accordance with the lord's interests. In a transcript of a

register of the priory of Eye in Suffolk, which seems to have

been compiled at the time of Edward I, the molmen are

distinguished from villains in a very remarkable manner as

regards the rule of inheritance, Borough English being considered

as the servile mode, while primogeniture is restricted to those

holding mol-land.(16*) Borough English was very widely held in

medieval England to imply servile occupation of land,(17*) and

the privilege enjoyed by molmen in this case shows that they were

actually rising above the general condition of villainage, the

economical peculiarities of their position affording a

stepping-stone, as it were, towards the improvement of their

legal status. It is especially to be noticed, that in this

instance we have to reckon with a material difference of custom,

and not merely with a vacillating terminology or a general and

indefinite improvement in position. An interesting attempt at an

accurate classification of this and other kinds of tenantry is

displayed by an inquisition of 19 Edward I preserved at the

Record Office. The following subdivisions are enumerated therein:

--

  Liberi tenentes per cartam.

  Liberi tenentes qui vocantur fresokemen.

  Sokemanni qui vocantur molmen.

  Custumarii qui vocantur werkmen.

  Consuetudinarii tenentes 4 acras terre.

  Consuetudinarii tenentes 2 acras terre.(18*)

    The difference between molmen and workmen lies, of course, in

the fact that the first pay rent and the second perform

week-work. But what is more, the molmen are ranged among the

sokemen, and this supposes a certainty of tenure and service not

enjoyed by the villains. In this way the intermediate class,

though of servile origin, connects itself with the free tenantry.

    The same group appears in manorial documents under the name

of censuarii.(19*) Both terms interchange, and we find the same

fluctuation between free and servile condition in regard to the

censuarii as in regard to molmen. The thirteenth-century extent

of the manor of Broughton, belonging to the Abbey of Ramsey in

Huntingdonshire, when compared with Domesday, shows clearly the

origin of the group and the progress which the peasantry had made

in two hundred years. The Domesday description mentions ten

sokemen and twenty villains; the thirteenth-century Cartulary

speaks in one place of liberi and villani, sets out the services

due from the latter, but says that the Abbot can 'ponere omnia

opera ad censum;' while in another place it speaks as though the

whole were held by liberi et censuarii.(20*)

    A similar condition is indicated by the term gavelmanni,

which occurs sometimes, although not so often as either of the

designations just mentioned.(21*) It comes evidently from gafol

or gafel, and applies to rent-paying people. It ought to be

noticed, however, that if we follow the distinction suggested by

the Kentish documents, there would be an important difference in

the meaning. Rent need not always appear as a result of

commutation; it may be an original incident of the tenure, and

there are facts enough to show that lands were held by rent in

opposition to service even in early Saxon time. Should mal be

taken as a commutation rent, and gafol strictly in the sense of

original rent, the gavelmen would present an interesting

variation of social grouping as the progeny of ancient

rent-holding peasantry. I do not think, however, that we are

entitled to press terminological distinctions so closely in the

feudal period, and I should never enter a protest against the

assumption that most gavelmen were distinguished from molmen only

by name, and in fact originated in the same process of

commutation. But, granting this, we have to grant something else.

Vice versa, it is very probable indeed that the groups of

censuarii and molmen are not to be taken exclusively as the

outcome of commutation. If gafol gets to be rather indistinct in

its meaning, so does mal, and as to census, there is nothing to

show whether it arises in consequence of commutation or of

original agreement. And so the Kentish distinction, even if not

carried out systematically, opens a prospect which may modify

considerably the characteristic of the status on which I have

been insisting till now. Commutation was undoubtedly a most

powerful agency in the process of emancipation; our authorities

are very ready to supply us with material in regard to its

working, and I do not think that anybody will dispute the

intimate connexion between the social divisions under discussion

and the transition from labour services to rent. Yet a money rent

need not be in every case the result of a commutation of labour

services, although such may be its origin in most cases. We have

at least to admit the possibility and probability of another

pedigree of rent-paying peasants. They may come from an old stock

of people whose immemorial custom has been to pay rent in money

or in kind, and who have always remained more or less free from

base labour. This we should have to consider as at all events a

theoretic possibility, even if we restricted our study to the

terminology connected with rent; though it would hardly give

sufficient footing for definite conclusions. But there are groups

among the peasantry whose history is less doubtful.

    There are at the British Museum two most curious Surveys of

the possessions of Ely Minster, one drawn up in 1222 and the

other in 1277,(22*) In some of the manors described we find

tenants called 'hundredarii.' Their duties vary a good deal, but

the peculiarity which groups them into a special division and

gives them their name is the suit of court they owe to the

hundred.(23*) And although the name does not occur often even in

the Ely Surveys, and is very rare indeed elsewhere,(24*) the

thing is quite common. The village has to be represented in the

hundred court either by the lord of the manor, or by the steward,

or by the reeve, the priest, and four men.(25*) The same people

have to attend the County Court and to meet the King's justices

when they are holding an eyre.(26*) It is not a necessary

consequence, of course, that certain particular holdings should

be burdened with the special duty of sending representatives to

these meetings, but it is quite in keeping with the general

tendency of the time that it should be so; and indeed one finds

everywhere that some of the tenants, even if not called

'hundredarii,' are singled out from the rest to 'defend' the

township at hundred and shire moots.(27*) They are exempted from

other services in regard to this 'external,' this 'forinsec'

duty, which was considered as by no means a light one.(28*)

    And now as to their status. The obligation to send the reeve

and four men is enforced all through England, and for this reason

it is prima facie impossible that it should be performed

everywhere by freeholders in the usual sense of the word. There

can be no doubt that in many, if not in most, places the feudal

organisation of society afforded little room for a considerable

class of free-holding peasants or yeomen.(29*) If every township

in the realm had to attend particular judicial meetings, to

perform service for the king, by means of five representatives,

these could not but be selected largely from among the villain

class. The part played by these representatives in the Courts was

entirely in keeping with their subordinate position. They were

not reckoned among the 'free and lawful' men acting as judges or

assessors and deciding the questions at issue. They had only to

make presentments and to give testimony on oath when required to

do so. The opposition is a very marked one, and speaks of itself

against the assumption that the five men from the township were

on an equal standing with the freeholders.(30*) Again, four of

these five were in many cases especially bound by their tenure to

attend the meetings, and the reeve came by virtue of his office,

but he is named first, and it does not seem likely that the

leader should be considered as of lower degree than the

followers. Now the obligation to serve as reeve was taken as a

mark of villainage. All these facts lead one forcibly to the

conclusion that the hundredors of our documents represent the

village people at large, and the villains first of all, because

this class was most numerous in the village. This does not mean,

of course, that they were all personally unfree: we know already,

that the law of tenure was of more importance in such questions

than personal status.(31*) It does not even mean that the

hundredors were necessarily holding in villainage: small

freeholders may have appeared among them. But the institution

could not rest on the basis of legal freehold if it was to

represent the great bulk of the peasantry in the townships.

    This seems obvious and definite enough, but our inquiry would

be incomplete and misleading if it were to stop here. We have in

this instance one of those curious contradictions between two

well-established sets of facts which are especially precious to

the investigator because they lead him while seeking their

solution to inferences far beyond the material under immediate

examination. In one sense the reeve and the four men, the

hundredors, seem villains and not freeholders. In another they

seem freeholders and not villains. Their tenure by the

'sergeanty' of attending hundreds and shires ranks again and

again with freehold and in opposition to base tenure.(32*)

Originally the four men were made to go not only with the reeve

but with the priest; and if the reeve was considered in feudal

times as unfree, the priest, the 'mass-thane,' was always

considered as free.(33*) It is to be noticed that the attendance

of the priest fell into abeyance in process of time, but that it

was not less necessary for the representation of the township

according to the ancient constitution of the hundred than the

attendance of the reeve. This last fact is of great importance

because it excludes an explanation which would otherwise look

plausible enough. Does it not seem at first sight that the case

of the hundredors is simply a case of exemption and exactly on a

parallel with the commutation of servile obligations for money?

We have seen that villains discharged from the most onerous and

opprobrious duties of their class rise at once in social

standing, and mix up with the smaller freeholders. Hundredors are

relieved from these same base services in order that they may

perform their special work, and this may possibly be taken as the

origin of their freedom. Should we look at the facts in this way,

the classification of this class of tenants as free would proceed

from a lax use of the term and their privileges would have to be

regarded as an innovation. The presence of the priest warns us

that we have to reckon in the case with a survival, with an

element of tradition and not of mere innovation. And it is not

only the presence of the priest that points this way.

    At first sight the line seems drawn very sharply between the

reeve and the four men on the one hand, and the freehold suitors

of the hundred court on the other: while these last have to judge

and to decide, the first only make presentments. But the

distinction, though very clear in later times, is by no means to

be relied upon even in the thirteenth century. In Britton's

account of the sheriff's tourn the two bodies, though provided

with different functions, are taken as constituted from the same

class: 'the free landowners of the hundred are summoned and the

first step is to cause twelve of them to swear that they will

make presentment according to the articles. Afterwards the rest

shall be sworn by dozens and by townships, that they will make

lawful presentment to the first twelve jurors.'(34*) The wording

of the passage certainly leads one to suppose that both sets of

jurors are taken from the freeholder class, and the difference

only lies in the fact that some are selected to act as

individuals, and the rest to do so by representation. The Assize

of Clarendon, which Mr Maitland has shown to be at the origin of

the sheriff's tourn,(35*) will only strengthen the inference that

the two bodies were intended to belong to the same free class:

the inquiry, says the Assize, shall be made by twelve of the most

lawful men of the county, and by four of the most lawful men of

every township. What is there in these words to show that the two

sets were to be taken from different classes? And does not the

expression 'lawful,' extending to both sets, point to people who

are 'worthy of their law' that is to free men? The Assize of

Clarendon and the constitution of the tourn are especially

interesting because they give a new bearing to an old

institution: both divisions of the population which they have in

view appear in the ordinary hundred and county court, and in the

'law day' of the 'great' hundred instituted for the view of

frankpledge. In the ordinary court the lord, his steward, and the

reeve, priest, and four men, interchange, according to the clear

statement of Leg. Henrici I. c. 7, that is to say, the vill is to

be represented either by the lord, or by his steward, or again by

the six men just mentioned. They are not called out as

representing different classes and interests, but as representing

the same territorial unity. If the landlord does not attend

personally or by his personal representative, the steward, then

six men from the township attend in his place. The question

arises naturally, where is one to look for the small freeholders

in the enactment? However much we may restrict their probable

number, their existence cannot be simply denied or disregarded.

It does not seem likely that they were treated as landlords

(terrarum domini), and one can hardly escape the inference that

they are included in the population of the township, which

appears through the medium of the six hundredors: another hint

that the class division underlying the whole structure did not

coincide with the feudal opposition between freeholder and

villain. Again, in the great hundred for the view of frankpledge,

which is distinguished from the ordinary hundred by fuller

attendance, and not by any fundamental difference in

constitution, all men are to appear who are 'free and worthy of

their wer and their wite:'(36*) this expression seems an

equivalent to the 'free and lawful' men of other cases, and at

the same time it includes distinctly the great bulk of the

villain population as personally free.

    I have not been able, in the present instance, to keep clear

of the evidence belonging to the intermediate period between the

Saxon and the feudal arrangements of society; this deviation from

the general rule, according to which such evidence is to be

discussed separately and in connexion with the Conquest, was

unavoidable in our case, because it is only in the light of the

laws of Henry I that some important feudal facts can be

understood. in a trial as to suit of court between the Abbot of

Glastonbury and two lay lords, the defendants plead that they are

bound to appear at the Abbot's hundred court personally or by

attorney only on the two law-days, whereas for the judgment of

thieves their freemen, their reeves and ministers have to attend

in order to take part in the judgment.(37*) It is clearly a case

of substitution, like the one mentioned in Leg. Henrici, c. 7,

and the point is, that the representatives of the fee are

designated as reeves and freemen. Altogether the two

contradictory aspects in which the hundredors are made to appear

can hardly be explained otherwise than on the assumption of a

fluctuation between the conception of the hundred as of an

assembly of freemen, and its treatment under the influence of

feudal notions as to social divisions. In one sense the

hundredors are villains: they come from the vill, represent the

bulk of its population, which consists of villains, and are

gradually put on a different footing from the greater people

present. In another sense they are free men, and even treated as

freeholders, because they form part of a communal institution

intended to include the free class and to exclude the servile

class.(38*) If society had been arranged consistently on the

feudal basis, there would have been no room for the

representation of the vill instead of the manor, for the

representation of the vill now by the lord and now by a

deputation of peasants, for a terminology which appears to

confuse or else to neglect the distinction between free and

servile holding. As it is, the intricate constitution of the

hundred, although largely modified and differentiated by later

law, although cut up as it were by the feudal principle of

territorial service, looks still in the main as an organisation

based on the freedom of the mass of the people.(39*) The free

people had to attend virtually, if not actually, and a series of

contradictions sprang up from the attempt to apply this principle

to a legal state which had almost eliminated the notion of

freedom in its treatment of peasantry on villain land. As in

these feudal relations all stress lay on tenure and not on

status, the manorial documents seem to raise the hundredors

almost or quite to the rank of freeholders, although in strict

law they may have been villains. The net results seem to be: (1)

that the administrative constitution of hundred and county is

derived from a social system which did not recognise the feudal

opposition between freeholder and villain; (2) that we must look

upon feudal villainage as representing to a large extent a

population originally free; (3) that this original freedom was

not simply one of personal status, but actually influenced the

conception of tenure even in later days.(40*)

    If in manorial documents these 'hundredors' occupy as it were

an ambiguous position, the same may be said of another and a very

important class -- the socmen. The socage tenure has had a very

curious terminological history. Everybody knows that it appears

in Domesday as a local peculiarity of Danish districts; in modern

law it came to be a general name for any freehold that was

neither knight service, frankalmoign, nor grand sergeanty. It

became in fact the normal and typical free tenure, and as such it

was treated by the Act of Charles II abolishing military tenure.

Long before this -- even in the thirteenth century -- 'free

socage' was the name of a freehold tenure fully protected by the

King's Courts. Very great men occasionally held land in free

socage (per liberum socagium); they even held of the King in

chief by free socage, and the tenure had many advantages, since

it was free from the burdensome incidents of wardship and

marriage. But no one would have called these men socmen

(sokemanni, socomanni). On the other hand, the socmen, free

socmen, were to he found all over England and not in the Danish

country only. It is of the tenure of these socmen that we have to

speak now. In a trial of Edward the First's time the counsel

distinguish three manners of persons -- free men, villains, and

socmen. These last are said to occupy an intermediate position,

because they are as statu liberi in regard to their lords.(41*)

The passage occurs in a case relating to ancient demesne, but the

statement is made quite broadly, and the term 'socmen' is used

without any qualification. As there were many socmen outside the

King's possessions on the land of lay and spiritual lords, such

usage may be taken as proof that the position of all these people

was more or less identical. And so in our inquiry as to the

characteristic traits of socage generally we may start from the

ancient demesne. Further, we see that the socman's tenure is

distinguished from free tenure, socmen from freeholders. In the

law books of the time the free but non-military tenure has to be

characterised not merely as socage, but as free socage: this fact

will give us a second clue in analysing the condition.

    There are two leading features in ancient demesne socage: it

is certain in tenure and service, and it is held by the custom of

the manor and not by feoffment. The certainty of the tenure

severs the class of socmen from the villains, and is to be found

as well in the case of socmen outside the crown demesne as in the

case of socmen on the crown demesne. What is to be said of the

second. trait? It seems especially worthy of notice, because it

cannot be said to belong to freehold generally. As to its

existence on ancient demesne land I have already had occasion to

speak, and it can hardly be doubted. I will just recall to the

reader's mind the fundamental facts: that the 'little writ of

right' was to insure justice according to the custom of the

manor, and that our documents distinguish in as many words

between the customary admittance of the socman and the feoffment

of the freeholder. This means, that in case of litigation the one

had warranty and charter to lean upon, while the other had to

appeal to the communal testimony of his fellow-suitors in the

court of the manor, and in later days to an entry on the

court-roll. Freehold appeared as chartered land (book-land),

while socage was in truth copyhold secured by communal

custom.(42*) The necessary surrender and admittance was performed

in open court, and the presence of fellow-tenants was as much a

requisite of it as the action of the lord or his steward.

    If we look now to the socmen outside the ancient demesne, we

shall find their condition so closely similar, that the documents

constantly confuse them with the tenants of the ancient demesne.

The free men under soke in the east of England have best kept the

tradition, but even their right is often treated as a mere

variation of ancient demesne.(43*) For this reason we should be

fairly entitled, I think, to extend to them the notion of

customary freehold. There is direct evidence in this respect. In

extents of manors socmen are often distinguished from

freeholders.(44*) True, as already said, that in the king's

courts 'free socage' came to be regarded as one of the freehold

tenures, and as such (when not on the ancient demesne) was

protected by the same actions which protected knight-service and

frankalmoign; but we have only here another proof of the

imperfect harmony between legal theory and manorial

administration. What serves in the manorial documents to

distinguish the 'socman' from the 'freeholder' is the fact that

the former holds without charter.(45*) We are naturally led to

consider him as holding, at least originally, by ancient custom

and communal testimony in the same sense as the socmen of ancient

demesne. In most cases only the negative side, namely the absence

of a charter, is mentioned, but there are entries which disclose

the positive side, and speak of tenants or even free tenants

holding without charter by ancient tenure.(46*) It is to be

added, that we find such people in central and western counties,

that is outside of the Danelagh. In Domesday their predecessors

were entered as villains, but their tenure is nevertheless not

only a free but an ancient one.

    It must also be added that it is not only free socmen that

one finds outside the ancient demesne; bond socmen are mentioned

as well. Now this seems strange at first sight, because the usual

and settled terminology treats villain socage as a peculiarity of

ancient demesne, My notion is that it is not 'bond' that

qualities the 'socmen,' but vice versa. To put it in a different

way, the documents had to name a class which held by certain

custom, although by base service, and they added the 'socman' to

qualify the 'bond' or the 'villain.'

    Two cases from the Hundred Rolls may serve as an illustration

of this not unimportant point. The vill of Soham in

Cambridgeshire (47*) was owned in 1279 partly by the King, partly

by the Earl Marshall, and partly by the Bishop of Ely. There are

two socmen holding from the King thirty acres each, fourteen

socmen holding fifteen acres each, and twenty-six 'toftarii'

possessed of small plots. No villains are mentioned, but the

socmen are designated on the margin in a more definite way as

bond socmen. The manor had been in the possession of the Crown at

the time of the Conquest, and it is to be noticed, to begin with,

that the chief population of the part which remained with the

King appears as socmen -- a good illustration of the principle

that the special status did not originate when the manor was

granted out by the Crown. The sixteen peasants first mentioned

are holders of virgates and half-virgates, and form as it were

the original stock of the tenantry -- it would be impossible to

regard them as a later adjunct to the village. Their status is

not a result of commutation -- they are still performing

agricultural work, and therefore bond socmen. The Domesday Survey

speaks only of villains and 'bordarii,' and it is quite clear

that it calls villains the predecessors of the 'bond socmen' of

the Hundred Rolls. And now let us examine the portion of the

manor which had got into the hands of the Earl Marshall. We find

there several free socmen whose holdings are quite irregular in

size: they pay rent, and are exempted from agricultural work.

Then come five bond socmen, holding thirty acres each, and nine

bonds holding fifteen acres each: all these perform the same

services as the corresponding people of the King's portion. And

lastly come twenty-two tofters. Two facts are especially worth

notice: the free socman appears by the side of the bond socman,

and the opposition between them reduces itself to a difference

between rent-paying people and labourers; the holdings of the

rent-payers are broken up into irregular plots, while the

labourers still remain bound up by the system of equalised

portions. The second significant fact is, that the term 'socman,'

which has evidently to be applied to the whole population except

the tofters, has dropped out in regard to the half-virgate

tenants of the Earl Marshall. If we had only the fragment

relating to his nine bondmen, we might conclude perhaps that

there was no certain tenure in the manor. The inference would

have been false, but a good many inferences as to the social

standing of the peasantry are based on no better foundation. In

any case the most important part of the population of Soham, as

far as it belonged to the king and to the earl, consisted of

socmen who at the same time are called bondmen, and were called

villains in Domesday.

    Soham is ancient demesne. Let us now take Crowmarsh in

Oxfordshire.(48*) Two-thirds of it belonged to the Earl of Oxford

in 1279, and one-third to the Lord de Valence. At the time of the

Domesday Survey it was in the hands of Walter Giffard, and

therefore not ancient demesne. On the land of the Earl of Oxford

we find in 1279 nine servi socomanni holding six virgates, there

are a few cotters and a few free tenants besides; the remaining

third is occupied by two 'tenentes per servicium socomannorum,'

and by a certain number of cotters and free tenants. It can

hardly be doubted that the opposition between servi and liberi is

not based on the certainty of the tenure; the socmen hold as

securely as the free tenants, but they are labourers, while these

latter are exempted from the agricultural work of the village.

The terms are used in the same way as the 'terra libera' and the

'terra operabilis' of the Glastonbury inquest.

    I need not say that the socmen of ancient demesne, privileged

villains as Bracton calls them, are sometimes subjected to very

burdensome services and duties. Merchet is very common among

them; it even happens that they have to fine for it at the will

of the lord.(49*) But all the incidents of base tenure are to be

found also outside the ancient demesne in connexion with the

class under discussion. If we take the merchet we shall find that

at Magna Tywa, Oxon,(50*) it is customary to give the steward a

sword and four pence for licence to give away one's daughter

within twenty miles in the neighbourhood; in Haneberg, Oxon,(51*)

a spear and four pence are given in payment. The socmen of

Peterborough Abbey (52*) have to pay five shillings and four

pence under the name of merchet as a fine for incontinence (the

legerwite properly so-called), and there is besides a marriage

payment (redempcio sanguinis) equal for socmen and villains. The

same payment occurs in the land of Spalding Priory, Lincoln.(53*)

The same fact strikes us in regard to tallage and aids, i.e. the

taxes which the lord had a right to raise from his subjects. In

Stoke Basset, Oxon,(54*) the socmen are placed in this respect on

the same footing with the villains. The Spalding Cartulary adds

that their wainage is safe in any case.(55*) On the lands of this

priory the classes of the peasantry are generally very near to

each other, so that incidents and terms often get confused.(56*)

    And not only socmen have to bear such impositions: we find

them constantly in all shapes and gradations in connection with

free tenantry. The small freeholder often takes part in rural

work,(57*) sometimes he has to act as a kind of overseer,(58*)

and in any case this base labour would not degrade him from his

position.(59*) Already in Bracton's day the learned thought that

the term 'socage' was etymologically connected with the duty of

ploughing: -- a curious proof both of the rapidity with which

past history had become unintelligible, and of the perfect

compatibility of socage with labour services. Merchet, heriot,

and tallage occur even more often.(60*) All such exactions

testify to the fact that the conceptions of feudal law as to the

servile character of particular services and payments were in a

great measure artificial. Tallage, even arbitrary tallage, was

but a tax after all, and did not detract from personal freedom or

free tenure in this sense. Then heriot often occurs among free

people in the old Saxon form of a surrender of horse and arms as

well as in that of the best ox.(61*) Merchet is especially

interesting as illustrating the fusion of different duties into

one. It is the base payment par excellence, and often used in

manorial documents as a means to draw the line between free and

unfree men.(62*) Nevertheless free tenants are very often found

to pay it.(63*) In most cases they have only to fine in the case

when their daughters leave the manor, and this, of course, has

nothing degrading in it: the payment is made because the lord

loses all claim as to the progeny of the woman who has left his

dominion. But there is evidence besides to show that free tenants

had often to pay in such a case to the hundred, and the lords had

not always succeeded in dispossessing the hundred.(64*) Such a

fine probably developed out of a payment to the tribe or to a

territorial community in the case when a woman severed herself

from it. It had nothing servile in its origin. And still, if the

documents had not casually mentioned these instances, we should

have been left without direct evidence as to a difference of

origin in regard to merchet or gersum. Is it not fair to ask,

whether the merchet of the villains themselves may not in some

instances have come from a customary recompense paid originally

to the community of the township into the rights of which the

lord has entered? However this may be, one fact can certainly not

be disputed: men entirely free in status and tenure were

sometimes subjected to an exaction which both public opinion and

legal theory considered as a badge of servitude.

    The passage from one great class of society to the other was

rendered easy in this way by the variety of combinations in which

the distinguishing features of both classes appear. No wonder

that we hear constantly of oppression which tended to substitute

one form of subjection for another, and thus to lower the social

standing of intermediate groups. The free socmen of Swaffham

Prior, in Cambridgeshire,(65*) complain that they are made to

bind sheaves while they did not do it before; they used to pay

thirty-two pence for licence to marry a daughter, and to give a

twofold rent on entering an inheritance, and now the lord fines

them at will. One of the tenants of the Bishop of Lincoln (66*)

declares to the Hundred Roll Commissioners that his ancestors

were free socmen and did service to the king for forty days at

their own cost, whereas now the Bishop has appropriated the royal

rights. The same grievances come from ancient demesne people. In

Weston, Bedfordshire,(67*) the tenantry complain of new exactions

on the part of the lord; in King's Ripton,(68*) Hunts, merchet is

introduced which was never paid before; in Collecot, Berks,(69*)

the lord has simply dispossessed the socmen. In some instances

the claims of the peasantry may have been exaggerated, but I

think that in all probability the chances were rather against the

subjected people than for them, and their grievances are

represented in our documents rather less than fairly.(70*)

    In speaking of those classes of peasants who were by no means

treated as serfs to be exploited at will, I must not omit to

mention one group which appears, not as a horizontal layer spread

over England, but in the vertical cut, as it were. I mean the

Kentish gavelkind tenantry. The Domesday Survey speaks of the

population of this county quite in the same way as of the people

of neighbouring shires; villains form the great bulk of it,

socmen are not even mentioned, and to judge by such indications,

we have here plain serfdom occupying the whole territory of the

county. On the other hand the law of the thirteenth century puts

the social standing of Kentish men in the most decided opposition

to that of the surrounding people. The 'Consuetudines Kanciae,'

the well-known list of special Kentish customs,(71*) is reported

to have been drawn up during an eyre of John of Berwick in the

twenty-first year of Edward I. Be its origin what it may, we come

across several of its rules at much earlier times,(72*) and they

are always considered of immemorial custom. The basis of Kentish

social law is the assumption that every man born in the county is

entitled to be considered as personally free, and the Common Law

Courts recognised the notion to the extent of admitting the

assertion that a person was born in Kent as a reply against the

'exceptio villenagii.' The contrast with other counties did not

stop there. The law of tenure was as different as the law of

status. It would be needless to enumerate all the points set

forth as Kentish custom. They show conclusively that the lord was

anything but omnipotent in this county. Interference with the

proprietary right of the peasantry is not even thought of the

tenants may even alienate their plots freely; the lord can only

claim the accustomed rents and services; if the tenants are

negligent in performing work or making payments, distress and

forfeiture are awarded by the manorial court according to

carefully graduated forms; wardship in case of minority goes to

the kin and not to the lord, and heiresses cannot be forced to

marry against their wish. As a case of independence the Kentish

custom is quite complete, and manorial documents show on every

page that it was anything but a dead letter. The Rochester

Custumal, the Black Book of St. Augustine, the customs of the

Kentish possessions of Battle Abbey, the registers of Christ

Church, Canterbury, all agree in showing the Kentish tenantry as

a privileged one, both as to the quantity and as to the quality

of their services.(73*) And so the great bulk of the Kentish

peasantry actually appears in the same general position as the

free socmen of other counties, and sometimes they are even called

by this name.(74*)

    What is more, the law of Kent thus favourable to the

peasantry connects itself distinctly with the ancient customs of

Saxon ceorls: the quaint old English proverbs enrolled in it look

like sayings which have kept it in the memory of generations

before it was transmitted to writing. The peculiarities in the

treatment of wardship, of dower, of inheritance, appear not only

in opposition to the feudal treatment of all these subjects, but

in close connexion with old Saxon usage. It would be very wrong,

however, to consider the whole population of Kent as living under

one law. As in the case of ancient demesne, there were different

classes on Kentish soil: tenants by knight-service and sergeanty

on one side, villains on the other.(75*) The custom of Kent holds

good only for the tenantry which would have been called gavelmen

in other places. It is a custom of gavelkind, of the rent-paying

peasantry, the peasantry which pays gafol, and as such stands in

opposition to the usages of those who hold their land by fork and

flail.(76*) The important point is that we may lay down as

certain in this case what was only put forward hypothetically in

the case of molmen and gavelmen in the rest of England: the

freehold quality of rent-paying land is not due to commutation

and innovation alone -- it proceeds from a pre-feudal

classification of holdings which started from the contrast

between rent and labour, and not from that between certain and

uncertain tenure. Again, the law of gavelkind, although not

extending over the whole of Kent, belongs to so important and

numerous a portion of the population, that, as in the case of

ancient demesne, it comes to be considered as the typical custom

of the county, and attracts all other variations of local usage

into its sphere of influence. The Custumal published among the

Statutes speaks of the personal freedom of all Kentish-men,

although it has to concern itself specially with the gavelkind

tenantry. The notion of villainage gets gradually eliminated from

the soil of the province, although it was by no means absent from

it in the beginning.

    Thirteenth-century law evidently makes the contrast between

Kent and adjoining shires more sharp than it ought to have been,

if all the varieties within the county were taken into account.

But, if it was possible from the legal standpoint to draw a hard

and fast line between Kent on one side, Sussex or Essex on the

other, it is quite impossible, from the historian's point of

view, to grant that social condition has developed in adjoining

places out of entirely different elements, without gradations and

intermediate shades. Is there the slightest doubt that the

generalising jurisprudence of the thirteenth century went much

too far in one direction, the generalising scribes of the

eleventh century having gone too far in the other? Domesday does

not recognise any substantial difference between the state of

Kent and that of Sussex; the courts of the thirteenth century

admitted a complete diversity of custom, and neither one nor the

other extreme can be taken as a true description of reality. The

importance of the custom of Kent can hardly be overrated: it

shows conclusively what a mistake it would be to accept without

criticism the usual generalising statement as to the different

currents of social life in mediaeval England. It will hardly be

doubted moreover, that the Kentish case proves that elements of

freedom bequeathed by history but ignored by the Domesday Survey

come to the fore in consequence of certain facts which remain

more or less hidden from view and get recognised and protected in

spite of feudalism. If so, can the silence of Domesday or the

absence of legal protection in the thirteenth century stand as

sufficient proof against the admission of freedom as an important

constitutive element in the historical process leading to

feudalism? Is it not more natural to infer that outside Kent

there were kindred elements of freedom, kindred remnants of a

free social order which never got adequate recognition in the

Domesday terminology or left definite traces in the practice of

the Royal courts?

    One more subject remains to be touched upon, and it may be

approached safely now that we have reviewed the several social

groups on the border between freeholders and villains. It is this

-- to what extent can the existence of a class of freeholders

among the peasantry of feudal England be maintained? It has been

made a test question in the controversy between the supporters of

the free and those of the servile community, and it would seem,

at first sight, on good ground. Stress has been laid on the fact,

that such communities as are mentioned in Domesday and described

in later documents are (if we set aside the Danish counties)

almost entirely peopled by villains, that free tenants increase

in number through the agency of commutation and grants of demesne

land, whereas they are extremely few immediately after Domesday,

and that in this way there can be no talk of free village

communities this side of the Conquest.(77*) This view of the case

may be considered as holding the field at the present moment: its

chief argument has been briefly summarised by the sentence-the

villains of Domesday are not the predecessors in title of later

freeholders.(78*) I cannot help thinking that a good deal has to

be modified in this estimate of the evidence. Without touching

the subject in all its bearings, I may say at once that I do not

see sufficient reason to follow the testimony of Domesday very

closely as to names of classes. If we find in a place many free

tenants mentioned in the Hundred Roll, and none but villains in

Domesday, it would be wrong to infer that there were none but

villains in the later sense at the time of the Survey, or that

all the free tenements of the Hundred Rolls were of later

creation than the Conquest. It would be especially dangerous to

draw such an inference in a case where the freeholders of the

thirteenth century are possessed of virgates, half-virgates,

etc., and not of irregular plots of land. Such cases may possibly

be explained by sweeping commutation, which emancipated the

entire village at one stroke, instead of making way for the

freehold by the gradual enfranchisement of plot after plot. But

it is not likely that all the many instances can be referred to

such sweeping emancipation. In the light of Kentish evidence, of

free and villain socage, it is at least probable that the

thirteenth-century freeholders were originally customary

freeholders entered as villains in Domesday, and rising to

freedom again in spite of the influence of feudalism. Such an

assumption, even if only possible and hypothetical, would open

the way for further proof and investigation on the lines of a

decline of free village communities, instead of imposing a

peremptory termination of the whole inquiry for the period after

the Conquest. If the Domesday villains are in no case

predecessors in title of freeholders, this fact would go a long

way to establish the serfdom of the village community for all the

period after the Conquest, and we should have to rely only on

earlier evidence to show anything else. Our case would be a hard

one, because the earlier evidence is scanty, scattered, obscure,

and one-sided, But if the villains of Domesday may be taken to

include customary freeholders, then we may try to illustrate our

conceptions of the early free village by traits drawn from the

life of the later period,



NOTES:



1. Rot. Hundred. ii. 528, b: 'Et modo omnia illa arrentata sunt

et dant per annum 14 sol. 8 d.'



2. Exch. Q. R. Min. Acc., Bundle 510, No. 13: 'Et solebant facere

servicia consueta, sed per voluntatem et ad placitum domini

extenta sunt in denariis., Cf Abingdon Cartulary, ii. 303. Rot.

Hundred. ii. 453, a: 'Omnes isti prenominati nomine villenagii

sunt ad voluntatem domini de operibus eorundem.' Cf Ibid. 407, b.



3. Worcester Cartulary (Camden Series), 54, b: 'Haec villa

tradita est ab antiquo villanis ad firmam, ad placitum cum

omnibus ad nos pertinentibus.' Cf Gloucester Cartulary, iii. 37.



4. Worcester Cartulary (Camden Series), l.c.: 'Praeterea

percipimus medietatem proventuum et herietum, praeterea debent

metere, ligare et compostare bladum de antiquo dominico de

Hordewell.... et gersummabunt filias.'



5. Glastonbury Cartulary, Bodleian MSS., Wood, i., f 241, a:

'Jocelynus dei gratia Bathoniensis episcopus..... Noveritis nos

quietos clamasse omnes homines abbatie Glastonie de Winterburne

in perpetuam de arruris et aliis operacionibus quas facere

debebant castro Marleberghe de terra de Winterburne, quos homines

nostros Henricus illustris rex Anglie nobis concessit.'



6. Wartrey Priory Cartulary, Fairfax MSS. f 19, a: 'Et Adam dicit

quod predictus Prior villenagium in persona ipsius Ade allegare

non potest quia dicit quod dudum convenit inter quemdam Johannem

dudum priorem de Wartre.... et quendam Henricum de W... patrem

ipsius Ade videlicet quod isdem Prior.... per quoddam scriptum

indenturam concesserunt Henrico.... quoddam toftum simul cum

duabus bovatis terre.'



7. Malmesbury Cartulary (Rolls Series), ii. I99: 'Nos

tradidisse... Roberto le H. de K. et Helenae uxori suae, et

Agneti filiae eorum primogenitae nativis nostris, omnibus diebus

vitae eorum, unam domum. Ita quod non licet praedicto Roberto

alicui vendere nec occasione istius traditionis aliquam

libertatem ipsis vendicare.'



8. As to molmen, I shall follow in substance my article in the

English Historical Review, 1886, IV. p. 734. We already find the

class in Cartularies of the twelfth century, in the Burton

Cartulary, and in the Boldon Book. See Round in the English

Historical Review, 1886, V. 103, and Stevenson, ibidem, VI. 332.



9. Any number of examples might be given. I referred in my

article to a Record Office document, Exch. Treas. of Rec. Min.

Acc. 32/8: 'Rogerus prepositus tenet 28 acras pro 13 solidis

solvendis ad 4 terminos principales. Et dat 2 gallinas at Natale

domini de precio 3 den., et 18 ova ad Pascham, et debet 2 homines

ad 2 precarias ad cibum domini et non extenduntur eo quod nihil

dabunt in argento si servicium illud dominus habere noluerit.

Item idem adiuvabit leuare fenum ad precariam domini quod nihil

valet ut supra. Item idem faeiet 2 averagia Londinium que valent

2d... Custumarii. Johannes Cowe tenet 13 acras et dimidiam pro 27

d... Et debet 3 opera qualibet septimana, scilicet per 44

septimanas videlicet a festo Natali beate Marie usque ad gulam

Augusti que continet in operibus per predictum tempus vi xii (i.

e. 132) et valet in denariis 5 sol.' etc.



10. Black Book of St. Augustine, Canterbury, Cotton MSS.

Faustina, A. i. 31: 'De quolibet sullung (ploughland) 20 solidos

de mala ad quatuor terminos quos antecessores nostri dederunt pro

omnibus iniustis et incausacionibus (sic) quas uobis ore plenius

exponemus.'



11. Rochester Costumal (ed. Thorpe), 2, b: 'F. habet 21 jugum

terre te Gavelland unius servicii et unius redditus. Unumquodque

jugum reddit 10 solidos ad 4 terminos-hoc est Mal. In media

quadragesima 40d. Hoc est Gable.' The Cartulary of Christ Church,

Canterbury, in the British Museum (Add. MSS. 6159) always gives

the rents under the two different headings of Gafol and Mal.



12. The etymology of the word is traced by Stevenson, l.c.



13. Ashley, Economic History, i. pp. 56, 57.



14. Registrum Album Abbatiae Sancti Edmundi de Burgo, Cambridge

University, Ee. iii. 60 f; 188, b: 'Memorandum quod anno regni

Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici 18-dominus Johannes de Norwold

abbas Sti. Edmundi ad ulteriores portas manerii sui de Herlawe,

ad instanciam Cecilie le Grete de Herlawe hereditatem suam de

mollond infra campum dicte ville jacentem post mortem viri sui a

pluribus tenentibus Abbatis petentis coram eodem Abbate, eo

pretextu quod vir suus adventicius dictam hereditatem suam ipsa

invita vendidit et alienauit, per subscriptos inquisivit, utrum

ipse seu alii quicumque infra villam predictam mollond tenentes

libere tenuerunt seu tenent, et per cartas aut alio modo... Qui

omnes et singuli jurati dixerunt per sacramentum suum quod omnes

tenentes de molland solebant esse custumarii et fuerunt, sed

Abbas Hugo primus et Abbas Sampson posterum et alii Abbates

relaxarunt eis seru,cia maiora et consuetudines pro certa

pecunia; modo arentati in aliquibus operibus ceteris, sed nihil

habent inde nec tenent per cartas, sed per virgam in curia. Et

sunt geldabiles in omnibus inter custumarios et quod omnes sunt

custumarie et servilis condicionis sicut et alii.'



15. Exch. Treas. of Rec. 59/66. The classes follow each other in

this way: 'Liberi tenentes, Molmen, Custumarii.' Cf Rot. Hundred.

ii. 425, a.



16. Harl. MSS. 639, f 69, b: 'Inquisicio facta per totam socam de

Badefeud dicit quod si aliquis servus domini moritur et plures

habuerit filios, si tota terra fuerit mollond primogenitus de

iure et consuetudine debet eam retinere; si tota fuerit villana

iunior; si maior pars fuerit mollond primogenitus, is maior pars

fuerit villana iunior eam optinebit.'



17. I cannot surrender this point (cf Stevenson, l.c.). That

Borough English existed in many free boroughs and among free

sokemen is true, of course, and there it had nothing to do with

servile status. It would have been wrong to treat the custom of

inheritance as a sure test from a general point of view. But as a

matter of fact it was treated as such a test from a local point

of view by many, if not most, manorial arrangements. I refer

again to the Case from the Note-book of Bracton, pl. 1062. The

lord is adducing as proof of a plea of villainage: 'Hoc bene

patet, quia postnatus filius semper habuit terram patris sui

sicut alii villani de patria.' I have said already that the

succession of the youngest son appears with merchet, reeveship,

etc., as a servile custom.



18. Q. R. Min. Acc. Box 587.



19. Ramsey Cartulary (Rolls Series), i.267: 'Decem hidae, ex

quibus persona, liberi et censuarii tenent tres hidas et

dimidiam, et villani tenent sex hidas.'



20. Domesday Book, i. 204; Ramsey Cartulary, i. 270, 330-40.



21. Rochester Cartulary (Thorpe), 2, a: 'Gavelmanni de

Suthflete.'



22. Cotton MSS. Tiberius B. ii, and Claudius C. xi.



23. Cotton MSS. Claudius C. xi, f 49, a: 'De hundredariis et

libere tenentibus. Philippus de insula tenet 16 acras de wara et

debet sectas ad curiam Elyensem et ad curiam de Wilburtone et in

quolibet hundredo per totum annum,' etc. For a more detailed

discussion of the position of hundredors, see Appendix.



24. In the description of Aston and Cote, a submanor of Bampton,

Oxfordshire, hundredarii are mentioned in Rot. Hundr. ii. 689.



25. Leg. Henrici I, c. 7. The point has been lately elucidated by

Maitland, Suitols of the County Court, Eng. Hist. Rev., July

1888, and Round, Archaeological Review, iv.



26. Gloucester Cart. iii. 193: 'Et dicunt quod predictus Thomas

et socii sui subscripti debent aquietare villam de quolibet

hundredo Cyrencestriae et de Respethate praeterquam ad visum

franciplegii bis in anno.' Ramsey Inqu., Cotton MSS. Galba E. x,

35: 'Sequebatur comitatum et hundredum pro dominico abbatis.'

Madox, Hist. of the Exchequer, i. 74: 'Serviet eis nominatim in

omnibus placitis ad quae convenienter summonitus erit et ad

defensionem totius villae Estone aderit in hundredis et scyris in

quibus erit quantum poterit.' Warwickshire Hundr. Roll, Q. R.

Misc. Books, No. 29, f. 73, a: 'Seriancia ad comitatum et

hundredum.'



27. Ramsey Cart. i. 438: 'J. R. tenet dimidiam hydam de veteri

feoffamento et non reddit per annum aliquem censum abbati, quia

est una de quattuor virgatis quae defendunt totam villatam de

secta comitatus et hundredi per annum.'



28. Gloucester Cart. iii. 77: 'Henricus de Marwent te.net unam

virgataet continentem 48 acras... et facit forinseca [scrvitia],

scil. sectas comitatus (hundredi, et alia forinseca.' Cf Cart. of

Shaftesbury, 65: '.... defendebat terram suam de omnibus

forinsecis avcncionibus.'



29. Seebohm, Village Community, 37, 38,. Scrutton, Common Fields,

39.



30. See the instances collected by Maitland, Introduction to

Rolls of Manorial Courts, Selden Soc., Ser. II, p. xxix, note 2.



31. Maitland, op. c.



32. A few instances among many: Gloucester Cart. iii 49:

'Radulfus de E. tenet unam virgatam terrae continentem 48 acras

et reddit inde per annum non reditum aliquem, sed sequetur

comitatum Warwici et hundredum de Kingtone pro domino, et curiam

de Clifforde pro omni servitio.' There are four other, virgatarii

liberi, besides this one. Domesday of St. Paul's (Camden Soc.),

30: 'Thomas arkarius (tenet) iv virgatas pro 28 solidis et debet

facere sectam sire et hundredi.' He is a freeholder. Worcester

Cart. (Camden Soc.), 64, C: 'De liberis Ricardus de Salford tenet

dimidiam hidam de priore, quam Thomas de Ruppe tenuit de eo, et

facit regale servitium tantum, et debet esse coram justiciariis

itinerantibus pro defensione villae ad custum suum.' The Ely,

hundredarii, are distinguished from the villains, and form by

themselves a group which ranks next to the 'libere tenentes' or

with them.



33. Ramsey, Inqu. Cotton MSS. Galba, E. x, f 52: 'Ecclesia ipsius

ville possidet dimidiam hidam liberam et presbiter debet esse

quartus eorum qui sequuntur comitatum et hundredum cum custamento

suo.' Cf 40, 54. instead of attending separately the priest comes

to be included among the four hundredors.



34. Britton, i. 177 sqq. See Maitland's Introd. to Manorial

Rolls, p. xxvii.



35. Maitland, op. c. pp. xxix, xxx.



36. Leg. Henrici I. c. 8. Cf. Ely Register, Cotton MSS.,

Claudius, C. xi, 52, a: 'et libere tenentes sui qui tenent per

socagium debent unam sectam ad frendlese hundred, scil. ad diem

Sabbati proximum post festum St. Michaelis. The expression,

friendless, is peculiar. It appears in other instances in the Ely

Surveys. May it not mean, that all the free tenants, even the

small ones, had to attend and could not be represented by their

fellows or 'friends'?



37. Glastonbury Cart., Wood MSS., i. f 233, a: 'et N. et G.

veniunt et defendunt vim et iniuriam et talem sectam qualem ab

eis exigit et bene cognoscunt quod per attornatos suos debent

ipsi facere duas sectas per annum ad duos lagedaios... sed si

aliquis latro fuerit ibi iudicandus tunc debent liberi homines

sui et prepositi uel seruientes sui debent interesse ad predictum

hundredum ad faciendum iudicium et non ipsi in propria persona

sua.' Cf Malmesbury Cart. (Rolls Ser.), ii.. 178; 'Item

recognouit sectam ad hundredum de Malmesburia per se vel per

sufficientem attornatum suum. Item recognouit et concessit quod

omnes liberi homines sui de Estleye sequantur de hundredo in

hundredum apud Malmesburiam sicut aliquo tempore predecessorum

suorum facere consueverunt.'



38. This may possibly account for the curious fact, that in every

manor there are some tenants called, Freeman,', Frankleyn,' and

the like. They seem to be there to keep up the necessary

tradition of the free element. For instance: Eynsham Cart. MSS.

of the Chapter of Christ Church, Oxford, xxix. f 4, a: 'Iohannes

Freman de Shyfford tenet unam virgatam per cartam... facit sectam

ad comitatum et hundredum et hac de causa tenet tenementum suum.'

Cf Coram Rege 27 Henry III, m. 3: 'Dicunt quod non est aliquis

liber homo in eodem manerio nisi Willelmus filius Radulfi qui

respondet infra corpus comitatus.' The fact is well known to all

those who have had anything to do with manorial records.



39. Cf. Maitland, Suitors of the County Court, Eng Hist. Review,

July, 1888.



40. Is it not possible to explain by the, hundredor, the

following difficult passage in Domesday, ii. 100? 'Hugo de

Montfort invasit tres liberos homines... unus ex his jacet ad

feudum Sancti Petri de Westmonasterio testiinonio hundredi, sed

fuit liberatus Hugoni in numero suorum hundredorum (corr.

hundredariorum?) ut dicunt sui homines.' It is true that the term

does not occur elsewhere in Domesday, but the reading as it

stands appears very clumsy, and the emendation proposed would

seem the easiest way to get out of the difficulty.



41. Y. B. 21/22 Edw. I. (ed. Horwood), pp. xix, 499.



42. I may be excused for again referring to the Stoneleigh Reg. f

32, d: 'Quidam tenentes eiusdem manerii tenent terras et

tenementa sua in Sokemannia in feodo et hereditate de qua quidem

tenura talis habetur et omne tempore habebatur consuetudo

videlicet quod quando aliquis tenens eiusdem tenure terram suam

alicui alienare voluerit veniat in curiam coram ipso Abbate vel

eius senescallo et per vergam sursum reddat in manum domini

terram sic alienandam ad opus illius qui terram illam

optinebit... Et si aliquis terram aliquam huiusmodi tenure infra

manerium predictum per cartam vel sine carta absque licentia

dicti Abbatis alienaverit aliter quam per sursum reddicionem in

curia in forma predicta, quod terra sic extra curia alienata

domino dicti manerii erit forisfacta in perpetuum.'



43. Madox, Exch. i. 724, e: 'Monstraverunt Regi homines et

tenentes de soca de Oswald Kirke in Com. Nottinghamiae, quod cum

soka illa dudum fuisset antiquum dominicum coronae Angliae et

dominus Henricus quondam Rex Angliae progenitor Regis socam illam

cum pertinenciis dedisset et concessisset Henrico de Hastyngges

habendam et tenendam ad communem legem... Ac licet homines et

tenentes predicti et antecessores sui homines et tenentes de Soca

illa inter homines communitatis comitatus Nottinghamiae et non

cum tenentibus de antiquis dominicis Coronae Regis a tempore

escambii predicti talliari consueverunt, assessores tamen

tallagii Regis in dominicis in Comitatu Nottinghamiae

praedicto... (eos) una cum illis de dominicis Regis praedictis

talliari fecerunt.' Cf 428, b, c.



44. Rot. Hundr. ii. 6o8, a: 'Liberi tenentes... liberi

sokemanni.' Cf 7 52, a.



45. Inquisit. post mortem 53 Henry III, n. 4 (Record Office):

'Libere tenentes ad voluntatem... libere tenentes in socagio...

libere tenentes per cartam.' Rot. Hundr. ii. 47I, a. See Appendix

x.



46. Warwicksh. Hund. Roll. Q. R. Misc. books, xxix. p. 44, b:

'(tenens) per antiquam tenuram sine carta.' Gloucester Cart. iii.

67: 'de liberis tenentibus dicunt quod haeredes O. G. tenent tres

virgatas terrae de antiqua tenura.' Cf iii. 47, 69. Christ Church

Cart., Canterbury, Add. MSS. 6159, p. 70.. 'isti tenent antiquo

dominico... isti tenent antiquum tenementum... inferius notati

sunt oper.arii.' Domesday of St. Paul's, 46, 47: 'de antiqua

hereditate.' Cf Pollock, Land-laws (2nd ed ), p. 2O9.



47. Rot. Hundr. ii. 501, b.



48. Rot. Hundr. ii. 774.



49. Coram Rege, Hill. 30 Edw. I, m. 17, (servicia

sokemannorum)... merchet ad voluntatem.'



50. Rot. Hundr. ii. 846, a.



51.  Rot. Hundr. ii. 781, b.



52. Peterborough Cart., Cotton MSS., Faustina, B. iii. f 97, 98.



53. Spalding Priory Cart., Cole MSS., xliii. p. 296.



54. Rot. Hundr. ii. 780 b.



55. Spalding Cart. p. 295.



56. Ibid. p. 283: 'bondus dat auxilium... scil omnes sokemanni.

unam marcam.' Cf 292.



57. Ely Inqu., Cotton MS., Claudius, C. xi. 50, b: 'Tota villata

tam liberi, quam alii debent facere 40 perticatas super Calcetum

de Alderhe [Aldreth's Causeway] sine cibo et opere.' Cf Domesday

of St. Paul's, 75.



58. Domesday of St. Paul's, 76, 77., Rot. Hundr. ii. 764, b.



59. Domesday of St. Paul's, 32: 'Omnes isti libere tenentes

metunt et arant ad precarias domini et ad cibum eius sine

forisfacto.' The general rule is, that freeholders join only in

the boon-works (precariae) and not in the regular week-work. But

socmen are found engaged in this latter also.



60. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi. f 266: 'De feodis

militum et libere tenentibus... heriet... relevium... sed non

dabit tallagium et gersumam.' 167 b: 'herietum... relevium...

pannagium... tallagium.. Ramsey Cart. i. 297.



61. Gloucester Cart. iii. 49 and 46; Battle Cart., Augm. Off.

Misc. Books, N. 57, f 10, b.



62. Ely Inqu., Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi. f 186, b.., Omnes

custumarii preter liberos qui non dant gersumam pro filiis et

filiabus...



63. E. g. ibid. 44, a.



64. Bury St. Edmund's Registrum Album, Cambr. Univ., Ee. iii. 6o,

f 154, b., Et nota quod si prepositus hundredi capiat gersumam.

de aliquo libero, dominus habebit medietatem.' Suffolk Court

Rolls, 3 (Bodleian): 'gersuma si evenerit filii vel filie, finem

faciet in hundredo, sed celerarius habebit medietatem finis.'



65. Rot. Hundr. ii. 484, b; 485, a.



66. Ibid. ii 749, b.



67. Ibid. i. 6.



68. Coram Rege, Trin., 3 Edw. I, m. 14, d.



69. Rot. Hundr. i. 19.



70. Cf. a very definite case of oppression, Placit. Abbrev., 150.



71. Statutes of the Realm, i. 224.



72. Notebook of Bracton, pl. 1334 and 1644.



73. Rochester Cart. (Thorpe), 19 a: 'Dominus non debet aliquem

operarium. injuste et sine judicio a terra Sua ejicere.' Ibid.

10, a: 'in crastino Sancti Martini non ponet eos (dominus) ad

opera sine consensu eorundem.' Black Book of St. Augustine,

Cotton MSS.' Faustina, A. i. f 185, d: '(Consuetudines villanorum

de Plumsted) Villani de P. tenent quatuor juga et debent inde

arare quatuor acras et seminare... et debent metere in autumpno 8

acras de ivernagio vel 4 acras de alio blado.... Et debent

falcare 2 acras prati.... Item debent duo averagia per annum a

Plumsted ad Newenton et nihil debent averare ad tunc nisi res que

sunt ad opus conventus et que poni debent super ripam.'



74. Notebook of Bracton, pl. 1334: '... et consuetudo est quod

uxores maritorum defunctorum habeant francum bancum suum de

terris sokemannorum.' Rot. Hundr. i. 201, 202: 'habent et vendunt

maritagia sokemannorum aliter quam deberent, quia in Kancia non

est warda.'



75. Cf Elton, Tenures of Kent.



76. Notebook of Bracton, pl. 1419: 'et ipsi veniunt et dicunt

quid nunquam cartam illam fecit nec facere potuit quia uillanus

fuit et terram suam defendidit per furcam ct flagellum.'



77. Seebohm, Village Community, 103; followed by Scrutton,

Commons and Common Fields, 38; and Ashley, Economic History, i.

18.



78. Maitland, Introduction to Manorial Rolls, lxix.





Chapter 7



The Peasantry of the Feudal Age. Conclusions.





    I have divided my analysis of the condition of the feudal

peasantry into two parts according to a principle forcibly

suggested, as I think, by the material at hand. The records of

trials in the King's Court, and the doctrines of lawyers based on

them, cannot be treated in the same way as the surveys compiled

for the use of manorial administration. There is a marked

difference between the two sets of documents as to method and

point of view. In the case of legal records a method of dialectic

examination could be followed. Legal rules are always more or

less connected between themselves, and the investigator has to

find out, first, from the application of what principles they

flow, and to find out, secondly, whether fundamental

contradictions disclose a fusion of heterogeneous elements. The

study of manorial documents had to proceed by way of

classification, to establish in what broad classes the local

variations of terms and notions arrange themselves, and what

variations of daily life these groups or classes represent.

    It is not strange, of course, that things should assume a

somewhat different aspect according to the point of view from

which they are described. Legal classification need not go into

details which may be very important for purposes of manorial

administration; neither the size of the holdings nor the complex

variations of services have to be looked to in cases where the

law of status is concerned. Still it may be taken for granted

that the distinctions and rules followed by the courts had to

conform in a general way with matter-of-fact conditions. Lawyers

naturally disregarded minute subdivisions, but their broad

classes were not invented at fancy; they took them from life as

they did the few traits they chose from among many as tests for

the purpose of laying down clear and convenient rules. A general

conformity is apparent in every point. At the same time there is

undoubtedly an opposition between the curial (if I may use that

term) and the manorial treatment of status and tenure, which does

not resolve itself into a difference between broad principle and

details. Just because the lawyer has to keep to distinct rules,

he will often be behind his age and sometimes in advance of it.

His doctrine, once established, is slow to follow the

fluctuations of husbandry and politics: while in both departments

new facts are ever cropping up and gathering strength, which have

to fight their way against the rigidity of jurisprudence before

they are accepted by it. On the other hand, notions of old

standing and tenacious tradition cannot be put away at once, so

soon as some new departure has been taken by jurists; and even

when they die out at common law such notions persist in local

habits and practical life. For these reasons, which hold good

more or less everywhere, and are especially conspicuous in

mediaeval history, the general relation between legal and

manorial documents becomes especially important. It will widen

and strengthen conclusions drawn from the analysis of legal

theory. We may be sure to find in thirteenth-century documents of

practical administration the foundations of a system which

prevailed at law in the fifteenth. And what is much more

interesting, we may be sure to find in local customaries the

traces of a system which had its day long before the thirteenth

century, but was still lingering in broken remains.

    Bracton defines villainage as a condition of men who do not

know in the evening what work and how much they will have to

perform next morning. The corresponding tenure is entirely

precarious and uncertain at law. But these fundamental positions

of legal doctrine we find opposed in daily life to the

all-controlling rule of custom. The peasant knows exactly on what

days he bas to appear personally or by representative at

ploughings and reapings, how many loads he is bound to carry, and

how many eggs he is expected to bring at Easter;(1*) in most

cases he knows also what will be required from him when he

inherits from his father or marries his daughter. This customary

arrangement of duties does not find any expression in common law,

and vice versa the rule of common law dwindles down in daily life

to a definition of power which may be exercised in exceptional

cases. The opposition between our two sets of records is

evidently connected in this case with their different way of

treating facts.

    Manorial extents and inquests give in themselves only a

one-sided picture of mediaeval village life, because they

describe it only from the point of view of the holding; people

who do not own land are very seldom noticed, and among the

population settled on the land only those persons are named who

'defend' the tenement in regard to the lord. Only the chief of

the household appears; this is a matter of course. He may have

many or few children, many or few women engaged on his plot: the

extent will not make any difference in the description of the

tenement and of its services. But although very incomplete in

this important respect, manorial records allow us many a glimpse

at the process which was preparing a great change in the law

Hired labourers are frequently mentioned in stewards' accounts,

and the 'undersette' and 'levingmen' and 'anelipemen'(2*) of the

extents correspond evidently to this fluctuating population of

rural workmen and squatters gathering behind the screen of

recognised peasant holders.

    The very foundation of the mediaeval system, its organisation

of work according to equalised holdings and around a manorial

centre, is in course of time undermined by the process of

commutation. Villains are released from ploughings and reapings,

from carriage-duties and boon work by paying certain rents; they

bargain with the lord for a surrender of his right of arbitrary

taxation and arbitrary amercement; they take leases of houses,

arable and meadows. This important movement is directly noticed

by the law in so far as it takes the shape of an increase in the

number of freeholders and of freehold tenements; charters and

instruments of conveyance may be concerned with it. But the

process is chiefly apparent in a standing contradiction with the

law. Legally an arrangement with a villain either ought not to

bind the lord or else ought to destroy his power. Even in law

books, however, the intermediate form of a binding covenant with

the villain emerges, as we have seen, in opposition to the

consistent theory. In practice the villains are constantly found

possessed of 'soclands,' 'forlands,' and freeholds. The passage

from obligatory labour to proprietary rights is effected in this

way without any sudden emancipation, by the gradual accumulation

of facts which are not strictly legal and at the same time tend

to become legal.

    Again, the Royal courts do not know anything about 'molmen,'

'gavelmen,' or 'censuarii,' They keep to the plain distinction

between free and bond. Nevertheless, all these groups exist in

practice, and are constantly growing in consequence of

commutation. The whole law of status gets transformed by their

growth as the law of tenure gets transformed by the growth of

leases. Molmen, though treated as villains by Royal courts, are

already recognised as more 'free' than the villains by manorial

juries. The existence of such groups testifies to something more

than a precarious passage from service to rent, namely to a

change from servile subjection to a status closely resembling

that of peasant freeholders, and actually leading up to it. In

one word, our manorial records give ample notice of the growth of

a system based on free contract and not on customary labour. But

the old forms of tenure and service are still existent in law,

and the contradiction involved in this fact is not merely a

technical one: it lies at the root of the revolutionary movement

at the close of the fourteenth century. In this manner facts were

slowly paving the way towards a modification of the law. But now,

turning from what is in the future, to what is in the past, let

us try to collect those indications which throw light on the

condition of things preceding feudal law and organisation.

    The one-sided conception of feudal law builds up the entire

structure of social divisions on the principle of the lord's

will. Custom, however sacred, is not equivalent to actionable

right, and a person who has nothing but custom to lean upon is

supposed to be at the will and mercy of his lord and of base or

servile condition, But we find even in the domain of legal

doctrine other notions less convenient for the purpose of

classification, and more adapted to the practice of daily life.

Servile persons and servile land are known from the nature of the

services to which they are subject. This test is applied in two

directions: (1) regular rural work, 'with pitch-fork and flail,'

is considered servile; and this would exclude the payment of

rents and occasional help in the performance of agricultural

labour; (2) certain duties are singled out as marking servitude

because they imply the idea of one person being owned by another,

and this would exclude subjection derived from the possession of

land, however burdensome and arbitrary such subjection might be.

    Turning next to manorial records, we find these abortive

features of feudal law resting on a very broad basis. Only that

land is considered servile which owes labour, if it renders

nothing but rent it is termed free. We have here no mere

commutation: the notion is an old one, and rather driven back by

later law than emerging from it. It is natural enough that the

holder of a plot is considered free if his relations with the

lord are restricted to occasional appearances at court,

occasional fines, and the payment of certain rents two or three

times a year. It is natural enough that the holder of another

plot should be treated as a serf because he is bound to perform

work which is fitted as a part into the arrangement of his lord's

husbandry, and constantly brought under the control and the

coercive power of the steward. This matter-of-fact contrast comes

naturally to the fore in documents which are drawn up as

descriptions of daily transactions and not as evidence for a

lawsuit. But the terms 'free' and 'servile' are not used lightly

even in such documents. We may be sure that manorial juries and

bailiffs would not have been allowed to displace at their

pleasure terminological distinctions which might lead people to

alter their legal position. The double sense of these terms

cannot be taken as arranging society under the same two

categories and yet in two entirely different ways: it must be

construed as implying the two sides of one and the same thing,

the substance in manorial records and the formal distinction in

legal records. That is to say, when the test of legal protection

was applied, the people who had to perform labour were deprived

of it and designated as holding in villainage, and to the people

who paid rent protection was granted and they were considered as

holding freely. For this very reason the process of commutation

creating mol-land actually led to an increase in the number of

free tenancies.(3*)

    The courts made some attempts to utilise personal subjection

as a distinctive feature of born villains. If it had been

possible to follow out the principle, we should have been able to

distinguish between villains proper and men of free blood holding

in villainage. The attempt miscarried in practice, although the

King's courts were acting in this case in conjunction with local

custom and local juries. The reason of the failure is disclosed

by manorial documents. Merchet, the most debasing incident of

personal villainage, appears so widely spread in the Hundred

Rolls that there can be no question, at least at the close of the

thirteenth century, of treating it as a sure test of personal

subjection. We cannot admit even for one moment that the whole

peasant population of entire counties was descended from personal

slaves, as the diffusion of merchet would lead us to suppose. The

appearance of the distinction is quite as characteristic as its

gradual collapse. The original idea underlying it was to connect

villain status with personal slavery, and it failed because the

incidents of personal slavery were confused with other facts

which were quite independent of it and which were expanded over a

very large area instead of a very restricted one.

    And now we have ready the several links of one chain. The

three tests of serfdom applied by our documents are connected

with each other by the very terms in which they are stated, and

at the same time they present three consecutive stages of

development. The notion of serfdom is originally confined to

forms of personal subjection and to the possession of land under

the bane of personal subjection: in this sense servitude is a

narrow term, and the condition denoted by it is exceptional. In

its second meaning it connects itself with rural labour and

spreads over the whole class of peasants engaged. in it. In its

last and broadest sense it includes all the people and all the

land not protected by the Common Law. We have no evidence as to

the chronological landmarks between these several epochs, and it

is clear that the passage from one to another was very gradual,

and by no means implied the absolute disappearance of ancient

terms. But it seems hardly doubtful that the movement was

effected in the direction described; both the, intrinsic evidence

of the notions under discussion and their appearance in our

documents point this way.

    This being so, we may expect to find some traces of the

gradual spread of serfdom in the subdivisions of that

comprehensive class called villainage. And, indeed, there are

unmistakable signs of the fact that the flood was rising slowly

and swamping the several groups of the peasantry which hitherto

had been of very various conditions. The Domesday classification

will have to be discussed by itself, but it may be noticed even

now that its fundamental features are the distinction between

serfs and villains, and the very limited number of these first.

Judging by this, the bulk of the peasantry was not considered

unfree. The inference is corroborated for the epoch of the early

Norman kings by the laws of Henry I, in which the villain is

still treated on the same footing as the ceorl of Saxon times, is

deemed 'worthy of his were and of his wite,' and is called as a

free man to the hundred court, although not a landlord,

'teirrarum dominus.' The hundredors of later times kept up the

tradition: degraded in many ways, they were still considered as

representatives of a free population. Ancient demesne tenure is

another proof of the same freedom in villainage; it is protected

though base, and supposes independent rights on the part of the

peasantry. The position of the group of socmen outside the

ancient demesne points the same way: their tenure is originally

nothing more and nothing less than a customary freehold or a free

copyhold, if one may say so. The law of Kent is constructed on

this very basis: it is the law of free ceorls subjected to a

certain manorial authority which has not been able to strike very

deep roots in this soil.

    But the general current went Steadily against the peasantry.

The disruption of political unity at the time of the great civil

war, and the systematic resumption of royal rights by Henry II,

must have led to a settlement which impaired the social standing

of the villain in the sense of feudal law. The immediate

connexion between the lower class and the royal power could not

be kept up during the troubled reign of Stephen, when England all

but lapsed into the political dismemberment of the neighbouring

continental states. Government and law were restored by Henry II,

but he had to set a limit to his sphere of action in order that

within that sphere he might act efficiently. The very growth of

the great system of royal writs necessitated the drawing a sharp

line between the people admitted to use them and those excluded

from this benefit. One part of the revolution effected by the

development of royal jurisdiction is very noticeable in our

documents: the struggle between king and magnates as to the right

of judging freeholders has left many traces, of which the history

of the 'breve quod vocatur praecipe' is perhaps the most

remarkable. But the victorious progress of royal jurisdiction in

regard to freeholders was counter-balanced by an all but complete

surrender of it in regard to villains. The celebrated tit. 29 of

William the Conqueror's laws providing that the cultivators of

the land are not to be subjected to new exactions, had lost its

sense in the reign of Henry II, and so soon as it was settled

that one class of tenants was to be protected, while another was

to be unprotected in the king's court, the lawyers set themselves

thinking over the problem of a definite and plain division of

classes. Their work in this direction bears all the marks of a

fresh departure. They are wavering between the formal and the

material test: instead of setting up at once the convenient

doctrine that villainage is proved by stock, and that in regard

to service and tenure the question is decided by their certainty

or uncertainty, they try for a long time to shape conclusive

rules as to the kind of services and incidents which imply

villainage, and for a time distinction between rural labour and

rent becomes especially important.

    On the whole, I think that an analysis of the legal and

manorial evidence belonging to the feudal age leads forcibly to

the conclusion that the general classification of society under

the two heads of freeholders and villains is an artificial and a

late one. A number of important groups appear between the two)

and if we try to reduce them to some unity, we may say that a

third class is formed by customary freeholders. Another way of

stating the same thing would be to say, that the feudal notion of

a freehold from which the modern notion has developed must be

supplemented from the point of view of the historian by a more

ancient form which is hidden, as it were, inside the class

distinction of villainage. By the side of the freeholder

recognised by later law there stands the villain as a customary

freeholder who has lost legal protection. I do not think that the

problems resulting from the ambiguous position of the feudal

villain can be solved better than on the supposition of this

'third estate.'



NOTES:



1. Chandler, Court Rolls of Great Cressingham, p. 14: '20 solidi

de toto Homagio quia recusaverunt preparare fenum domini. Debitum

ponatur in respectum usque proximam curiam et interea scrutatur

le Domesday.' A manorial extent is evidently meant. Comp.

Domesday of St. Paul's.



2. Ely Inq., Cotton MSS., Claudius, C. xi. 60, a: 'Anelipemen,

Anelipewyman et coterellus manens super terram episcopi vel

terram alicuius custumariorum suorum metet unam sellionem in

autumpno ex consuetudine que vocatur luuebene.' Cp. 42, a,

'quilibet anlepiman et anlepiwyman et quiibet undersetle metet

dimidiam acram bladi,' etc., and Ramsey, Cart.i 50. -- I have not

been able to find a satisfactory etymological explanation of,

anelipeman,; but he seems a small tenant, and sometimes settled

on the land of a villain.



3. Of course in later times the test applied in drawing the line

between freehold and baser tenure was much rather the mode of

conveyance than anything else. The commutation into money rent of

labour services due from a tenement, held by copy of court roll,

(a commutation which in some cases was not effected before the

fifteenth century), did not convert the tenement into freehold;

had it done so, there would have been no copyhold tenure at the

present day. But I am here speaking of the thirteenth century

when this, conveyancing test, could not be readily applied, when

the self-same ceremony might be regarded either as the feoffment

by subinfeudation of a freehold tenant or the admittance of a

customary tenant, there being neither charter on the one hand nor

entry on a court roll on the other hand. Thus the nature of the

services due from the tenement had to be considered, and, at

least in general, a tenement which merely paid a money rent was

deemed freehold.








the Spartans who had been taken prisoners on the island and had





surrendered their arms might, it was feared, suppose that they were to





be subjected to some degradation in consequence of their misfortune,





and so make some attempt at revolution, if left in possession of their





franchise. These were therefore at once disfranchised, although some





of them were in office at the time, and thus placed under a disability





to take office, or buy and sell anything. After some time, however,





the franchise was restored to them.





  The same summer the Dians took Thyssus, a town on Acte by Athos in





alliance with Athens. During the whole of this summer intercourse





between the Athenians and Peloponnesians continued, although each





party began to suspect the other directly after the treaty, because of





the places specified in it not bein











Villainage in England: Essays in English Mediaeval History



	by Paul Vinogradoff







1892









Preface







    A foreigner's attempt to treat of difficult and much disputed

points of English history requires some justification. Why should

a Russian scholar turn to the arduous study of English mediaeval

documents? Can he say anything of sufficient general interest to

warrant his exploration of so distant a field?

    The first question is easier to answer than the second.

    There are many reasons why we in Russia are especially keen

to study what may be called social history -- the economic

development of nations, their class divisions and forms of

co-operation. We are still living in surroundings created by the

social revolution of the peasant emancipation; many of our elder

contemporaries remember both the period of serfdom and the

passage from it to modern life; some have taken part in the

working out and putting into practice of the emancipating acts.

Questions entirely surrendered to antiquarian research in the

West of Europe are still topics of contemporary interest with us.

    It is not only the civil progress of the peasantry that we

have to notice, but the transformation and partial decay of the

landed gentry, the indirect influence of the economic convulsions

on politics, ideas, and morality, and, in a more special way, the

influence of free competition on soil and people that had been

fettered for ages, the passage from 'natural husbandry' to the

money system, the substitution of rents for labour, above all,

the working of communal institutions under the sway of the lord

and in their modern free shape. Government and society have to

deal even now with problems that must be solved in the light of

history, if in any light at all, and not by instinct groping in

the dark. All such practical problems verge towards one main

question: how far legislation can and should act upon the social

development of the agrarian world. Are economic agencies to

settle for themselves who has to till land and who shall own it?

Or can we learn from Western history what is to be particularly

avoided and what is to be aimed at? I do not think that anybody

is likely to maintain at the present day, that, for instance, a

study of the formation and dissolution of the village community

in the West would be meaningless for politicians and thinkers who

have to concern themselves with the actual life of the village

community in the East.

    Another powerful incitement comes from the scientific

direction lately assumed by historical studies. They have been

for a long time very closely connected with fine literature:

their aim was a lifelike reproduction of the past; they required

artistic power, and stirred up feelings as well as reflective

thought. Such literary history has a natural bent towards

national tradition, for the same reason that literature is

attracted by national life: the artist gains by being personally

in touch with his subject; it is more easy for him to cast his

material into the right mould. Ancient history hardly constitutes

an exception, because the elements of classical civilisation have

been appropriated by European nations so as to form part of their

own past. What I call literary history has by no means done all

its work. There is too much in the actions of men that demands

artistic perception and even divination on the part of the

historian, to allow this mode of treatment to fall into decay.

But nobody will deny that historical study is extending more and

more in the direction of what is now called anthropology and

social science. Historians are in quest of laws of development

and of generalisations that shall unravel the complexity of human

culture, as physical and biological generalisations have put into

order our knowledge of the phenomena of nature.

    There is no subject more promising from this point of view

than the history of social arrangements. It borders on political

economy, which has already attained a scientific standing; part

of its material has been fashioned by juridical doctrine and

practical law, and thereby moulded into a clear, well-defined

shape; it deals with facts recurring again and again with much

uniformity, and presenting great facilities for comparison; the

objects of its observation are less complex than the phenomena of

human thought, morality, or even political organisation. And from

the point of view of the scientific investigator there can be no

other reason for taking up a particular epoch or nation, but the

hope of getting a good specimen for analysis, and of making use

of such analysis for purposes of generalisation.

    Now I think that there can be no better opportunity for

studying early stages of agrarian development than that afforded

by English mediaeval history. The sources of information are

comparatively abundant in consequence of the powerful action of

central authority; from far back in the feudal time we get legal

and fiscal documents to enlighten us, not only about general

arrangements but even about details in the history of landed

property and of the poorer classes. And the task of studying the

English line of development is rendered especially interesting

because it stands evidently in close connexion with the

variations of the same process on the continent. Scandinavian,

German, French, Italian, and Spanish history constantly present

points of comparison, and such differences as there are may be

traced to their origins just because so many facts are in common

to start with. I think that all these considerations open a

glorious vista for the enquirer, and the interest excited by such

publications as those of Fustel de Coulanges proves that the

public is fully alive to the importance of those studies in spite

of their dry details.

    What could I personally undertake to further the great

objects of such investigation? The ground has been surveyed by

powerful minds, and many controversies show that it is not an

easy one to explore. Two main courses seemed open in the present

state of the study. A promising method would have been to

restrict oneself to a definite provincial territory, to get

intimately acquainted with all details of its geography, local

history, peculiarities of custom, and to trace the social

evolution of this tract of land as far back as possible, without

losing sight of general connexions and analogies. How instructive

such work may become may be gathered from Lamprecht's monumental

monograph on the Moselland, which has been rightly called by its

author 'Deutsches Wirthschaftsleben im Mittelalter.' Or else, one

might try to gather the general features of the English mediaeval

system as embodied in the numerous, one might almost say

innumerable, records of the feudal period, and to work back from

them into the imperfectly described pre-feudal age. Such enquiry

would necessarily leave out local peculiarities, or treat them

only as variations of general types. From the methodical point of

view it has the same right to existence as any other study of

'universalities' which are always exemplified by individual

beings, although the latter are not made up by them, but appear

complicated in every single case by additional elements.

    Being a foreigner, I was driven to take the second course. I

could not trust myself to become sufficiently familiar with local

life, even if I had the time and opportunity to study it closely.

I hope such investigations may be taken up by scholars in every

part of England and may prosper in their hands; the gain to

general history would be simply invaluable. And I was not sorry

of the necessity of going by the second track, because I could

hope to achieve something useful even if I went wrong on many

points. Every year brings publications of Cartularies, Surveys,

Court-rolls; the importance of these legal and economic records

has been duly realised, and historians take them more and more

into account by the side of annals and statutes. But surely some

attempt ought to be made to concentrate the results of scattered

investigation in this field. The Cartularies of Ramsey, Battle,

Bury St. Edmunds, St. Paul's, the Hundred Rolls, the Manorial

Records of Broughton and King's Ripton, give us material of one

and the same kind, which, for all its wealth and variety,

presents great facilities for classification and comparison.(1*)

I have seen a good many of these documents, both published and in

manuscript, and I hope that my book may be of some service in the

way of concentrating this particular study of manorial records. I

am conscious how deficient my work is in many respects; but if by

the help of corrections, alterations, additions, it may be made

to serve to some extent for the purpose, I shall be glad to have

written it. I may say also that it is intended to open the way,

by a careful study of the feudal age, for another work on the

origins of English peasant life in the Norman and pre-Norman

periods.

    One pleasant result the toil expended on mediaeval documents

has brought me already. I have come into contact with English

scholars, and I can say that I have received encouragement,

advice, and support in every case when I had to apply for them,

and in so large and liberal a measure as I could hardly hope for

or expect. Of two men, now dead, I have to repeat what many have

said before me. Henry Bradshaw was the first to lay an English

MS. cartulary before me in the Cambridge University Library; and

in all my travels through European libraries and archives I never

again met such a guide, so ready to help from his inexhaustible

store of palaeographical, linguistic and historical learning.

Walford Selby was an invaluable friend to me at the Record Office

-- always willing and able to find exactly what was wanted for my

researches.

    It would be impossible to mention all those from whom I have

received help in one way or another, but I should like to speak

at least of a few. I have the pleasant duty of thanking the

Marquis of Bath for the loan of the Longleat MS. of Bracton,

which was sent for my use to the Bodleian Library. Lord Leigh was

kind enough to allow of my coming to Stoneleigh Abbey to work at

a beautiful cartulary in his possession, and the Hon. Miss

Cordelia Leigh took the pains of making for me some additional

extracts from that document. Sir Frederick Pollock and Mr York

Powell have gone through the work of reading my proofs, and I owe

to them many suggestions for alterations and improvements. I have

disputed some of Mr Seebohm's opinions on mediaeval history; but

I admit freely that nobody has exercised a stronger influence on

the formation of my own views, and I feel proud that personal

friendship has given me many opportunities of admiring the

originality and width of conception of one who has done great

things for the advancement of social history. As for F.W.

Maitland, I can only say that my book would hardly have appeared

at all if he had not taken infinite trouble to further its

publication. He has not only done everything in his power to make

it presentable to English readers in style and wording, but as to

the subject-matter, many a friendly suggestion, many a criticism

I have had from him, and if I have not always profited by them,

the blame is to be cast entirely on my own obstinacy.



                Paul Vinogradoff



NOTES:



1. Miss Lamond's edition of Walter of Henley did not appear until

the greater part of my book was in type. I had studied the work

in MS. So also I studied the Cartulary of Battle Abbey in MS.

without being aware that it had been edited by Mr Scargill Bird.

Had Mr Gomme's Village Communities come to my hands at an earlier

date I should have made more references to it.



Introduction



    When the time comes for writing a history of the nineteenth

century, one of the most important and attractive chapters will

certainly be devoted to the development of historical literature.

The last years of a great age are fast running out: great has

been the strife and the work in the realm of thought as well as

in the material arrangement of life. The generations of the

nineteenth century have witnessed a mighty revival of religious

feeling; they have attempted to set up philosophical systems as

broad and as profound as any of the speculations of former times;

they have raised the structure of theoretical and applied science

to a height which could hardly have been foreshadowed some two

hundred years ago. And still it is to historical study that we

have to look as the most characteristic feature of the period.

Medieval asceticism in its desperate struggle against the flesh,

and Puritanism with its sense of individual reconciliation with

God, were both more vigorous forms of religious life than the

modern restorations of faith and Church, so curiously mixed up

with helplessness, surrender of acquired truth, hereditary

instincts, and utilitarian reflection. In philosophy, Hegel's

metaphysical dialectic, Schopenhauer's transformation of Kant's

teaching, and the attempts of English and French positivism at

encyclopaedical science may be compared theoretically with

Plato's poetical idealism or with the rationalistic schools of

the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But it would be

difficult to deny, that in point of influence on men's minds,

those older systems held a more commanding position than these:

Hegel seems too arbitrary and phantastical, Schopenhauer too

pessimistic, positivism too incomplete and barren as to ultimate

problems to suit the practical requirements of philosophy; and

people are already complaining of the decay of philosophical

study. In science, again, the age of Darwin is certainly second

to none, but it has to share its glory with the age of Newton,

and it may be reasonably doubted whether the astronomer,

following in the footsteps of Galileo and Kepler, was not

actuated by even greater thirst and pride of knowledge than the

modern biologist or geologist. It is otherwise with regard to

history.

    Students of science are wont to inveigh against the inexact

character of historical research, its incoherence and supposed

inability to formulate laws. It would be out of place here to

discuss the comparative value of methods and the one-sided

preference given by such accusers to quantitative analysis; but I

think that if these accusers were better acquainted with the

subject of their attacks, or even more attentive to the

expressions of men's life and thought around them, they would

hardly dare to maintain that a study which in the short space of

a century has led to a complete revolution in the treatment of

all questions concerning man and society, has been operating only

by vague assumptions and guesses at random. An investigation into

methods cannot be undertaken in these introductory pages, but a

general survey of results may be attempted. If we merely take a

single volume, Tocqueville's Ancien Regime, and ask ourselves

whether anything at all like it could have been produced even in

the eighteenth century, we shall have a sense of what has been

going on in the line of historical study during the nineteenth.

Ever since Niebuhr's great stroke, historical criticism has been

patiently engaged in testing, sifting, and classifying the

original materials, and it has now rendered impossible that

medley of discordant authorities in which eighteenth-century

learning found its confused notions of Romans in French costume,

or sought for modern constitutional ideas as manifest in the

policy of the Franks. Whole subjects and aspects of social life

which, if treated at all, used to be sketchily treated in some

appendix by the historian, or guessed at like a puzzle by the

antiquarian, have come to the fore and are recognised as the

really important parts of history. In a word, the study of the

past vacillates no longer between the two extremes of minute

research leading to no general results and general statements not

based on any real investigation into facts. The laws of

development may still appear only as dim outlines which must be

more definitely traced by future generations of workers, but

there is certainly a constant progress of generalisation on

firmly established premises towards them.

    What is more striking, the great change in the ways and

results of history has made itself felt on all the subjects which

surround it. Political economy and law are assuming an entirely

new shape under the influence of historical conceptions: the

tendency towards building up dogmatic doctrine on the foundation

of abstract principle and by deductive methods is giving way to

an exact study of facts in their historical surroundings, and to

inquiries into the shifting conditions under which the problems

of social economy and law are solved by different epochs. As a

brilliant representative of legal learning has ironically put it,

it would be better for one nowadays to be convicted of petty

larceny than to be found deficient of 'historical-mindedness.'

The influence of historical speculation on politics is yet more

definite and direct: even the most devoted disciples of

particular creeds, the most ardent advocates of reform or

reaction dare not simply take up the high standing ground of

abstract theory from which all political questions were discussed

less than a hundred years ago: the socialist as well as the

partisan of aristocracy is called on to make good his contention

by historical arguments.

    It may be urged that the new turn thus taken is not

altogether beneficial for practical life. Men of fanatical

conviction were more likely to act and die for the eternal truth

revealed to them, than people reflecting on the relative

character of human arrangements. But can one get blissfully

one-sided by merely wishing to be so? And is it not nobler to

seek knowledge in the hope that it will right itself in the end,

than to reject it for the sake of being comfortable? However this

may be, the facts can hardly be denied: the aspiration of our age

is intensely historical; we are doing more for the relative, than

for the absolute, more for the study of evolution than for the

elucidation of principles which do not vary.

    It will not be my object to give a sketch of the gradual rise

of historical study in the present century: such an undertaking

must be left to later students, who will command a broader view

of the subject and look at it with less passion and prejudice

than we do now. But Lord Acton's excellent article has shown that

the task is not quite hopeless even now, and I must try, before

starting on my arduous inquiry into the social history of the

middle ages in England, to point out what I make of the work

achieved in this direction, and what object I have in view

myself. Quite apart from any questions of detail which may come

under consideration as the treatment of the subject requires it,

I have to say in what perspective the chief schools of historians

present themselves to my view, in what relation they stand to

each other, to show how far they have pushed the inquiry, and

what problems still remain unsolved. Such a preliminary sketch

must not be carried out with a view to criticism and polemics,

but rather as the general estimate of a literary movement in its

various phases.

    It is a remarkable fact, that the vast importance of the

social side of history has been recognised later than any other

aspect of that study. Stating things very broadly, one may say

that it was pushed to the fore about the middle of our century by

the interests and forces at play in actual life: before 1848 the

political tendency predominates; after 1848 the tide turns in

favour of the social tendency. I mean that in the first half of

the century men were chiefly engaged in reorganising the State,

in trying to strike a balance between the influence of government

and the liberties of the people. The second half of the century

is engrossed by the conflict between classes, by questions of

economical organisation, by reforms of civil order. Historical

literature, growing as it was in the atmosphere of actual life,

had to start from its interests, to put and solve its problems in

accordance with them. But it is no wonder that the preceding

period had already touched upon a number of questions that were

fated to attract most attention in later research. The rise of

the Constitution, for instance, could not be treated without some

regard being paid to the relative position of classes; it would

have been out of the question to speak of political feudalism

without taking into account the social bearing of the system. And

so a sketch of the literary treatment of social questions must

begin with books which did not aim directly at a description of

social history.

    I shall not detain the reader over the work achieved in the

seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The learning of a Selden or

of a Madox is astounding, and a student of the present day has to

consult them constantly on particular questions; but they never

had in mind to embrace the history of their country as a whole.

Facts are brought into a system by Coke, but the system is

strictly a legal one; undigested historical knowledge is made to

yield the necessary store of leading cases, and, quite apart from

the naive perversion of most particulars, the entire view of the

subject is thoroughly opposed to historical requirements, for it

makes the past an illustration of the present, and regards it as

planned on the same lines. There is no lack of books setting

forth historical proof for some favourite general thesis or

arranging facts according to some general idea, but such attempts

were distinguished by unbounded imagination and by endless

sacrifices of fact to the object of the writer's devotion. The

curious literary by-play to the struggle of political party which

Aug. Thierry has artistically illustrated in France from the

writings of Boulainvilliers and Dubos, Mably and Lezardiere,

could certainly be matched in England by a tale of the historical

argumentation of Brady, or Petyt, or Granville Sharp. Nothing can

be more eloquent in a sense than the title given by this last

author to his book on the system of frankpledge: -- "An account

of the Constitutional English Polity of Congregational Courts,

and more particularly of the great annual court of the people,

called the View of Frankpledge, wherein the whole body of the

Nation was arranged into the regular divisions of Tythings,

Hundreds, etc.: -- the happy effect of that excellent

institution, in preventing robberies, riots, etc., whereby, in

law, it was justly deemed 'Summa et maxima securitas:' -- that it

would be equally beneficial to all other nations and countries,

as well under monarchical as republican establishments; and that,

to the English Nation in particular, it would afford an effectual

means of reforming the corruption of Parliament by rendering the

representation of the people perfectly equal, in exact numerical

proportion to the total number of householders throughout the

whole realm."

    Historical research, in the true sense of the word, was

indeed making its first appearance in the eighteenth century, and

it was more fruitful in England than in any other country,

because England was so far ahead of the Continent in its

political condition: the influence of an intelligent society in

political affairs had for its counterpart a greater insight into

the conditions of political development. But the great English

historians of the eighteenth century were looking to problems in

other fields than that of social history. Robertson was prompted

by an interest in the origins of that peculiar community called

Western Europe, so distinctly dismembered in its component States

and so closely united by ideal and material ties; Gibbon could

see the shadows of the old world in which the new world was

living; both had been attracted to research by an admirable sense

of influences deeper and stronger than nationality, or State, or

class, and both remained indifferent to the humbler range of

English social history. Hume took his stand on England, but he

had to begin with a general outline and the explanation of the

more apparent changes in State and Church.

    In this way current notions on our questions remained towards

the close of the eighteenth century still undisturbed by writers

of a high order. We may take as a fair sample of such current

notions Sir William Blackstone's historical digressions,

especially those in the second volume of his Commentaries. There

is no originality about them, and the lack of this quality is

rather an advantage in this case: it enables us through one book

to glance at an entire literature. I may be allowed to recall its

most striking points to the mind of my readers.

    The key to the whole medieval system and to the constitution

emerging from it is to be found in feudalism. 'The constitution

of feuds had its original from the military policy of the

northern or Celtic nations, the Goths, the Huns, the Franks, the

Vandals, and the Lombards, who poured themselves into all the

regions of Europe, at the declension of the Roman Empire. It was

brought by them from their own countries, and continued in their

respective colonies as the most likely means to secure their new

acquisitions, and to that end large districts or parcels of land

were allotted by the conquering general to the Superior officers

of the army, and by them dealt out again in smaller parcels or

allotments to the inferior officers and most deserving soldiers.'

'Scarce had these northern conquerors established themselves in

their new dominions, when the wisdom of their constitutions, as

well as their personal valour, alarmed all the princes of Europe.

Wherefore most, if not all, of them thought it necessary to enter

into the same or a similar plan of policy. And thus, in the

compass of a very few years, the feudal constitution, or the

doctrine of tenure, extended itself over all the western world.'

    'But this feudal polity, which was thus by degrees

established over all the Continent of Europe, seems not to have

been received in this part of our island, at least not

universally and as a part of our national constitution, till the

reign of William the Norman. This introduction, however, of the

feudal tenures into England by King William does not seem to have

been effected immediately after the Conquest, nor by the mere

arbitrary will and power of the Conqueror, but to have been

gradually established by the Norman barons, and afterwards

universally consented to by the great Council of the nation.'

'The new polity therefore seems not to have been imposed by the

Conqueror, but nationally and freely adopted by the general

assembly of the whole realm.' 'By thus consenting to the

introduction of feudal tenures, our English ancestors probably

meant no more than to put the kingdom in a state of defence by

establishing a military system. But whatever their meaning was,

the Norman interpreters... gave a very different construction to

this proceeding, and thereupon took a handle to introduce, not

only the rigorous doctrine which prevailed in the duchy of

Normandy, but also such fruits and dependencies, such hardships

and services, as were never known to other nations.' 'And from

hence arises the inference, that the liberties of Englishmen are

not (as some arbitrary writers would represent them) mere

infringements of the king's prerogative, but a restoration of the

ancient constitution, of which our ancestors had been defrauded

by the art and finesse of the Norman lawyers, rather than

deprived by the force of the Norman arms.' The structure of the

component parts is (for Blackstone) as ancient as the

constitution of the whole. The English manor is of Saxon origin

in all its essential characteristics, but the treatment of the

people within the manor underwent a very notable change in

consequence of the Norman invasion. In Saxon times the common

people settled on folkland were immersed in complete slavery,

Their condition was improved by the Conquest, because the Normans

admitted them to the oath of fealty. And the improvement did not

stop there: although the peasantry held their plots only by base

tenure and at the lord's will, the lord allowed in most cases a

hereditary possession. In this way out of the lord's will custom

arose, and as custom is the soul or vital principle of common

law, the Courts undertook in the end to protect the base tenure

of the peasantry against the very lord whose will had created it.

Such was the rise of the copyhold estate of modern times.

    Blackstone's work is a compilation, and it would be out of

the question to reduce its statements to anything like

consistency. The rationalistic mode of thought which has left

such a peculiar stamp on the eighteenth century, appears in all

its glory in the laying out of the wise military polity of

feudalism. But scarcely has our author had time to show the rapid

progress of this plan all round Europe, when he starts on an

entirely new tack suggested by his wish to introduce a historical

justification of Constitutional Monarchy. Feudal polity is of

late introduction in England, and appears as a compact between

sovereign and subjects; original freedom was not destroyed by

this compact, and later infringements of contractual rights by

kings ultimately led to a restoration and development of ancient

liberties. In the parts of the treatise which concern Private Law

the keynote is given throughout by that very Norman jurisprudence

on which such severe condemnation is passed with regard to Public

Law. The Conquest is thus made to appear alternately as a source

of danger, struggle, and hardship from one point of view, and as

the origin of steady improvement in social condition from

another. In any case the aristocratic cast of English life is

deduced from its most ancient origins, and all the rights of the

lower orders are taken as the results of good-humoured concession

on the part of the lords of the soil and of quiet encroachment

against them.

    Statements and arguments in Blackstone's style could hold

water only before that great crisis in history and historical

literature by which the nineteenth century was ushered into the

world. The French Revolution, and the reaction against it, laid

open and put to the test the working of all the chief forces

engaged in historical life. Government and social order,

nationality and religion, economic conditions and modes of

thought, were thrown into the furnace to be consumed or

remoulded. Ideas and institutions which had towered over

centuries went down together, and their fall not only brought

home the transitory character of human arrangements, but also

laid bare the groundwork of society, which however held good in

spite of the convulsions on its surface. The generation that

witnessed these storms was taught to frame its politics and to

understand history in a new fashion. The disorderly scepticism of

the eighteenth century was transformed by Niebuhr into a

scientific method that paved the way by criticism to positive

results. On the other hand, the Utopian doctrines of political

rationalism were shattered by Savigny's teaching on the

fundamental importance of tradition and the unconscious organic

growth of nations. In his polemic with Thibaut, the founder of

the historical school of law enters a mighty protest against

wanton reform on the ground of a continuity of institutions not

less real than the continuity of language, and his: History of

Roman Law during the Middle Ages, demonstrated that even such a

convulsion as the Barbarian Invasion was not sufficient to sweep

away the foundations of law and social order slowly formed in the

past. Eichhorn's 'History of German Public and Private Law' gave

detailed expression to an idea which occurs also in some of

Savigny's minor works -- to the idea, namely, that the German

nations have had to run through their history with an engrained

tendency in their character towards political dismemberment and

social inequality. This rather crude attempt at generalising out

some particular modern features and sanctioning them by the past

is of historical interest, because it corresponds to the general

problem propounded to history by the Romantic school: viz. to

discover in the various manifestations of the life of a nation

its permanent character and the leading ideas it is called to

embody in history.

    The comparative soundness of the English system had arrayed

it from the very beginning on the side of Conservatism against

Revolution, and Burke was the first to sound the blast of a

crusade against subversive theories. No wonder the historical

discoveries on the Continent found a responsive echo in English

scholarship. Allen took up the demonstration that the Royal power

in England had developed from the conceptions of the Roman

Empire. Palgrave gave an entirely new construction of Anglo-Saxon

history, which could not but exercise a powerful influence on the

study of subsequent periods. His book is certainly the first

attempt to treat the problems of medieval social history on a

large scale and by new methods. It deserves special attention.

    The author sat down to his work before the Revolution of

1830, although his two volumes were published in 1832. He shares

the convictions of very moderate Liberalism, declares in favour

of the gradual introduction of reforms, and against any reform

not framed as a compromise between actual claims. Custom and

tradition did not exclude change and development in England, and

for this reason the movement towards progress did not tear that

people from the inheritance of their ancestors, did not disregard

the mighty agency of historical education. In order to study the

relative force of the elements of progress and conservatism in

English history, Palgrave goes behind the external play of

institutions, and tries to connect them with the internal growth

of legal principles. It is a great, though usual, mistake to

begin with political events, to proceed from them to the study of

institutions, and only quite at the end to take up law. The true

sequence is the inverse one. And in England in particular the

Constitution, with all its showy and famous qualities, was formed

under the direct influence of judicial and legal institutions. In

accordance with this leading view Palgrave's work begins by a

disquisition on classes, forms of procedure and judicial

organisation, followed up by an estimate of the effects of the

different Conquests, and ultimately by an exposition of the

history of government. We need not feel bound by that order, and

may start from the conclusion which gives the key to Palgrave's

whole system.

    The limited monarchy of England is a result of the action of

two distinct elements, equally necessary for its composition. It

is a manifestation of the monarchical power descended both in

principle and in particular attributes from the Roman Empire. If

this political idea had not been at work the Kingdoms of the

barbarians would have presented only loose aggregates of separate

and self-sufficient political bodies; on the other hand, if this

political idea had been supreme, medieval Kings would have been

absolute. The principles of Teutonic and of Roman polity had to

work together, and the result was the medieval State with an

absolute King for its centre, and a great independence of local

parts. The English system differed from the continental in this

way, that in England the free judicial institutions of the

localities reacted on the central power, and surrounded it by

constitutional limitations, while the Continent had to content

itself with estates of a very doubtful standing and future. It is

easy to see in this connexion how great an importance we must

assign to the constitution of local Courts: the shires, hundreds,

and townships are not mere administrative divisions, but

political bodies. That the Kingdom formed itself on their basis,

not as an absolute but as a parliamentary monarchy, must be

explained in a great measure by the influence of the Norman

Conquest, which led to a closer union of the isolated parts, and

to a concentration of local liberty in parliament.

    But (such is Palgrave's view) the importance of Conquests has

been greatly overrated in history. The barbarian invasion did not

effect anything like a sudden or complete subversion of things;

it left in force and action most of the factors of the preceding

period. The passage from one rule to another was particularly

easy in England, as most tribes which occupied the island were

closely related to each other. Palgrave holds that the Britons,

Anglo-Saxons, Danes, and Normans all belong to one and the same

Teutonic race. There were, of course (he allows), Celtic elements

among the Britons, but the greater part consisted of Belgian

Kymrys, whose neighbours and kin are to be found on the Continent

as Saxons and Frisians. The conquest of the island by bands of

seafaring Saxons did not lead by any means to the wholesale

destruction and depopulation which the legendary accounts of the

chronicles report. The language of the Britons has not been

preserved, but then no more has the Celtic language in Gaul. The

Danish and Norman invasions had even less influence on social

condition than the Saxon. It is only the Roman occupation that

succeeded in introducing into the life of this island important

and indestructible traits.

    If we look at the results of all these migrations and

ethnographical mixtures, we have first to notice the

stratifications of English society according to rank. It is

settled definitely enough in the Saxon period on an aristocratic

basis. In the main, society consists of eorls and ceorls,

noblemen and serfs. The difference does not consist merely in a

diversity of legal value, social influence and occupation, but

also in the fact that the ceorl may economically and legally be

dependent on the eorl, and afterwards on the thane. How did this

aristocratic constitution arise? Social distinctions of this kind

may sometimes originate in the oppression of the weak by the

strong, and in voluntary subjection, but, as a rule, they go back

to conquest. There is every reason to believe that the

Anglo-Saxon conquerors, who were very few in number, became the

privileged class of the new States, and reduced the Britons to

serfdom; a corroboration of this assumption may be found in the

fact that the services of Celtic and Saxon peasantry are

extremely alike.

    It is more difficult to trace the influence of different

races in the agrarian system, of which the township or manor is

the unit. It is by comparing it with the forms in its immediate

neighbourhood that one gets to understand its origin. The Roman

organisation of husbandry and ownership on the basis of

individualism is too well known to be described. In marked

contrast with it stands the Celtic community, of which survivals

were lingering for a long time in Ireland and Wales. Here the

land is in the ownership of tribal groups: rights of individuals

and families expand and collapse according to the requirements

and decisions of the entire tribe; there is no hereditary

succession, but every grown-up clansman has a claim to be endowed

with a plot of land, and as a consequence of this, all land in

separate possession is constantly liable to be divided by the

tribal community. The Anglo-Saxon system is an intermediate stage

between Roman individualism and Celtic communalism. No wonder

that the Saxons, who at home followed a system closely resembling

the Celtic, modified it when they got acquainted with Roman forms

and entered into their Roman inheritance in Great Britain. The

mixed organisation of the township was the result of the

assimilation.

    Such are in the main those conclusions of Palgrave which have

a direct bearing on the questions before us. It is easy to

perceive that they are permeated by certain very general

historical conceptions. He is greatly impressed by the 'Vis

inertiae' of social condition, and by the continuity of

historical development arising from it. And so in his work the

British population does not disappear without leaving any traces

of its existence; the Roman dominion exercises a most conspicuous

influence on important aspects of later condition -- on central

power, feudalism, and agrarian organisation: the most recent of

the Conquests -- the Norman invasion -- is reduced to a

comparatively secondary share in the framing of society. The

close connexion between Palgrave's ideas and the currents of

thought on the Continent is not less notable in his attempts to

determine the peculiarities of national character as manifested

in unconscious leanings towards certain institutions. The

Teutonic system is characterised by a tendency towards federalism

in politics and an aristocratic arrangement of society. The one

tendency explains the growth of the Constitution as a

concentration of local self-government, the other leads from the

original and fundamental distinction between a privileged class

and a servile peasantry to the original organisation of the

township under a lord.

    There can be no question as to the remarkable power displayed

in Palgrave's work, or as to the value of his results. He had an

enormous and varied store of erudition at his command, and the

keenest eye for observation. No wonder that many of his theories

on particular subjects have been eagerly taken up and worked out

by later scholars. But apart from such successful solutions of

questions, his whole conception of development was undoubtedly

very novel and fruitful. One of Palgrave's main positions -- the

intimate connexion between the external history of the

Constitution and the working of private law in the courts --

opened a wholly new perspective for the study of social history.

But naturally enough the first cast turned out rather rough and

distorted. Palgrave is as conspicuous for his arbitrary and

fanciful treatment of his matter, as for his learning and

ingenuity. He does not try to get his data into order or

completeness, and has no notion of the methods of systematic

work. Comparisons of English facts with all kinds of phenomena in

the history of kindred and distant peoples sometimes give rise to

suggestive combinations, but, in most cases, out of this medley

of incongruous things they lead only to confusion of thought. In

consequence of all these drawbacks, Palgrave's attempt only

started the inquiry in most directions, but could not exhaust it

in any.

    The two great elements of Western civilisation -- Roman

tradition and Teutonic tendencies -- were more or less peacefully

brought together in the books of Savigny, Eichhorn, and Palgrave.

But in process of time they diverged into a position of

antagonism. Their contrast not only came out as a result of more

attention and developed study. It became acute, because in the

keen competition of French and German scholarship, historians,

consciously and unconsciously, took up the standpoint of national

predilection, and followed their bias back into ancient times.

Aug. Thierry, while protesting against the exaggerations of

eighteenth-century systems, considered the development of

European nations almost entirely as a national struggle

culminating in conquest, but underlying most facts in the history

of institutions. He began, for the sake of method, by tracing the

conflict on English ground where everything resolved itself to

his eye into open or hidden strife between Norman and Saxon. But

William the Bastard's invasion led him by a circuitous way to the

real object of his interest -- to the gradual rise of Gallo-Roman

civilisation against the Teutonic conquest in France: historical

tendencies towards centralised monarchy and municipal bourgeoisie

were connected by him with the present political condition of

France as the abiding legacy of Gallo-Roman culture

    Men of great power and note, from Raynouard and B. Guerard

down to Fustel de Coulanges in our own days, have followed the

same track with more or less violence and exaggeration. They are

all at one in their animosity towards Teutonic influence in the

past, all at one in lessening its effects, and in trying to

collect the scattered traces of Romanism in principle and

application. The Germans did not submit meekly to the onslaught,

but went as far as the Romanists on the other side. Lobell,

Waitz, and Roth -- to speak only of the heads of the school -- have

held forth about the mighty part which the Teutons have played in

Europe; they have enhanced the beneficial value of Germanic

principles, and tried to show that there is no reason for laying

to their account certain dark facts in the history of Europe. The

Germanist school had to fight its way not only against Romanism,

but against divers tenets of the Romantic school as represented

by Savigny and Eichhorn, of which Romanists had availed

themselves. The whole doctrine was to be reconsidered in the

light of two fundamental assumptions. The foundations of social

life were sought not in aristocracy, but in the common freedom of

the majority of the people: the German middle class, the

'Burgers,' who form the strength of contemporary Germany, looked

to the past history of their race as vouching for their liberty.

The destinies of that particular class became the test of social

development. Then again the disruptive tendency of German

national character was stoutly denied, and all the historical

instances of disruption were demonstrated to be quite independent

of any leaning of the race. In the great fermentation of thought

which led indirectly to the unification of Germany, the best men

in the country refused to believe that Western Europe had fallen

to pieces into feudalism because Teutonic development is doomed

to strife and helplessness by deeply engrained traits of

character. German scholarship found a most powerful ally in this

period of its history in the literature of kindred England:

German and English investigators stood side by side in the same

ranks. Kemble, K. Maurer, Freeman, Stubbs, and Gneist form the

goodly array of the Germanist School on English soil.

    Kemble's position is, strictly speaking, an intermediate one:

in some respects he is very near to Eichhorn and Grimm; although

his chief work was published in 1849, he was not acquainted with

Waitz's first books. But Kemble is mostly in touch with those

parts of Eichhorn's theory which could be accepted by later

Germanists; other important tenets of the Romantic School are

left in the shade or rejected, and as a whole Kemble's teaching

is essentially Germanistic. Kemble's 'Saxons in England' takes

its peculiar shape and marks an epoch in English historical

literature, mainly because it presents the first attempt to

utilise the enormous material of Saxon Charters, in the

collection of which Kemble has done such invaluable work. With

this copious and exact, but very one-sided, material at his

disposal, our author takes little notice of current tales about

the invasion of Great Britain by Angles and Saxons. Such tales

may be interesting from a mythological or literary point of view,

but the historian cannot accept them as evidence. At the same

time one cannot but wish to try and get certain knowledge of an

historical fact, which, as far as the history of England is

concerned, appears as the first manifestation of the Teutonic

race in its stupendous greatness. Luckily enough we have some

means to judge of the invasion in the names of localities and

groups of population. Read in this light the history of Conquest

appears very gradual and ancient. It began long before the

recorded settlements, and while Britain was still under Roman

sway. The struggle with the Celts was a comparatively easy one;

the native population was by no means destroyed, but remained in

large numbers in the lower orders of society. Notwithstanding

such remnants, the history of the Anglo-Saxon period is entirely

Teutonic in its aspect, and presents only one instance of the

general process by which the provinces of the Empire were

modified by conquerors of Teutonic race.

    The root of the whole social system is to be found in the

Mark, which is a division of the territory held jointly by a

certain number of freemen for the purposes of cultivation, mutual

help and defence. The community began as a kinship or tribe, but

even when the original blood ties were lost sight of and modified

by the influx of heterogeneous elements, the community remained

self-sufficient and isolated. The whole fabric of society rested

on property in land: as its political divisions were based on the

possession of common lands, even so the rank of an individual

depended entirely on his holding. The Teutonic world had no idea

of a citizen severed from the soil. The curious fact that the

normal holding, the hide, was equal all over England (33 1/2

acres) can be explained only by its origin; it came full-formed

from Germany and remained unchanged in spite of all diversities

of geographical and economical conditions.

    The transformation of medieval society is, for Kemble,

intimately connected with the forms of ownership in land. The

scanty population of ancient times had divided only a very small

part of the country into separate holdings. The rest remained in

the hands of the people to supply the wants of coming

generations. The great turn towards feudalism was given by the

fact that this reserve-fund lapsed into the hands of a few

magnates: the mass of free people being deprived of its natural

sphere of expansion was forced to seek its subsistence at the

hands of private lords (loaf-givers). From the point of view of

personal status the same process appears in the decrease of

freedom among the people and in the increase of the so-called

Gesid. According to Teutonic principles a man is free only if he

has land to feed upon, strength to work, and arms to defend

himself. The landless man is unfree; and so is the Gesidcundman,

the follower, however strong and wealthy he may be through his

chiefs grace. The contrast between the free ceorls tilling their

own land and the band of military followers, who are always

considered as personally dependent -- this contrast is a marked

one. From the first this military following had played an

important part in German history. Most raids and invasions had

been its work, and sometimes whole tribes were attracted into its

organisation, but during the first period of Saxon history the

free people were sufficiently strong to hold down the power of

military chiefs within certain bounds. Not so in later

development. With the growth of population, of inequalities, of

social competition, the relations of dependency are seen

constantly gaining on the field of freedom. The spread of

commendation leads not only to a change in the distribution of

ranks, but to a dismemberment of political power, to all kinds of

franchises and private encroachments on the State.

    I may be excused for marshalling all these well-known points

before the public by the consideration that they must serve to

show how intimately these views are connected with the general

principles of a great school. The stress laid by Kemble on

property in land ought to be noticed especially: land gets to be

the basis of all political and social condition. This is going

much further than Palgrave ever went; though not further than

Eichhorn. What actually severs Kemble from the Romantics is his

estimate of the free element in the people. He does not try to

picture a kind of political Arcadia in Saxon England, but there

is no more talk about the rightless condition of the ceorls or

the predominance of aristocracy. The Teutonic race towers above

everything. Although the existence of Celts after the Conquests

is admitted, neither Celtic nor Roman elements appear as

exercising any influence in the course of history. Everything

takes place as if Germanic communities had been living and

growing on soil that had never before been appropriated.

Curiously enough the weakest point of Kemble's doctrine seems to

lie in its very centre -- in his theory of social groups. One is

often reminded of Grimm by his account of the Mark, and it was an

achievement to call attention to such a community as distinct

from the tribal group, but the political, legal, and economical

description of the Mark is very vague. As to the reasoning about

gilds, tithings, and hundreds, it is based on a constant

confusion of widely different subjects.

    Generally speaking, it is not for a lawyer's acuteness and

precision that one has to look in Kemble's book: important

distinctions very often get blurred in his exposition, and though

constantly protesting against abstract theories and suppositions

not based on fact, he indulges in them a great deal himself.

Still Kemble's work was very remarkable: his extensive, if not

very critical study of the charters opened his eyes to the

first-rate importance of the law of real property in the course

of medieval history: this was a great step in advance of

Palgrave, who had recognised law as the background of history,

but whose attention had been directed almost exclusively to the

formal side to judicial institutions. And Kemble actually

succeeded in bringing forward some of the questions which were to

remain for a long time the main points of debate among

historians.

    The development of the school was evidently to proceed in the

direction of greater accuracy and improved methods. Great service

has been done in this respect by Konrad Maurer. He is perhaps

sometimes inclined to magnify his own independence and dissent

from Kemble's opinions, but he has undoubtedly contributed to

strengthen and clear up some of Kemble's views, and has gone

further than his predecessor on important subjects. He accepts in

the main Kemble's doctrines as to the Mark, the allotment of

land, the opposition of folkland and bookland, and expounds them

with greater fulness and better insight into the evidence. On the

other hand he goes his own way as to the Gesids (Gefolgschaft),

and the part played by large estates in the political process.

Maurer reduces the importance of the former and lays more stress

on the latter than Kemble. Altogether the German scholar's

investigations have been of great moment, and this not only for

methodical reasons, but also because they lead to a complete

emancipation of the school from Eichhorn's influence.

    As to the Conquests, Germanist views have been formulated

with great authority by Freeman. A comparison of the course of

development in Romance countries with the history of England, and

a careful study of that evidence of the chronicles which Kemble

disregarded, has led the historian of the Norman Conquest to the

conclusion, that the Teutonic invaders actually rooted out most

of the Romanised Celtic population of English Britain, and

reduced it to utter insignificance in those western counties

where they did not destroy it. It is the only inference that can

be drawn from the temporary disappearance of Christianity, from

the all but complete absence of Celtic and Latin words in the

English tongue, from the immunity of English legal and social

life from Roman influence. The Teutonic bias which was given to

the history of the island by the Conquest of Angles and Saxons

has not been altered by the Conquest of the Normans. The foreign

colouring imparted to the language is no testimony of any radical

change in the internal structure of the people: it remained on

the surface, and the history of the island remained English, that

is, Teutonic. Even feudalism, which appears in its full shape

after William the Bastard's invasion, had been prepared in its

component parts by the Saxon period. In working out particulars

Freeman had to reckon largely with Kemble's work and to strike

the balance between the conflicting and one-sided theories of

Thierry and Palgrave. Questions of legal and social research

concern him only so far as they illustrate the problem of the

struggle and fusion of national civilisations. His material is

chiefly drawn from chronicles, and the history of external facts

of war, government, and legislation comes naturally to the fore.

But all the numberless details tend towards one end: they

illustrate the Teutonic aspect of English culture, and assign it

a definite place in the historical system of Europe.

    Stubbs' 'Constitutional History,' embracing as it does the

whole of the Middle Ages, is not designed to trace out some one

idea for the sake of its being new or to take up questions which

had remained unheeded by earlier scholars. Solid learning,

critical caution and accuracy are the great requirements of such

an undertaking, and every one who has had anything to do with the

Bishop of Oxford's publications knows to what extent his work is

distinguished by these qualities. If one may speak of a main idea

in such a book as the Constitutional History of a people, Stubbs'

main idea seems to be, that the English Constitution is the

result of administrative concentration in the age of the Normans

of local self-government formed in the age of the Saxons. This

conclusion is foreshadowed in Palgrave's work, but what appears

there as a mere hypothesis and in confusion with all kinds of

heterogeneous elements, comes out in the later work with the

overwhelming force of careful and impartial induction. Stubbs'

point of view is a Germanist one. The book begins with an

estimate of Teutonic influence in the different countries of

Europe, and England is taken in one sense as the most perfect

manifestation of the Teutonic historical tendency. The influx of

Frenchmen and French ideas under William the Conqueror and after

him had important effects in rousing national energy,

contributing to national unification, settling the forms of

administration and justice, but at bottom there remained the

Teutonic character of the nation. The 'Constitutional History'

approaches the question of the village community, but its object

is strictly limited to the bearing of the problem on general

history and to the testimony of direct authority. It starts from

the community in land as described by Caesar and Tacitus, and

notices that Saxon times present only a few scattered references

to communal ownership. Most of the arable land was held

separately, but the woods, meadow, and pasture still remained in

the ownership of village groups. The township with its rights and

duties as to police, justice, and husbandry was modified but not

destroyed by feudalism. The change from personal relations to

territorial, and from the freedom of the masses to their

dependency, is already very noticeable in the Saxon period. The

Norman epoch completed the process by substituting proprietary

rights in the place of personal subordination and political

subjection. Still even after conquest and legal theory had been

over the ground, the compact self-government of the township is

easily discernible under the crust of the manorial system, and

the condition of medieval villains presents many traces of

original freedom.

    Gneist's work is somewhat different in colouring and closely

connected with a definite political theory, Tocqueville in France

has done most to draw attention to the vital importance of local

self-government in the development of liberal institutions; and

Stubbs' history goes far to demonstrate Tocqueville's general

view by a masterly statement as to the origins of English

institutions. In Gneist's hands the doctrine of decentralisation

assumes a particular shape by the fact that it is constructed on

a social foundation; the German thinker has been trying all along

to show that the English influence is not one of self-government

only, but of aristocratical self-government. The part played by

the gentry in local and central affairs is the great point of

historical interest in Gneist's eyes. Even in the Saxon period he

lays stress chiefly on the early rise of great property, and the

great importance of 'Hlafords' in social organisation. He pays no

attention to the village community, and chiefly cares for the

landlord. But still even Gneist admits the original personal

freedom of the great mass of the people, and his analysis of the

English condition is based on the assumption, that it represents

one variation of Teutonic development: this gives Gneist a place

among the Germanists, although his views on particular subjects

differ from those of other scholars of the same school.

    Its chief representatives have acquired such a celebrity that

it is hardly necessary to insist again, that excellent work has

been done by them for the study of the past. But the direction of

their work has been rather one-sided; it was undertaken either

from the standpoint of political institutions or from that of

general culture and external growth; the facts of agriculture, of

the evolution of classes, of legal organisation were touched upon

only as subsidiary to the main objects of general history. And

yet, even from the middle of the century, the attention of Europe

begins to turn towards those very facts. The 'masses' come up

with their claims behind the 'classes,' the social question

emerges in theory and in practice, in reform and revolution;

Liberals and Conservatives have to reckon with the fact that the

great majority of the people are more excited, and more likely to

be moved by the problems of work and wages than by problems of

political influence. The everlasting, ever-human struggle for

power gets to be considered chiefly in the light of the

distribution of wealth; the distribution of society into classes

and conditions appears as the connecting link between the

economical process and the political process. This great change

in the aspect of modern life could not but react powerfully on

the aspect of historical literature. G.F. von Maurer and Hanssen

stand out as the main initiators of the new movement in our

studies. The many volumes devoted by G.F. Maurer to the village

and the town of Germany are planned on a basis entirely different

from that of his predecessors. Instead of proceeding from the

whole to the parts, and of using social facts merely as a

background to political history, he concentrates everything round

the analysis of the Mark, as the elementary organisation for

purposes of husbandry and ownership. The Mark is thus taken up

not in the vague sense and manner in which it was treated by

Kemble and his followers; it is described and explained on the

strength of copious, though not very well sifted, evidence. On

the other hand, Hanssen's masterly essays on agrarian questions,

and especially on the field-systems, gave an example of the way

in which work was to be done as to facts of husbandry proper.

    Nasse's pamphlet on the village community may be considered

as the first application of the new methods and new results to

English history. The importance of his little volume cannot

easily be overrated: all subsequent work has had to start from

its conclusions.

    Nasse's picture of the ancient English agricultural system,

though drawn from scanty sources, is a very definite one. Most of

the land is enclosed only during the latter part of the year, and

during the rest of the year remains in the hands of the

community. Temporary enclosures rise upon the ploughed field

while the crop is growing; their object, however, is not to

divide the land between neighbours but to protect the crop

against pasturing animals; the strips of the several members of

the township lie intermixed, and their cultivation is not left to

the views and interests of the owners, but settled by the

community according to a general plan. The meadows are also

divided into strips, but these change hands in a certain rotation

determined by lot or otherwise. The pasture ground remains in the

possession of the whole community. The notion of private

property, therefore, can be applied in this system only to the

houses and closes immediately adjoining them.

    Then the feudal epoch divides the country into manors, a form

which originated at the end of the Saxon period and spread

everywhere in Norman times. The soil of the manor consists of

demesne lands and tributary lands. These two classes of lands do

not quite correspond to the distinction between land cultivated

by the lord himself and soil held of him by dependants; there may

be leaseholders on the demesne, but there the lord is always free

to change the mode of cultivation and occupation, while he has no

right to alter the arrangements on the tributary portion. This

last is divided between free socmen holding on certain

conditions, villains and cottagers. The villains occupy equal

holdings; their legal condition is a very low one, although they

are clearly distinguished from slaves, and belong more to the

soil than to the lord. The cottagers have homesteads and crofts,

but no holdings in the common fields; the whole group presents

the material from which, in process of time, the agricultural

labourers have been developed.

    The common system of husbandry manifests itself in many ways:

the small holders club together for ploughing; four virgates or

yardlands have to co-operate in order to start an eight-oxen

plough. The services are often laid upon the whole village and

not on separate householders; on the other hand the village, as a

whole, enters into agreement with the lord about leases or

commutation of services for money.

    Each holding is formed of strips which lie intermixed with

the component parts of other holdings in different fields, and

this fact is intimately connected with the principle of joint

ownership. The whole system begins to break up in the thirteenth

century, much earlier than in France or Germany. As soon as

services get commuted for money rents, it becomes impossible to

retain the labouring people in serfdom. Hired labourers and

farmers take the place of villains, and the villain's holding is

turned into a copyhold and protected by law. Although the passage

to modern forms begins thus early, traces of the original

communalism may be found everywhere, even in the eighteenth

century.

    Nasse's pamphlet is based on a careful study of authorities,

and despite its shortness must be treated as a work of scientific

research. But if all subsequent workers have to reckon with it in

settling particular questions, general conceptions have been more

widely influenced by Sir Henry Maine's lectures, which did not

aim at research, and had in view the broad aspects of the

subject. Their peculiar method is well known to be that of

comparing facts from very different environments -- from the

Teutonic, the Celtic, the Hindu world; Maine tries to sketch a

general process where other people only see particular connexions

and special reasons. The chapters which fall within the line of

our inquiry are based chiefly on a comparison between Western

Europe and India. The agrarian organisation of many parts of

India presents at this very day, in full work and in all stages

of growth and decay, the village community of which some traces

are still scattered in the records of Europe. There and here the

process is in the main the same, the passage from collective

ownership to individualism is influenced by the same great

forces, notwithstanding all the differences of time and place.

The original form of agrarian arrangement is due to the

settlement of a group of free men, which surrenders to its

individual members the use of arable land, meadows, pasture and

wood, but retains the ownership and the power to control and

modify the rights of using the common land. There can be no doubt

that the legal theory, which sees in the modern rights of

commoners mere encroachments upon the lord, carries feudal

notions back into too early a period.

    The real question as conceived by Maine is this -- By what

means was the free village community turned into the manor of the

lord? The petty struggles between townships must have led to the

subjugation of some groups by others; in each particular village

the headman had the means to use his authority in order to

improve his material position; and when a family contrived to

retain an office in the hands of its members this at once gave

matters an aristocratical turn. In Western Europe external causes

had to account for a great deal in the gradual rise of

territorial lordship. When the barbarian invaders came into

contact with Roman civilisation and took possession of the

provincial soil, they found private ownership and great property

in full development, and naturally fell under the influence of

these accomplished facts; their village community was broken up

and transformed gradually into the manorial system.

    Maine traces economic history from an originally free

community; Nasse takes the existence of such a community for

granted. The statements of one are too general, however, and

sometimes too hypothetical, the other has in view husbandry

proper rather than the legal development of social classes.

Maurer's tenets, to which both go back, present a very coherent

system in which all parts hold well together; but each part taken

separately is not very well grounded on fact. The one-sided

preference given to one element does not allow other important

elements to appear; the wish to find in the authorities suitable

arguments for a favourite thesis leads to a confusion of

materials derived from different epochs. These defects naturally

called for protest and rectification; but the reaction against

Maurer's teaching has gone so far and comes from such different

quarters, that one has to look for its explanation beyond the

range of historical research.

    Late years have witnessed everywhere in Europe a movement of

thought which would have been called reactionary some twenty

years ago. Some people are becoming very sceptical as to

principles which were held sacred by preceding generations; at

the same time elements likely to be slighted formerly are coming

to the front in great strength nowadays. There have been liberals

and conservatives at all times, but the direction of the European

mind, saving the reaction against the French Revolution and

Napoleon, has been steadily favourable to the liberal tendency.

For two centuries the greatest thinkers and the course of general

opinion have been striving for liberty in different ways, for the

emancipation of individuals, and the self-government of

communities, and the rights of masses. This liberal creed has

been, on the whole, an eminently idealist one, assuming the easy

perfectibility of human nature, the sound common sense of the

many, the regulating influence of consciousness on instinct, the

immense value of high political aspirations for the regeneration

of mankind. In every single attempt at realising its high-flying

hopes the brutal side of human nature has made itself felt very

effectually, and has become all the more conspicuous just by

reason of the ironical contrast between aims and means. But the

movement as a whole was certainly an idealist one, not only in

the eighteenth but even in the nineteenth century, and the

necessary repressive tendency appeared in close alliance with

officialism, with unthinking tradition, and with the egotism of

classes and individuals. Many events have contributed of late

years to raise a current of independent thought which has gone

far in criticising and stemming back liberal doctrines, if not in

suppressing them. The brilliant achievements of historical

monarchy in Germany, the ridiculous misery to which France has

been reduced by conceited and impotent politicians, the excesses

of terrorist nihilism in Russia, the growing sense of a coming

struggle on questions of radical reform -- all these facts have

worked together to generate a feeling which is far from being

propitious to liberal doctrines. Socialism itself has been

contributing to it directly by laying an emphatic stress on the

conditions of material existence, and treating political life

merely as subordinate to economic aims. In England the repressive

tendency has been felt less than on the Continent, but even here

some of the foremost men in the country are beginning, in

consequence of social well-known events, to ask themselves:

Whither are we drifting? The book which best illustrates the new

direction of thought is probably Taine's 'Origines de la France

Contemporaine.' It is highly characteristic, both in its literary

connexion with the profound and melancholy liberalism of

Tocqueville, and in its almost savage onslaught on revolutionary

legend and doctrine.

    In the field of historical research the fermentation of

political thought of which I have been speaking has been

powerfully seconded by a growing distrust among scholars for

preconceived theories, and by the wish to reconsider solutions

which had been too easily taken for granted. The combined action

of these forces has been curiously experienced in the particular

subject of our study. The Germanist school had held very high the

principle of individual liberty, had tried to connect it with the

Teutonic element in history, had explained its working in the

society described by Tacitus, and had regretfully followed its

decay in later times. For the representatives of the New School

this 'original Teutonic freedom' has entirely lost its

significance, and they regard the process of social development

as starting with the domination of the few and the serfdom of the

many. The votaries of the free village community have been

studying with interest epochs and ethnographical variations

unacquainted with the economic individualism of modern Europe,

they have been attentive in tracing out even the secondary

details of the agrarian associations which have directed the

husbandry of so many centuries, but the New School subordinates

communal practice to private property and connects it with

serfdom. We may already notice the new tendency in

Inamasternegg's Wirthschaftsgeschichte: he enters the lists

against Maurer, denies that the Mark ever had anything to do with

political work, reduces its influence on husbandry, and enhances

that of great property. The most remarkable of French

medievalists -- Fustel de Coulanges -- has been fighting all

along against the Teutonic village community, and for an early

development of private property in connexion with Roman

influence. English scholarship has to reckon with similar views

in Seebohm's well-known work.

    Let us recall to mind the chief points of his theory. The

village community of medieval England is founded on the equality

of the holdings in the open fields of the village. The normal

bolding of a peasant family is not only equal in each separate

village, but it is substantially the same all over England.

Variations there are, but in most cases by far it consists of the

virgate of thirty acres, which makes the fourth part of the hide

of a hundred and twenty acres, because the peasant holder owns

only the fourth part of the ploughteam of eight oxen

corresponding to the hide. The holders of virgates or yardlands

are not the only people in the village; their neighbours may have

more or less land, but there are not many classes as a rule, all

the people in the same class are equalised, and the virgate

remains the chief manifestation of the system. It is plain that

such equality could be maintained only on the principle that each

plot was a unit which was neither to be divided nor thrown

together with other plots. Why did such a system spread all over

Europe? It could not develop out of a free village community, as

has been commonly supposed, because the Germanic law regulating

free land does not prevent its being divided; indeed, where this

law applies, holdings get broken up into irregular plots. If the

system does not form itself out of Germanic elements, it must

come from Roman influence; one has only the choice between the

two as to facts which prevail everywhere in Western Europe.

Indeed, the Roman villa presents all the chief features of the

medieval manor. The lord's demesne acted as a centre, round which

coloni clustered-cultivators who did not divide their tenancies

because they did not own them. The Roman system was the more

readily taken up by the Germans, as their own husbandry,

described by Tacitus, had kindred elements to show-the condition

of their slaves, for instance, was very like that of Roman

coloni. It must be added, that we may trace in Roman authorities

not only the organisation of the holdings, but such features as

the three-field partition of the arable and the intermixed

position of the strips belonging to a single holding.

    The importance of these observations taken as a whole becomes

especially apparent, if we compare medieval England with Wales or

Ireland, with countries settled by the Celts on the principle of

the tribal community: no fixed holdings there; it is not the

population that has to conform itself to fixed divisions of land,

but the divisions of land have to change according to the

movement of the population. Such usage was prevalent in Germany

itself for a time, and would have been prevalent there as long as

in Celtic countries, if the Germans had not come under Roman

influence. And so the continuous development

of society in England starts from the position of Roman

provincial soil.

    The Saxon invasion did not destroy what it found in the

island. Roman villas and their labourers passed from one lord to

the other -- that is all. The ceorls of Saxon times are the

direct descendants of Roman slaves and coloni, some of them

personally free, but all in agrarian subjection. indeed, social

development is a movement from serfdom to freedom, and the

village community of its early stages is connected not with

freedom, but with serfdom.

    Seebohm's results have a marked resemblance to some of the

views held by the eighteenth-century lawyers, and also to those

held by Palgrave and by Coote, but his theory is nevertheless

original, both in the connexion of the parts with the whole, and

in its arguments: he knows how to place in a new light evidence

which has been known and discussed for a long time, and for this

reason his work will be suggestive reading even to those who do

not agree with the results. The chief strength of his work lies

in the chapters devoted to husbandry; but if one accepts his

conclusions, what is to be done with the social part of the

question? Both sides, the economic and the social, are

indissolubly allied, and at the same time the extreme

consequences drawn from them give the lie direct to everything

that has hitherto been taken for granted and accepted as proved

as to this period. Can it really be true that the great bulk of

free men was originally in territorial subjection, or rather that

there never was such a thing as a great number of free men of

German blood, and that the German conquest introduced only a

cluster of privileged people which merged into the habits and

rights of Roman possessors? If this be not true and English

history testifies on every point to a deeper influence exercised

by the German conquerors, does not the collapse of the social

conclusion call in question the economical premises? Does not a

logical development of Seebohm's views lead to conclusions that

we cannot accept? These are all perplexing questions, but one

thing is certain; this last review of the subject has been

powerful enough to necessitate a reconsideration of all its chief

points.

    Happily, this does not mean that former work has been lost. I

have not been trying the patience of my readers by a repetition

of well-known views without some cogent reasons. The subject is

far too wide and important to admit of a brilliantly unexpected

solution by one mind or even one generation of workers. A

superficial observer may be so much struck by the variations and

contradictions, that he will fail to realise the intimate

dependence of every new investigator on his predecessors. 'The

subjective side of history,' as the Germans would say, has been

noticed before now and the taunt has been administered with great

force: 'Was ihr den Geist der Zeiten heisst, das ist im Grund der

Herren eigener Geist, in dem die Zeiten sich bespiegeln,' Those

who do not care to fall a prey to Faust's scepticism, will easily

perceive that individual peculiarities and political or national

pretensions will not account for the whole of the process. Their

action is powerful indeed: the wish to put one's own stamp on a

theory and the reaction of present life on the past are mighty

incitements to work. But new schools do not rise in order to pull

down everything that has been raised by former schools, new

theories always absorb old notions both in treatment of details

and in the construction of the whole. We may try, as conclusion

of our review of historical literature, to notice the permanent

gains of consecutive generations in the forward movement of our

studies. The progress will strike us, not only if we compare the

state of learning at both ends of the development, but even if we

take up the links of the chain one by one.

    The greatest scholars of the time before the French

Revolution failed in two important respects: they were not

sufficiently aware of the differences between epochs; they were

too ready with explanations drawn from conscious plans and

arrangements. The shock of Revolution and Reaction taught people

to look deeper for the laws of the social and political organism.

The material for study was not exactly enlarged, but instead of

being thrown together without discrimination, it was sifted and

tried. Preliminary criticism came in as an improvement in method

and led at once to important results. Speaking broadly, the field

of conscious change was narrowed, the field of organic

development and unconscious tradition widened. On this basis

Savigny's school demonstrated the influence of Roman civilisation

in the Middle Ages, started the inquiry as to national

characteristics, and shifted the attention of historians from the

play of events on the surface to the great moral and intellectual

currents which direct the stream. Palgrave's book bears the mark

of all these ideas, and it may be noticed especially that his

chief effort was to give a proper background to English history

by throwing light on the abiding institutions of the law.

    None of these achievements was lost by the next generation of

workers. But it had to start from a new basis, and had a good

deal to add and to correct. Modern life was busy with two

problems after the collapse of reaction had given way to new

aspirations: Europe was trying to strike a due balance between

order and liberty in the constitutional system; nationalities

that had been rent by casual and artificial influences were

struggling for independence and unity. The Germanist School arose

to show the extent to which modern constitutional ideas were

connected with medieval facts, and the share that the German

element has had in the development of institutions and classes.

As to material, Kemble opened a new field by the publication of

the Saxon charters, and the gain was felt at once in the turn

given towards the investigation of private law, which took the

place of Palgrave's vague leaning towards legal history. The

methods of careful and cautious inquiry as to particular facts

took shape in the hands of K. Maurer and Stubbs, and the school

really succeeded, it seems to me, in establishing the

characteristically Germanic general aspect of English history, a

result which does not exclude Roman influence, but has to be

reckoned with in all attempts to estimate definitely its bearing

and strength.

    The rise of the social question about the middle of our

century had, as its necessary consequence, to impress upon the

mind of intelligent people the vast importance of social

conditions, of those primary conditions of husbandry,

distribution of wealth and distribution of classes, which ever,

as it were, loom up behind the pageant of political institutions

and parties. Nasse follows up the thread of investigation from

the study of private law towards the study of economic

conditions. G.F.v. Maurer and Maine enlarge it in scope,

material, and means by their comparative inquiry, taking into

view, first, all varieties of the Teutonic race, and then the

development of other ethnographical branches. The village

community comes out of the inquiry as the constitutive cell of

society during an age of the world, quite as characteristic of

medieval structure, as the town community or 'civitas' was of

ancient polity.

    The consciousness that political and scientific construction

has been rather hasty in its work, that it has often been based

upon doctrines instead of building on the firm foundation of

facts -- the widely spread perception of these defects has been

of late inciting statesmen and thinkers to put to use some of

those very elements which were formerly ignored or rejected. The

manorial School -- if I may be allowed to use this expression --

has brought forward the influence of great landed estates against

the democratical conception of the village community. The work

spent upon this last phenomenon is by no means undone; on the

contrary, it was received in most of its parts. But new material

was found in the manorial documents of the later middle ages, the

method of investigation 'from the known to the unknown' was used

both openly and unconsciously, comparative inquiry was handled

for more definite, even if more limited purposes. Great results

cannot be contested: to name one -- the organising force of

aristocratic property has been acknowledged and has come to its

rights.

    But the new impetus given to research has caused its

originators to overleap themselves, as it were. They have

occupied so exclusively the point of view whence the manor of the

later middle ages is visible that they have disregarded the

evidence which comes from other quarters instead of finding an

explanation which will satisfy all the facts. The investigation

'from the known to the unknown' has its definite danger, against

which one has to be constantly on one's guard: its obvious danger

is to destroy perspective and ignore development by carrying into

the 'unknown' of early times that which is known of later

conditions. Altogether the attempt to overthrow some of the

established results of investigation as to race and classes does

not seem to be a happy one. And so, although great work has been

done in our field of study, it cannot be said that it has been

brought to a close -- 'bis an die Sterne weit.' Many things

remain to be done, and some problems are especially pressing. The

legal and the economical side of the inquiry must be worked up to

the same level; manorial documents must be examined

systematically, if not exhaustively, and their material made to

fit with the evidence established from other sources of

information; the whole field has to be gone over with an eye for

proof and not for doctrine. A review of the work already done,

and of the names of scholars engaged in it, is certainly an

incitement to modesty for every new reaper in the field, but it

is also a source of hope. It shows that schools and leading

scholars displace one another more under the influence of general

currents of thought than of individual talent. The ferment

towards the formation of groups comes from the outside, from the

modern life which surrounds research, forms the scholar, suggests

solutions. Moreover, theoretical development has a continuity of

its own; all the strength of this manifold life cannot break or

turn back its course, but is reduced to drive it forward in ever

new bends and curves. The present time is especially propitious

to our study: one feels, as it were, that it is ripening to

far-reaching conclusions. So much has been done already for this

field of enquiry in the different countries of Europe, that the

hope to see in our age a general treatment of the social origins

of Western Europe will not seem an extravagant one. And such a

treatment must form as it were the corner-stone of any attempt to

trace the law of development of human society. It is in this

consciousness of being borne by a mighty general current, that

the single scholar may gather hope that may buoy him against the

insignificance of his forces and the drudgery of his work.



