INTRODUCTION
“What is a healthy diet?” Many clinicians find themselves at a loss to answer this common
question from patients. The difficulty of offering a simple answer is understandable. The
overwhelming volume of data generated by food and nutrition researchers coupled with
sometimes contradictory findings, the seeming flip-flops in recommendations, and the flood
of misinformation in diet books and the media can make it seem as though explaining the
essentials of healthy eating is akin to describing the intricacies of particle physics. That is
unfortunate, because there are now enough solid strands of evidence from reliable sources to
weave simple but compelling recommendations about diet.
In the United States and other developed countries, the average woman can expect to live 80
years or more.
 With such longevity, it isn’t enough merely to consume the calories needed
to sustain the body, build it, and repair it. The foods that supply these calories can influence
the risk of developing chronic conditions, which range from heart disease and cancer to
osteoporosis and age-related vision loss.
Although much remains to be learned about the role of specific nutrients in decreasing the
risk of chronic disease, a large body of evidence supports the utility of healthy dietary
patterns that emphasize whole-grain foods, legumes, vegetables, and fruits, and that limit refined starches, red meat, full-fat dairy products, and foods and beverages high in added
sugars. Such diets have been associated with decreased risk of a variety of chronic diseases.
Diet, of course, is just one approach to preventing illness. Limiting caloric intake to maintain
a healthy weight, exercising regularly, and not smoking are three other essential strategies.
Compelling data from the Nurses’ Health Study show that women who followed a healthy
lifestyle pattern that includes these four strategies were 80% less likely to develop
cardiovascular disease over a 14-year period compared to all other women in the study.
 A
companion study, the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, showed that similar healthy
choices were beneficial in men, even among those who were taking medications to lower
blood pressure or cholesterol.
In this article, we present evidence-based elements of healthful nutrition and an overview of
healthy dietary patterns. We also touch on three special situations: diet and fertility, diet and
pregnancy, and diet and weight loss.
DIETARY FAT
Dietary fat is a terribly misunderstood and mistakenly maligned nutrient. Myths and
messages that have persisted since the 1960s warn that “fat is bad.” That dangerous
oversimplification has helped launch dozens of largely ineffective diets and the development
of thousands of fat-free but calorie-laden foods. It has also helped fuel the twin epidemics of
obesity and type 2 diabetes. The message “fat is bad” is problematic because there are four
main types of dietary fat with dramatically different effects on health.
Trans fats from partially hydrogenated oils are undeniably bad for the cardiovascular
system and the rest of the body. These largely man-made fats elevate harmful low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, reduce protective high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol,
stimulate inflammation, and cause a variety of other changes that damage arteries and impair
cardiovascular health.
 Higher intake of trans fat has been associated with an increased risk
for developing cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, gall stones, dementia, and weight
gain.5 Saturated fats from red meat and dairy products increase harmful LDL, but also
increase HDL. A moderate intake of saturated fat (under 8% of daily calories) is compatible
with a healthy diet, whereas consumption of greater amounts has been associated with
cardiovascular disease. Monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats from vegetable oils,
seeds, nuts, whole grains, and fish—especially the polyunsaturated omega-3 fatty acids—
are important components of a healthy diet and are also essential for cardiac health. Eating
polyunsaturated fats in place of saturated and trans fats lowers harmful LDL, elevates
protective HDL, improves sensitivity to insulin, and stabilizes heart rhythms.
Dietary fat per se is not associated with risk of chronic disease. In fact, diets that include up
to 40% of calories from fat can be quite healthy if they are low in trans and saturated fat and
emphasize polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat.
 Although definitive data are not
available on the optimal proportions of dietary fats, a low intake of trans and saturated fat
and a higher intake of unsaturated fats reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
CARBOHYDRATES
In the United States, the reduction in the intake of dietary fat from 45% of calories in 1965
to approximately 34% today was accompanied by an increase in the intake of
carbohydrates.
 These extra carbohydrates were largely in the form of highly processed
grains. Processing removes fiber, healthful fats, and an array of vitamins, minerals, and
phytonutrients, making processed grains such as white flour or white rice nutritionally
impoverished compared with whole-grain versions. Consumption of a diet rich in highly
processed grains is associated with an increase in triglycerides and a reduction in protective
HDL.9
 These adverse responses may be aggravated in the context of insulin resistance,
which often develops during pregnancy. The prevalence of insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes are both increasing in the United States and around the world.
The Glycemic Index
The glycemic response refers to the measurable increase in blood sugar after consuming
carbohydrates. The greater the postprandial spike in glucose a food generates, the greater
that food’s glycemic index. Highly refined grains cause a more rapid and a greater overall
increase in blood sugar than less-refined whole grains.10 Greater glycemic responses are
accompanied by increased plasma insulin levels, which are thought to be at the root of
metabolic syndrome11 and have also been implicated in ovulatory infertility.12 Diets with a
high glycemic index or glycemic load (the product of dietary glycemic index and total
carbohydrate intake) appear to increase the risks of type 2 diabetes and coronary artery
disease, particularly among women who have some insulin resistance.13 The dramatic loss
of fiber and micronutrients during the milling process may also contribute to these adverse
effects of highly processed grains.
In contrast, whole grains and foods made from whole grains, along with fruits, vegetables,
and beans, provide slowly digested carbohydrates that are rich in fiber, vitamins, minerals,
and phytonutrients. A substantial body of evidence indicates that eating whole grains or
cereals high in fiber, rather than highly refined grains, reduces the risk of cardiovascular
disease14 and type 2 diabetes.15 Although reductions in the risk of colon cancer by diets rich
in whole-grain fiber have been difficult to document, such a dietary pattern has been clearly
associated with reductions in constipation and diverticular disease.
PROTEIN
To the metabolic systems engaged in protein production and repair, it is immaterial whether
amino acids come from animal or plant protein. However, protein is not consumed in
isolation. Instead, it is packaged with a host of other nutrients. The quality and amount of
fats, carbohydrates, sodium, and other nutrients in the “protein package” may influence
long-term health. For example, results from the Nurses’ Health Study suggest that eating
more protein from beans, nuts, seeds, and the like, while cutting back on easily digested
carbohydrates reduces the risk of heart disease.16 In that study, eating more animal protein
while cutting back on carbohydrates did not reduce heart disease risk, possibly because of
the fats and other nutrients that come along (or don’t come along) with protein from
animals.
VEGETABLES AND FRUITS
“Eat more fruits and vegetables” is timeless advice that has the backing of a large body of
evidence.17 Vegetables and fruits provide fiber, slowly digested carbohydrates, vitamins and
minerals, and numerous phytonutrients that have been associated with protection against
cardiovascular disease, aging-related vision loss due to cataract and macular degeneration,
and maintenance of bowel function. The connection between vegetables and fruits and
cancer is less well established. Although they do not have a blanket anticancer effect, fruits
and vegetables may work against specific cancers, including esophageal, stomach, lung, and
colorectal cancer.18
Fruits and vegetables should be consumed in abundance, which means a minimum of five
servings a day—and more is better. As few as 1 in 4 persons in the United States meet this
guideline.19
BEVERAGES
The ideal beverage provides 100% of what the body needs—H2O—without any calories or
additives. Water has all of those qualifications. From the tap, it costs a fraction of a penny
per glass. After water, the two most commonly consumed beverages are tea and coffee. Both
are remarkably safe beverages, and have been associated with reduced risks of type 2
diabetes,20 kidney stones and gallstones, and possibly heart disease and some types of
cancer.
Two problematic beverages are sugar-sweetened drinks (sodas, fruit drinks, juices, sports
drinks, etc.) and alcoholic drinks. One 12-ounce can of sugar-sweetened cola delivers 8–10
teaspoons of sugar, approximately 120–150 “empty” calories.21 Not surprisingly, daily
consumption of sugary beverages has been associated with weight gain and increased risk of
type 2 diabetes,22 heart disease,23 and gout.24 Alcohol in moderation (no more than one
drink a day for women, 1–2 drinks a day for men) has been associated with reduced risks of
cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. On the other hand, even moderate drinking may
increase the risk of breast cancer.
However, it is possible that a diet rich in folate may attenuate this risk. In the Nurses’ Health
Study, the risk of breast cancer associated with alcohol intake was strongest among women
with total folate intake less than 300 μg/d for alcohol intake ≥15 grams (g)/d vs <15 g/d
which is the alcohol content of one “standard” drink. The multivariate relative risk (RR) was
1.32; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.15–1.50. For women who consumed at least 300 μg/d
of total folate, there was no increased risk of breast cancer associated with alcohol intake.25
Drinking alcohol during pregnancy is not recommended due to possible health hazards to the
developing child.
VITAMINS AND MINERALS
An optimal diet generally provides all the vitamins, minerals, and other micronutrients
needed for good health. However, many women in the U.S., and a very large percentage of
poor women, do not follow optimal diets.3
 Thus, for most women a daily multivitaminmultimineral supplement provides good insurance against nutritional deficiencies. Such
supplements usually include extra iron, which is needed by the 9% to 11% of premenopausal
women with iron deficiency.26
The most firmly established benefit of vitamin supplements is that additional folic acid can
reduce the risk of neural tube defects by approximately 70%.27 Current guidelines call for
all women of childbearing age to take a daily supplement containing 400 to 800 micrograms
(μg) of folic acid, or 4 milligrams (mg) for women with a child with a neural tube defect.
Calcium is important for the maintenance of bone strength. Precisely how much calcium is
needed is a controversial question. World Health Organization guidelines recommend an
intake of 400 mg/day. In the United Kingdom, 700 mg/day is considered adequate for
women aged 19 years and older. In the United States, dietary guidelines recommend that
adult women receive 1,500 mg of calcium daily,28 in large part by consuming 3 servings of
low-fat or fat-free dairy products a day.29 A lower-calorie, no-fat option is to get calcium
from supplements.
For maintaining bone strength, other factors—including physical activity and vitamin D—
are as important, or more important, than calcium. There is mounting evidence that current
recommendations for vitamin D (200–600 IU/day, depending on age) are too low, and that
1,000 IU/day provides better protection against fractures and possibly heart disease and
some cancers30 (see Focus on Vitamin D). Excess intake of preformed vitamin A (retinol)
has been associated with an increased risk of hip fracture, possibly by competing with
vitamin D.31 However, elevated risk is seen at intakes slightly higher than the current
Dietary Reference Intake of 700 μg per day. Given this concern, a multivitamin that delivers
much of its vitamin A as beta-carotene is preferred.
WEIGHT CONTROL, EXERCISE
Body weight sits like a spider at the center of a web of health and disease. Excess weight
predisposes an individual to the development of a host of chronic conditions. The higher the
body mass index (BMI) > 25 kg/m2
, the greater the prevalence of abnormal blood glucose,
lipids and blood pressure; hypertension and cardiovascular disease; diabetes; many cancers;
gallstones; sleep apnea; complications of pregnancy; infertility; and premature mortality.
Under the current national guidelines, a BMI between 18 and 25 kg/m2
 is considered
optimal, and the best health experience is achieved by avoiding increases in weight during
adulthood.
Maintaining a healthy body weight, or losing weight, is a direct function of calories
consumed and expended. Portion control is essential for weight maintenance. The
percentage of calories from dietary fat has little relationship with weight maintenance, while
low consumption of sugary beverages and trans fats and higher intake of dietary fiber appear
to be helpful. Regular exercise and the avoidance of extreme inactivity, such as excessive
television watching, are also integral strategies for weight control. A supportive social and
physical environment are also important.
DIETARY PATTERNS
Although research on nutrients such as fats, carbohydrates, and specific vitamins and
minerals has been revealing, it has also generated some dead ends, along with myths and
confusion about what constitutes healthy eating. A key reason is because people eat food,
not nutrients. Furthermore, humans tend to follow relatively repeatable dietary patterns.
Although it is harder to study dietary patterns than it is to study nutrients, new research has
shown how some dietary patterns are good for long-term health.
One dietary pattern that may harm long-term health is the typical Western diet—rich in red
meat, highly processed grains, and sugar, and lacking in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and
fiber. A host of studies have emphasized that this type of dietary pattern promotes
atherosclerosis and a variety of cardiovascular conditions, including heart attack and stroke,
peripheral vascular disease, and heart failure.32, 33
One alternative is provided by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans.29 These guidelines are
revised every five years by a panel that was once appointed by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA). The Department of Health and Human Services is now also involved
in the process. According to the USDA, the guidelines “provide authoritative advice for
people two years and older about how good dietary habits can promote health and reduce
risk for major chronic diseases.”
In an effort to make the guidelines more accessible to the public, they were initially distilled
into the Food Guide Pyramid. Unfortunately, this ubiquitous symbol illustrated the goals of
U.S. agriculture as much as it represented the principles of healthful eating. The Food Guide
Pyramid offered no guidance on grains; it lumped together red meat, poultry, fish, and
beans, and it asked us to judge these protein sources by their total fat content. The Food
Guide Pyramid promoted drinking three glasses of low-fat milk or eating three servings of
other dairy products per day; and made no distinction between types of fat, recommending
that fat be consumed “sparingly.” The Food Guide Pyramid was retired in 2005 and replaced
with the abstract MyPyramid (Figure 1), which cannot be deciphered without access to the
accompanying Web site. The replacement of food groups with vertical stripes (orange for
grains, green for vegetables, red for fruits, yellow for oils, blue for dairy and purple for meat
and beans) was a win for the food industry, which took issue with the original Food Guide
Pyramid because it represented foods near the bottom as “good” and those near the top as
“bad.” The left-to-right design presents all foods as being nutritionally equal.
A better dietary pattern is embodied in the Healthy Eating Pyramid (Figure 2), which was
developed by faculty members in the Department of Nutrition at Harvard School of Public
Health based on the best available evidence. The dietary strategies embodied in this pyramid
are summarized in Table 1.
For individuals who would rather follow a set dietary pattern instead of building their own
based on the Healthy Eating Pyramid, a Mediterranean-type diet or the DASH diet can have
profoundly positive effects on health (Table 2).
Mediterranean Diet
Traditional diets developed in countries surrounding the Mediterranean Sea have been
linked with lower rates of heart disease and other chronic conditions. Such diets also appear
to transplant well to foreign soil. Among the 166,012 women participating in the National
Institutes of Health AARP Diet and Health Study, those whose diets most closely matched a
traditional Mediterranean diet had reduced risks of all-cause mortality (multivariate hazard
ratio [HR], 0.80; 95% CI, 0.75–0.85), cardiovascular mortality (HR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.68–
0.97) and cancer mortality (HR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.78–1.00) compared with those following a
Western diet.34 A similar trend was observed for men. The impact was even greater among
smokers. The Mediterranean diet has other health benefits as well, such as reduced risk of
cancer, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease.35 It has also been associated with
control of asthma36 and improvement in rheumatoid arthritis.37
Although there is no single diet that can be called “the” Mediterranean diet, those worthy of
the name are high in extra virgin olive oil; high in whole grain foods and fiber; and rich in
fruits, vegetables, legumes, and nuts. Small portions of cheese and yogurt are eaten daily;
fish is consumed in varying amounts; red meat, poultry, eggs, and sweets are consumed
sparingly. Modest amounts of red wine complement meals, and regular physical activity is a
part of daily life. An example of a Mediterranean-type diet is listed in the Table 2.
A DASH of Prevention
In the 1990s, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute sponsored a randomized,
controlled trial called Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) to see if certain
changes in diet could lower blood pressure. The DASH diet emphasized fruits, vegetables,
and low-fat dairy foods and limited red meat, saturated fats, and sweets. Compared with an
average American diet, the DASH diet lowered participants’ systolic blood pressure by an
average of 5.5 mm Hg and diastolic pressure by 3 mm Hg.38 A low-sodium DASH approach
was even more effective; the results were comparable to those from trials of
antihypertensive medications.39 The impact of the DASH diet goes beyond lowering blood
pressure. It has since been shown to reduce weight,40 the risk of coronary heart disease and
stroke,41 and the development of kidney stones.42 Details of the DASH diet can be
downloaded for free from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Web site (see Box 1, More
information).
