THIS ISA BORZOI BOOK PUBLISHED BY ALFRED A. KNOPF Text copyright  2003, 2010 by Mavis Jukes and Lilian Cheung, D.Sc., R.D.

Illustrations copyright  2003 by Debra Ziss Cover art copyright  2010 by Linzie Hunter All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of Random House Childrens Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York. Originally published in slightly different form in the United States by Crown Publishers, an imprint of Random House Childrens Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, in 2003.

Knopf, Borzoi Books, and the colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.

Visit us on the Web! www.randomhouse.com/kids Educators and librarians, for a variety of teaching tools, visit us at www.randomhouse.com/teachers Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Jukes, Mavis.

Be healthy! its a girl thing: food, fitness, and feeling great / Mavis Jukes, Lilian Cheung.

p. cm.

Summary: A guide for adolescent girls on how to stay healthy and fit, with information on nutrition and exercise.

eISBN: 978-0-307-55455-0 1. GirlsHealth and hygieneJuvenile literature. 2. GirlsNutritionJuvenile literature. 3. Physical fitness for youthJuvenile literature. [1. Teenage girlsHealth and hygiene. 2. Health. 3. Teenage girlsNutrition. 4. Nutrition. 5. Physical fitness.] I. Cheung, Lilian. II. Title.

RA777.25.J85 2003 613.04243dc21 2003010114 October 2010 Random House Childrens Books supports the First Amendment and celebrates the right to read.

v3.1 For the legendary Marilyn Marlow: Thank you for who you are, for all youve done.

Love, Mavis For my parents, my husband, and our sonsthank you.

Love, Lilian CONTENTS Title Page Copyright Dedication Acknowledgments About This Book Chapter 1: Connected Chapter 2: The Absolute Basics About Food Chapter 3: How Food Works Chapter 4: FY.I.: Your Heart Chapter 5: Maintaining the Balance: The Cactus Plan Chapter 6: The Cactus Plans Nutritional Guidelines Chapter 7: Food: The Celebration of Life Chapter 8: Taking Charge Chapter 9: Being Vegetarian Chapter 10: Germ Busters Chapter 11: A Proper Shopper Chapter 12: Food Labels/Ingredients Lists Chapter 13: How Great Is This?

Chapter 14: All the Right Moves Chapter 15: A Beautiful Presence Chapter 16: You, the Amazing You Chapter 17: Begin by Beginning Vitamin/Mineral Charts Shopping List About the Author The authors acknowledge and appreciate those who are dedicating their lives to researching critical issues related to the health and well-being of adolescent girls.

We are especially indebted to the researchers in nutrition and physical activity at the Harvard School of Public Health. We acknowledge the insights and information gained from Eat Well & Keep Moving, second edition (by Dr. Lilian W. Y. Cheung, Hank Dart, Sari Kalin, and Dr. Steven L. Gortmaker; Human Kinetics, Inc.) and Planet Health, second edition (by Jill Carter, Dr. Jean Wiecha, Dr. Karen Peterson, Suzanne Nobrega, and Dr. Steven L. Gortmaker; Human Kinetics, Inc.).

We thank our colleagues Dr. David Arond, Dr. Bryn Austin, Dr. Patricia Burke, Jill Carter, Dr. Alison Field, Dr. Teresa Fung, Dr. Frank Hu, Dr. Kelly Jackson, Sari Kalin, Dr. David Ludwig, Kathy McManus, Judy Phillips, Suzanne Rostler, Lela Silverstein, Dr. Walter Willett, and Anne Wolf for their critical input. We thank Sandy Gooch, Deborah Keir, and our young reviewers, Alivia Carter, Cency Middleton, Hannah Poor, Amanda Strominger, Hannah Williams, and Lindsay Williams, for their comments. We thank Erin Boyd and Kacey Wardle for their help in the preparation of the manuscript.

Going through puberty means youre going through a series of dazzling physical, intellectual, and emotional changes called the growth spurt.

But its really not a spurt. It actually takes a few years.

If youre going through puberty, youre in the process of gaining half of your adult bone mass and weight, the last inches of your height, and the ability to reproduce.

At the same time, youre beginning to think more critically. Youre acquiring the intellectual and emotional ability to make decisions, including healthy food and lifestyle choices.

AND ALL OF THIS IS HAPPENING AT ONCE!

In order to support this rapid growth, you have very specific needs for food and physical activity.

Be Healthy! Its a Girl Thing: Food, Fitness, and Feeling Great will help you understand the basic information you need to stay healthy and fit.

And feel great.

AND HAVE A GOOD TIME DOING IT.

Be Healthy! Its a Girl Thing: Food, Fitness, and Feeling Great gives you the lowdown on how your body uses food; ideas for boosting the nutritional value of what you love to eat, choosing from a fast-food menu, and shopping for food; information on how to link food and physical activity with fun and friendship; and advice on how to think positively and keep your spirits up, how to initiate change by advocating for yourself and friends, and how, when, and where to ask for help when you need it.

DO!

Involve your friends, family, teachers, and health care professionals (physician, pediatrician, nurse, registered dietitian) in evaluating the information in these pages and putting it to work for you in the context of your own cultural traditions, family structure, school environment, economic circumstances, and community.

SOUND GOOD?

Be Healthy! Its a Girl Thing: Food, Fitness, and Feeling Great will help you  Have more energy  Improve your ability in sports, exercise, and active games  Focus and concentrate better in school  Reduce stress and worries  Boost your spirits  Look your best  Appreciate yourself for who you are  Counter the negative influence of the media (like TV and magazines and websites) on your food choicesand your self-image  Work toward getting more nutritious food and more choices for safe, fun physical activity in your school  Up your chances of being healthy as an adult  Establish and maintain a beautiful, powerful presence as you move through the world  Care for our planet by making choices that are good for the environment Even if you live in the middle of a city and are surrounded by concrete and buildings, youre connected to the earth.

Above your head the moon rises and the sky sizzles with stars, whether you can see them or not.

Below your feet the ground brings forth life in the form of plantsplants that enrich the air you breathe, plants with beautiful, delicate flowers, plants that can fascinate and shade and feed you.

Plants provide food and shelter for animalsanimals that gallop or stroll across the land and moo or oink, quack and flap their wings and lay eggs, flip from streams, glide in the sky, ride the tide, cling to the rocks onshore.

You are a 100 percent natural, organic, living being on a planet that can nurture and comfort and energize youand astound you. Food, physical activity, water, sunshine, and sleep can be balanced to support your healthy growth; peak physical, intellectual, and emotional performance; and a true sense of well-being.

PLANT AND ANIMAL FOODS PROVIDE NUTRIENTS FOR PEOPLE Nutrients are substances we absolutely, positively must have for energy, growth, and metabolism.

Dont let the word metabolism confuse you. Metabolism is a set of chemical reactions organized in the body that allow you to grow, breathe, have your heart beat, digest food, maintain your bodys temperature, and do other things that happen inside you.

ENERGY Your body always, in all ways, uses energy-even when you sleep. In addition to growth and metabolism, it takes energy for your muscles to contract, which is how you move.

SO WHERE DO YOU GET IT?

Only certain nutrients in plant and animal foods have the potential to provide energy: proteins, carbohydrates, and fats.

NUTRIENT COMBOS In food, carbohydrates, proteins, and fats appear by themselves or in combination with one another.

An example?

Nuts.

Nuts have all three working for you, along with a laundry list of vitamins and minerals that help your body do its thing.

Vitamins and minerals are also nutrients, but they dont provide energy. Instead, they help your body do things that it cant do without themlike form red blood cells and fight infections.

CALORIES Foods contain different combinations of nutrients and have the possibility (potential) of producing different amounts of energy. The potential is measured in units called calories.

EXTRA ENERGY Extra energy (after meeting your growth and metabolic needs), regardless of whether its in the protein, carbohydrate, or fat you eat, is stored as body fat. Reserves of energy stored as fat are converted back into usable energy only when you are in an energy-deficit statethat is, burning more calories than you take in.

F.Y.I.

Everybody has body fat and needs it. Fat cells are deposited just under your skin and insulate you from the cold. Fat helps keep your body warm and protects your internal organs; it holds them in place and acts like a cushion.

During puberty in girls, fat tissues increase as part of breast development. Hips and thighs change in size and shape in anticipation of a girls bearing children someday.

Expect it. Its normal.

BORN TO MOVE Its primal. Your body is designed to moveto chase animals down into canyons and up hillsides, dig in the ground for roots, reach and stretch to gather berries, plant and harvest seeds, grind grain against rocks, lug around baskets of seeds, climb trees to grab fruit, break sticks and carry wood to build fires for cooking, dance, drum, and play games to celebrate life.

Regardless of your cultural heritage, all families trace back to people who once had to live off the land to survive.

People had to be physically active just to stay alive.

We dont have to hunt and gather our food anymore. We dont have to build a fire to cook. We dont have to walk miles and miles before we can get water to drink.

But were still human beings who have to moveto stretch our muscles and keep our bodies flexible, to increase our strength, to keep our hearts healthy, to improve our endurance, and to help maintain our stamina (ability to perform over time).

F.Y.I Movement can improve your posture, help you to feel and look good, and give you more energy. It can help build up your bones, tone your muscles, strengthen your heart, and give your body the practice it needs to master skills to move with grace and coordination: to dance, play music, play sports, play games, do work.

It also can relax you and give you a sense of well-beingand balance.

BALANCE: ENERGY IN, ENERGY OUT Food reflects the cycle of birth, growth, and renewal of the earths living thingsa cycle that includes you.

What you eat, how much you eat, how you eat, how often you eat (energy in), how you move, and how often you move (energy out) relate to a 100 percent healthy you.

WATER Water is a nutrient that drips or drizzles, falls or flutters from the sky onto the ground. It can take the form of mist or steam or fog. It becomes icicles or snowbanks that melt into streams that rush into rivers, collect in lakes. It seeps from springs or is pulled by pumps from wells.

You contain water. In fact, about 70 percent of your body weight is water.

Foods can contain waterand some have lots of it, like watermelon. (Think of it: Raisins are dehydrated, or dried, grapes.) Among other things, water is needed to regulate your body temperature, carry nutrients around your body, and help get rid of waste.

SUNLIGHT Sunlight is not only important for building strong bonesits deeply involved in the process of lifting your spirits.

The sun rises and sets in astounding, flaming shades of orange or pale apricot pastel colors. It warms you and cheers you. It promises that there will always be another tomorrow.

ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ The sun sets for a reason.

Tired?

Rest and sleep are essential for good health.

Sleep.

SQUAWK A hen lays an egg. She sits and sits on it. It hatches into a chick that peeps, pecks bugs and seeds, grows into a hen, and lays an egg.

THUMP An orange ripens and falls to the ground. It rolls downhill into the sunlight and rots. Its seeds sprout, take root, and grow into trees that produce oranges.

ORANGES AND EGGS Both miraculous! And both contain nutrients that your body needs. You can get all the nutrients nature has to offer when you eat a variety of foods from plants and/or animals.

Plant foods include a bonus along with their nutrients: fiber. Foods from animals do not contain fiber.

F.Y.I. FIBER Fiber supports and strengthens the structure of plants. It holds them up. Fiber is absolutely necessary for humans healthy digestion. When we eat plant foods, some plant fiber (insoluble) passes right through our system and helps us get rid of waste.

Soluble fiber is fiber that dissolves in water An example is pectin, which is found in fruits and oats. Soluble fiber is heart friendly.

VEGETABLES STEMS, LEAVES, AND FLOWERS Asparagus and celery stalks are plant stems.

Cabbage, spinach, kale, and lettuce are plant leaves.

Cauliflower and broccoli are plant flowers.

ROOTS AND TUBERS Carrots are roots. So are turnips, beets, and radishes.

An onion is an edible underground fleshy bud. A potato is a rounded outgrowth of an underground stem (called a tuber).

FRUITS Apples, pears, raspberries, plums, and mangoeslike all fruits and many vegetables-are seed containers.

Fruits are the sweetest ones.

NUTS (AND SEEDS) Nuts are seeds.

Sunflower seeds and pumpkin seeds are examples of other edible seeds.

LEGUMES (AND BEANS) Seeds in a seed pod that can be split into two sides are legumes. Beans like pinto beans, kidney beans, navy beans, lentils, and black beans are legumes. So are peanuts, even though most people think of them as nuts.

F.Y.I. TRUE COLORS Deep blue blueberries, bright white cauliflower, intensely orange carrots, brilliant yellow squash, dark green collard greensplant foods come in a stunning array of colors. Fruits and vegetables contain chemicals called phytochemicals, which help keep your heart healthy and help protect against high blood pressure, stroke, urinary tract infections, and certain diseases, such as heart disease.

Phytochemicals are complex! But lets keep it simple: Eat those fruits and veggies!

Peanuts become peanut butter! Theyre still legumes.

GRAINS The seeds of wheat, rye, oats, brown rice, millet, barley, and corn are grains.

Whole grain is grain in its absolutely natural state, which includes the inner germ layer, which contains the nutrition goodies, and an outer covering called the bran layer. (Dont worrythe germ layer doesnt have germs in it.) Whole grains can be eaten whole or can be ground into a powdery state called whole grain flour. Whole grain flour can be used to make whole grain tortillas, bread, rolls, muffins, pasta, and breakfast cereals. Whole grains are good for you!

F.Y.I. REFINED GRAINS When the layers are removed from the grain before its sold, as in the case of white rice, the grain is called refined. Often the layers are removed before the grain is ground into flour This flour (called refined flour) is used to make things such as white noodles, white bagels, and certain breakfast cereals.

Refined translates into whiter And fancier in some cultures.

But most of the fiber in grain is in the outer layers (husk and bran). The inner layer (germ) contains important nutrients.

When the husk bran, and germ get discarded during the refining process, valuable nutrients get thrown out along the way. Stick with whole grains!

OILS FROM PLANTS Avocados, nuts, and seeds contain oils. Plant oils for cooking and dressings can be squeezed from corn, olives, peanuts, soybeans, sunflowersand other plants.

ALCOHOL Alcohol is made from grapes, grains, and other plants.

Occasional, very light drinking of alcoholic beverages may have health benefits for some (not all) adults. Regardless, the legal age for drinking alcohol is twenty-one in all states, and alcohol must always be used responsibly. Kids should not drink alcohol. And there are other ways for adults to get health benefits, without drinking.

Theres no nutritional advantage that could possibly outweigh the risks of underage drinkingwhich include being in a drunk-driving accident, using poor judgment that puts you at risk, being physically harmed by another person, getting alcohol poisoning, or getting arrested.

Alcohol poisoning is when there is so much alcohol in someones system that it interferes with basic body functions. It can cause the person to stagger, fall, throw up, pass out, choke, or stop breathing and die. If you suspect alcohol poisoning, call 911 (or the police emergency number for your area).

POULTRY Chickens, turkeys, and ducks are poultry. Certain wild birds are ediblepheasant, quail, and wild ducks, for example.

EGGS Edible eggs are laid on a daily basis by cooperative chickens and ducks.

FISH Fishes that lurk or dart through streams, rivers, and lakes are called freshwater fish; perch, catfish, and trout are examples.

Fishes that cruise through the salty water of the ocean are called (you guessed it!) saltwater fish; sea bass, tuna, sardines, haddock, cod, and sword-fish are examples.

SHELLFISH AND OTHER SEAFOOD Edible shelly critters that live in the oceans include mussels, prawns, shrimp, clams, lobsters, conches, abalone, oysters, and urchins. Octopuses, squids, and eels are also food from the sea.

RED MEAT Meat from cattle, lamb, deer, elk, rabbits, pigs, and other mammals is called red meat because its red or dark pink before its cooked.

Organsheart, kidneys, stomach, etc.from certain of these animals are called organ meats.

DAIRY Milk or foods that come from the milk of mammals (cows and goats, usually) are called dairy foods; butter, cheese, and yogurt are examples because theyre all made from milk.

Drinking enough water has positive effects on your mood, attention span, and ability to concentrate and to perform physically.

If you dont drink enough fluids, youll become dehydrated, especially when the weather is dry and hot and you are sweating a lot. Its possible to be dehydrated without feeling thirsty or hot.

Municipal (city) tap water is fine to drink in the United States. City tap water usually contains fluoride, a chemical that helps protect your teeth (see here). For environmental reasons, we should limit our use of plastic water bottles.

Set your sights on drinking about six to eight (eight-ounce) cups of fluid (mostly water) over the course of a day (and more if its very hot out or if youre exercising vigorously). Drink before, during, and after long periods of physical activity Even if its winter! But dont drink too much at one time!

How do you know if you are drinking enough? One way is to check out the color of your urine (pee). It should be pale yellow, practically clearnot deep yellow or orange. see here for more on fluid intake.

You can become very dehydrated during long periods of strenuous physical activityespecially when its hot out. Fluids that contain sugar and salt (sports drinks)not just tap water-should be drunk to replenish lost salts and provide a short-term boost in energy if you are exercising very strenuously in the heat Very hot out? Wait till it cools down to exercise strenuously! Also note: Sports drinks serve a particular purpose. They have lots of added sugar No need to routinely drink them with meals and snacksstick with water.

SUNSHINE Your body needs about fifteen minutes a day of sunlight on your arms and legs, two to three days a week, for your skin to make vitamin D, which is needed to build strong bones, boost your immunity, and prevent certain cancers.

People who live at high latitudes dont make much, if any, vitamin D in the winter and fall, because the suns rays arent as strong. If you dont get regular sun exposure and dont get enough vitamin D from your diet, you might not be meeting your requirements. (Many children and adolescents dont get enough vitamin D.) A daily multivitamin supplement for kids may be recommended for you. Talk to your pediatrician about extra vitamin D.

Sunscreen decreases the bodys ability to make vitamin D, but you still need to protect yourself from the suns damaging rays. Direct exposure to sunlight increases the risk of getting skin cancer and causes premature aging of the skin. Wear sunscreen (SPF 30 and above) and a hat if you plan to be outside in the sun for extended periods. There are limits to the effectiveness of sunscreen, so you may need to cover up or find shade.

YOU KNOW YOU CAN Drink water, let the sun shine on you. Its a cinch!

You can also figure out how to have fun with physical activityyou really can!

Understanding the basics of how food works isnt as complicated as it seemsits not!

You can do this. You already know more than you think!

All you need is a plan, and we can help you.

DIGESTING FOOD Heres the basic information on how food works for you: Cells are the building blocks of every single living organism on earth, including us. Theyre tiny little structures so small, you need a microscope to look at them. The total content of a cell is called protoplasm. It is surrounded by a thin membrane.

We have millions of living cells within us, and every one of them needs a very precise form of energy in order to function.

The energy is provided by carbohydrates (carbs), proteins, and fats in the food we eat and drink. During digestion, the structure of proteins, fats, and carbs is broken down, down, down into very tiny usable pieces, which are carried through our blood to cells.

Each cell is like an incredibly complex little factory that has a specific job to complete for the good of our whole body.

THE MACROS (AKA MACRONUTRIENTS) Proteins, carbohydrates, and fats are called macronutrients (big nutrients). We need lots of these. Theyre our only source of energy.

Foods contain a variety of different nutrients. Some foods are famous for their high protein content (tofu, fish, chicken, and lentils, for example), others are famous for their high carb content (whole grains, including cereals and rice), and others are famous for their fat content (olive oil and nuts).

CARBOHYDRATES (CARBS) Carbs is the family name for sugars, starches, and fiber.

Once we chew up or drink food containing carbs, our body immediately starts breaking them down into their basic building blockglucoseand uses glucose for energy.

Carbs make natural appearances in everything from apples to whole grains to broccoli to milk. But carbohydrates are also added to some of the foods we eat and drink; white sugar, brown sugar, honey, molasses, and corn syrup are all carbs commonly used to sweeten food. These carbs are simple sugars. Theyre quickly changed to glucose, giving you a fast burst of energy.

Carbs in certain other foodsblack beans, for exampleare broken down into glucose more gradually, giving you energy over a longer period of time.

Foods high in added sugar, like soft drinks, do provide quick energy but this energy doesnt lastand often these high-sugar foods dont contain other macronutrients or vitamin and mineral perks. Its good to spread your carbs around and get them from different sourcesfruit, vegetables, beans, whole grains, milkand limit carbs from added sugar.

F.Y.I.

A glass of 1 percent low-fat or skim milk contains about the same amount of potential energy (calories) as a glass of soda. Both contain carbs.

But 1 percent low-fat or skim milk has protein, a little fat, vitamins, and minerals along with the carbs.

Does soda?

No!

Drinking soda occasionally is okay, but routinely substituting soda for 1 percent low-fat or skim milk or water isnt the way to go.

PROTEIN Your body is capable of converting protein into glucose and using it for energy (or storing it) if it wants tobut protein is more about growth and repair of cells.

Just about every food has protein in itexcept pure sugar and fats (like butter and oil).

During digestion, proteins are broken down into their simplest building blocks (amino acids) and reassembled in various ways. (Think Legos here.) Your body can produce some, but not all, of its own amino acids. The essential amino acids are the ones you have to get in food because your body cant produce them.

Animal foods are particularly rich sources of proteinand are called complete proteins because they contain all the essential amino acids your body requires. Its also possible to get all the essential amino acids from plant-based foods when you eat a variety of legumes (beans), whole grains, and nuts throughout the day (see here).

F.Y.I.

Protein supplements do not build muscle mass. Working out builds muscle mass. Please dont buy or use these products.

FATS Fats really deliver energy, especially in the long run. Theyre so energy-rich that they have more than twice as many calories per gram as carbs and proteins.

Fats give flavor and texture to food. And they keep you from feeling too hungry soon after you eat. Theyre absolutely necessary for carting around specific fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K). And they keep your skin smooth.

Both plant and animal foods contain fats.

Certain plant foods, like nuts, avocados, seeds, and plant oilsand also certain fish, like salmoncontain fats that really do extremely good things for your heart (see here).

THE MINIS (AKA MICRONUTRIENTS) Vitamins and minerals dont provide energythey help your body perform functions.

We need only tiny amounts of vitamins and minerals. Thats why these nutrients are called micronutrients. (Micro basically means mini.) With guidance from research scientists, the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences has established how much we need of each vitamin and mineral.

You can get all the vitamins and minerals you need by following a healthy eating plan that includes a wide variety of foods (see here).

But some vitamins and minerals can be hard to scout out in foodespecially for busy people who eat and snack on the run. So certain key vitamins and minerals are routinely added to some foods to make sure the general population gets enough of them. Foods with added nutrients are called enriched or fortified. Milk, juice, bread, cereal, pasta, and other grain foods are commonly fortified/enriched. (Check the ingredients label on the packaging.) IF YOUR DOCTOR RECOMMENDS IT you can take one daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids as a nutritional backup. But it wont make up for an unhealthy eating pattern.

Only one should be taken each day. It should be taken after a meal. Fat from food is needed for certain vitamins (fat-soluble) to be absorbed in your body (see here).

Fat-soluble vitamins accumulate in the body and build up: like vitamins A and D. Chronically high doses of certain vitamins are toxic. Please do NOT take more than one daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids and please do NOT take doses of single vitamins or minerals separatelyunless prescribed by your doctor.

If you have young children in the house, make sure the bottle has a childproof cap. And keep the supplements out of their reach. They contain iron. Accidental overdose of products containing iron is the leading cause of fatal (causing death) poisoning in children under age six. FYI: Poison Control Hotline, 1-800-222-1222. Call free, day or night, anywhere in the United States.

For more about the function and sources of vitamins and minerals, see here.

B VITAMINS B vitamins (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-6, and B-12) are needed for converting food into energy; healthy eyes, skin, muscles, and red blood cells; and having a healthy nervous system. Good sources of B vitamins are leafy green vegetables, milk (1 percent low-fat or skim), legumes, nuts, seeds, whole grains, eggs, and chicken.

FOLATE Its a good idea to get into the habit of routinely eating foods that are rich in folate, since it reduces your heart disease and cancer risks. Folate is a vitamin that has special importance to women of childbearing age. Good sources include dark green leafy vegetables (like spinach and romaine lettuce), fruits (like oranges), dried beans, whole grain breads, and enriched grain products like fortified cereals. (For more sources, see here.) Too little folate in pregnancy causes birth defects. So women are advised to take folic acid (the form of folate found in vitamin pills) for a few months in advance of becoming pregnant. Some (not all) doctors recommend that girls who have reached puberty take a daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids that contains folic acid. Ask your doctor if he or she recommends this for you.

VITAMIN D Vitamin D and calcium work together in the bone-building process. Our skin makes vitamin D when exposed to the sun. But to make sure we get enough vitamin D, its added to milk. Fortified breakfast cereals have vitamin D and calcium added. Check out food labels (see here).

AH! BUT WHAT IF YOU DONT DRINK MILK?

Vitamin D can also be found in salmon, egg yolk, fortified cereals, and fortified soy milk (and in daily [complete] multivitamin/multimineral supplements for kids).

Minerals help our blood carry oxygen and nutrients to muscles and other body parts and help build strong teeth and bonesas well as performing other wonderful benefits for our health.

Two really important minerals for girls are calcium and iron.

CALCIUM Calcium is absolutely essential for reaching your genetic potential (all you are programmed to be) for height and building strong bones.

And your bones are growing like crazy right now!

Seize the moment! Never again will you have this same opportunity and time span to increase your bone mass, ever! If you miss this window of opportunity, you may become vulnerable to your bones thinning later in life (osteoporosis).

F.Y.I.

Weight-bearing exercise, during which your bones carry the weight of your body or other weightlike walking or playing volleyball or basketballis also a big factor in keeping your bones strong.

Calcium is found in dairy products (like 1 percent low-fat or skim milk, yogurt, and cheese), canned sardines and canned salmon, spinach, and certain dark green leafy vegetables like collard greens, bok choy turnip greens, mustard greens, and kale. Broccoli and carrots also contain it.

Tempeh (like cheese but made from fermented soybeans or grains), white beans, soybeans, and soy nuts all contain calcium.

Foods fortified with calcium include fortified orange juice, soy milk, soy yogurt, soy cheese, and firm tofu (made with calcium sulfate). Enriched breakfast cereals and certain enriched breads have added calcium.

You can also find calcium in almonds, molasses, and canned pinto beans (and in daily [complete] multivitamin/multimineral supplements for kids).

F.Y.I.

In general, there is not enough calcium in a daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement to meet calcium requirements. It only partly fulfills calcium needs (1,300 milligrams per day). You can get the rest from food.

GOT MILK? (SKIM OR 1 PERCENT, THAT IS) Your bones want and need calcium and vitamin D, and these are present in milk. Your body likes protein and carbohydrates, and these and other nutrients are present in milk. Whole milk has too much heart-unfriendly saturated fat (see here) to drink on a routine basis. That is why 1 percent low-fat or skim milk is the way to go: The saturated fat has been removed, but the other nutrients remain the same!

However: Most children between twelve months and two years of age are advised to drink higher-fat milk. Ask the pediatrician.

LACTOSE INTOLERANCE Some of us dont produce enough of the enzyme lactase, which helps break down the sugar (lactose) found in dairy foods (and certain other foods; see below).

Do you have gas, bloating, cramps, and/or diarrhea after eating dairy foods or drinking milk? If so, you may be lactose intolerant. How do you know for sure?

Your health care professional can help you determine this.

Tips for getting enough calcium if you are lactose intolerant (or prefer to avoid milk): 1. Eat broccoli, collard greens, kale, turnip greens, mustard greens, and bok choy: good sources of calcium.

2. Calcium-fortified soy products (soy milk, tofu, and soy yogurt) are nondairy sources of calcium.

3. Calcium-fortified juices and cereals are also available. Its a good idea to stick to only a small glass (about 3/4 cup) of juice a day, so you cant rely on juice for all your calcium.

Ask your health care professional if he or she recommends that you take a calcium supplement. Or maybe he or she will suggest that you add a little extra lactase to your meals. Lactase can be purchased without a prescription. It comes in liquid, chewable, or capsule form. If your health care professional recommends it, take a lactase tablet before drinking milk or eating other dairy products, add lactase drops to milk, or buy milk that has been treated with the enzyme.

IRON Going through puberty means your reproductive system has begun to function. Or is soon about to.

Iron is a mineral thats especially important for girls because of menstruation (having your period).

Beginning to have periods means that your reproductive system has begun to function. The tiny eggs contained in your two reproductive organs (called ovaries) have begun to mature. Your period can start anytime between about the ages of nine and sixteen.

When youre having a period, which lasts a few days, a small amount of bloody fluid trickles out of your vagina, which is an opening very close to where urine comes out of your body.

Once it starts and becomes regular, most girls have a period once a month until the age of about fifty Thats when having periods stops (menopause).

HOW THIS RELATES Iron is part of a compound in your blood (hemoglobin) that carries oxygen to every cell of the body. When blood is lost through having your period each month, the iron has to be replaced. Your body needs the raw material (iron) to re-create hemoglobin.

But your body cant make iron for itself. When youre not getting enough iron, you feel tiredlacking in energy.

Cooked dry beanslike black beans, kidney beans, and pinto beanscontain iron. Chickpeas (garbanzo beans), lentils, soybeans, seeds, firm tofu, and certain dark vegetableslike spinach, collard greens, and kaleall contain iron.

Lean red meat (especially beef) is a good source of iron. Its also in shellfish, sardines, and dark turkey meat. And there are other good sources, such as iron-fortified breads and cereals (and in daily [complete] multivitamin/multimineral supplements for kids).

ZZZZZZZZ Getting plenty of sleepand still feel groggy? Nodding off in class? Talk to your pediatrician.

Many, many teen girls are short on iron.

Besides fatigue (being tired), not enough iron (called iron deficiency) causes shortened attention span. It gets in the way of your intellectual performance, reduces your bodys ability to fight off infections, and makes you less able to do work.

F.Y.I. ANEMIA Long-term deficiency in iron may result in anemia, which is when your blood doesnt have enough hemoglobin in it to carry the amount of oxygen required by your cells.

A NOTE ON SODIUM While were on the subject of minerals, salt (which contains sodium) may add zest and life to certain foodsbut your body doesnt like too much of it!

So please pass the saltshaker  right on past you. Or at least limit the sprinkling! The unique flavors of food will make themselves known to you once theyre not overpowered by salt. Fast food and processed food are also high in sodiumchoosing fresh, home-cooked food can help you limit your salt.

F.Y.I.SOME SALTY SIDEWINDERS Dont overdo these foods. Easy does it with: 1. Canned soup and soup that comes in packages (unless low sodium) 2. Canned gravy 3. Beef jerky 4. Bacon bits 5. Table salt 6. Dill pickles 7. Teriyaki sauce 8. Cured ham 9. Soy sauce 10. Processed cheese food 11. Salty chips 12. Pepperoni 13. Hot dogs 14. Bacon Also: Sodium is used as a preservative (sodium nitrate) and flavor enhancer (monosodium glutamateMSG) in many highly processed foods like soups, salad dressings, and frozen dinners.

Certain herbs and/or plant parts contain strong natural chemicals.

At the time of publication of this book, standards regulating the sale of herbs and the products that contain them are different from the standards that regulate food and drugs.

Under these standards, it is hard to know for sure whether a certain product is pure, what its actually made of, how strong it is, whether it works, and what side effects it may have.

It is also hard to know if claims made by the people who sell the product are scientifically based or, in some cases, whether its even safe to use.

Combining drugs (including natural chemicals) can potentially cause dangerous reactions. Herbal medications and/or herbal supplements may interfere with prescription medication you may be taking or even complicate an existing medical condition.

Before taking an herbal medication or herbal supplement, please run it past your pharmacist or another health care professional.

BE HEALTHY! ITS A GIRL THING: FOOD, FITNESS, AND FEELING GREAT recommends the following reliable websites on nutrition, health, and fitness.

THE CENTER FOR YOUNG WOMENS HEALTH www.youngwomenshealth.org CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL (CDC) BAM! BODY AND MIND www.bam.gov POWERFUL BONES. POWERFUL GIRLS.

www.cdc.gov/powerfulbones FOODSAFETY.GOV www.foodsafety.gov MYPYRAMID.GOV www.mypyramid.gov HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES HEALTHFINDER AND PAGES FOR KIDS www.healthfinder.gov/kids www.hhs.gov/kids HARVARD SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTHS NUTRITION SOURCE www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource LETSMOVE.GOV www.letsmove.gov KIDSHEALTH.ORG www.kidshealth.org If you want additional info about health, nutrition, and fitness on the Internet, work with your parent and keep the following guidelines in mind: The question is: Is the site trustworthy?

It doesnt take much more than some basic computer literacy to set up a site. How do you make sure that information on the Web about nutrition, fitness, and other health issues is reliable?

Tip list (adapted from United Health Foundation): 1. Visit four to six sites so that you can get a full picture of the information you want.

2. Investigate: Who runs the site? If its a good one, the people running it will be the first to say whos responsible for the information. Credibility and credentials (proper training and proof of it) of the website publisher are absolutely key.

3. Who wrote the ACTUAL information? Information on nutrition should be provided by a qualified professionalthat is, a registered dietitian, doctor, or professor of nutrition at an established educational institution or government agency, and their credentials should be easy to find on the site.

NUTRITIONIST OR REGISTERED DIETITIANWHATS THE DIFFERENCE?

The word nutritionist doesnt have standards attached to it that are regulated. The title for an actual bona fide nutrition pro is registered dietitian.

4. What is the source of the information? Did the person create it or borrow it from another site?

5. Check the date to make sure the information is current. Information on health is continually changing.

6. Is there a scientific basis for the informationor are we talking about gut feelings and anecdotes (personal stories and/or testimonies) being passed along? These arent reliable.

7. What is the purpose of the site? It should include a mission statementor About this sitethat includes its purpose.

8. Is somebody trying to sell you something? The sites you rely on should be well established or else run by the governmentand not set up for commercial purposes.

9. Dont give out any personal information about yourself to an Internet site without your parent working with you. And even with your parent involved, be sure why you are being asked for personal information about yourself before giving it.

10. Share the information gathered with your health care professional and make sure he or she is aware of the sources for it.

STAYING SAFE ON THE INTERNET Check out safety tips on KidsHealth: www.kidshealth.org/teen/safety or go to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children website: www.missingkids.com.

Sexual predators often try to target unsuspecting kids on the Internet, including on social networking sites. Dont chat, email, IM, blog, or communicate in any way with someone who isnt personally known and trusted by you and your parent. Suspicious/unlawful online activity should be reported to the police or the NCMEC CyberTipline: www.cybertipline.com.

WHAT IT IS Your heart is a beautiful, powerful little pump made of muscle that pumps and pumps.

And pumps.

Think of it: Some hearts pump nonstop for over a hundred years.

Your heart pushes blood throughout your body in tubes called blood vessels: veins and arteries. Blood vessels are flexible so they can accommodate the different levels of pressure that occur as your heart beats and pushes blood through them.

THE HEART-LUNG CONNECTION You have two lungs, and its their job to deliver oxygen into your bloodstream. Oxygen is present throughout nature, in combination with other elements. Its in the air you breathe.

Your lungs have a big jobconsidering that oxygen is required by every cell in your body. All tissues in our body need to have oxygen delivered to them or they will die.

F.Y.I.

Your lungs need to remain healthy and strong in order to deliver oxygen to your blood. Smoking damages the lungs. Every year, 400,000 Americans die as a result of tobacco-related illnesses, including lung disease, heart disease, and cancer.

In order for blood to deliver oxygen and other essentials to cells throughout the body, it must be able to pass freely through vessels that are open and flexible. Over time, eating too much saturated and trans fats (see here) can increase a persons risk of developing arteries that are narrow, hard, cloggedor even completely blocked. This is cardiovascular disease, and it can have serious consequences, including a heart attack or stroke.

HEART-FRIENDLY FATS (UNSATURATED FATS) There are certain fats (oils) that are v-e-r-y helpful to your heart!

Fats from certain fish are very heart friendly! Fats in salmon and saltwater fish like tuna, sardines, and herring keep the inside walls of your arteries open and flexible.

Almost all oils from plants are heart helpers (olive, corn, soybean, canola, sunflower, peanut). Vegetable oils that have been chemically altered (trans fat) are not.

FATS NOT FRIENDLY TO THE HEART (TRANS FATS AN D SATURATED FATS) 1. Trans fats (trans-fatty acids) Some vegetable shortening and stick margarine are plant oils that have been chemically altered: partially hydrogenated.

Their very structure has been changed! They are solid at room temperature instead of liquid. This process makes perfectly heart-friendly plant oils into a very unhealthy substance called trans fat.

Trans fat increases the risk of getting heart disease when youre an adult. Trans fat is also known as partially hydrogenated oil.

F.Y.I. HEART-FRIENDLY MARGARINE Margarines that list vegetable oils as their first ingredient and do not contain partially hydrogenated oils are friendly to the heart. Choose soft tub margarines, liquid margarines, and/or vegetable spreads. (Most of these will be labeled No trans fat.) 2. Saturated fats Saturated fats are found in certain animal foods, like butter, whole milk, and red meat. Two plant oilspalm and coconutare also high in saturated fat. Saturated fats can contribute to clogging up your arteries.

Limiting foods made with butter and full-fat cheese; cooking with unhydrogenated plant oils (not including palm or coconut) instead of butter, lard, or shortening; and trimming fat from meat help you cut down on saturated fat.

Thinking of beef, pork, and lamb as occasional foods rather than everyday foods and using butter sparingly are two more steps in the right direction (see here and here).

3. Cholesterol Cholesterol is produced by the liver, and its also present in certain animal foods that we eat. Plant foods dont contain any cholesterol; only animal foods do.

Your body does need cholesterol but can manufacture enough of its own. It doesnt require extra from your diet.

Your blood cholesterol level is strongly affected by the type of fat you eat. Eating too much saturated fat over time may be associated with high cholesterol levels in the bloodwhich is associated with increased risk of heart disease.

HEADS UP! SMOKING AND YOUR ARTERIES Tobacco use can harm our bodies so seriously and in so many different ways.

Nicotine, carbon monoxide, and other dangerous substances in cigarette smoke damage the walls of the arteriesincluding the arteries that bring oxygen and nutrients to your heart.

Now why would anyone want to deprive such a beautiful, hardworking heart muscle of the things it needs?

And P.S. Remember: That faithful little muscle especially loves fruits and vegetables loaded with fiber and chemicals that help prevent heart disease.

So lets hear it for: apples, bananas, blackberries, blueberries, Brussels sprouts, carrots, cherries, cooked beans and peas, dates, figs, grapefruit, kiwi fruit, oranges, pears, prunes, raspberries, spinach, strawberries, sweet potatoes, and tomatoes.

The amounts and types of food that you eat and drink need to be in balance with the energy your body uses for growing, moving, and performing its metabolic functionslike breathing and digestion.

?

But how do you balance these things?

GREAT NEWS!

Most of this balance involves doing what comes naturally; its a blast to romp and play games and sports, refreshing to glug down cool water, satisfying to chomp into fresh, crisp fruits and vegetables, fun to munch snacks or have lunch with a bunch of friends, comforting to sit down to yummy home-cooked family dinners, and (yawn) lovely to snuggle deep down into your covers for a good nights sleep.

So you already know a lot.

STILL, THERES A TON OF INFORMATION OUT THEREORGANIZATION IS KEY!

The Cactus Plan graphic on here is an organizational tool that pulls together key information for easy reference.

INTRODUCING: TA-DA!

WELL WALK YOU THROUGH IT. BUT DO UNDERSTAND THAT EVERYTHING TO DO WITH THE CACTUS PLAN IS FURTHER EXPLAINED IN THE TEXT OF THIS BOOK.

The Cactus Plan is food and physical activity guidelines basically represented by a (labeled) drawing of a cactus, a sun, a moonand a rainbow.

The drawing of this cactus, sunning itself under the sun, dozing under the moon, and sitting within view of a rainbow, can loosely represent you: also an organic being on planet Earth.

The Cactus Plan describes, in pictures, words, and numbers, one very good strategy for staying hydrated (having enough fluid on board), nourishing your body, sustaining your energy, keeping your energy (calorie) intake in balance with your activity level, and feeling emotionally strong by staying connected with people you love and trustand asking for help when you need it.

F.Y.I.

The future health of your heart and body is also carefully considered and built into The Cactus Plan, along with enhancing your chances of avoiding certain common chronic (ongoing) illnesses (like type 2 diabetes) when you are an adult or older teen.

THE FOOD GROUPS Related foods are grouped together and represented within separate sections of the cactus.

The drawing includes the approximate amount of servings you should try to eat each day from each group. (Serving sizes are explained in the following chapter.) ENERGY INTAKE If you follow The Cactus Plan, youll be drinking plenty of fluids. Youll be eating three nutritious meals a day: breakfast, lunch, and dinner, and one or two healthy snacks.

This will ensure that you are getting enough nutrients and energy (calories) to support your metabolism; achieve your potential for growth (including height), intellectual performance, and emotional well-being; and fuel your body for physical activity. (This can range from about 1,6002,200 calories a day, depending on your age and level of physical activity.) But you may need to eat and drink more if youre very physically activeor if your health care professional advises adjustments to meet your individual needs.

YES, WEVE ALL HAD DAYS   And may have more days when we, say, skip lunch and snack on chips.

Establishing and maintaining a healthy eating and activity pattern over the long run is what The Cactus Plan is all about. So please think of it as a general guideline, not as something that has to be followed to the letter every day of your life.

But do think of it. It can really help you make healthy food and physical activity choices right nowwhen good nutrition and routine activity are so important for your physical, emotional, and intellectual (brainpower) growth.

THE BASIC CONCEPT The basic concept behind The Cactus Plan is this: Its very healthy to fill up on a variety of nutrient-rich plant foods: whole grains, colorful fruits and vegetables, nuts, and beans (and other legumes). And to use oils from plants for dressings and in cooking. Why? Because plants have heart-helping fats, fiber, and those chemicals that can help prevent diseases (phytochemicals; see here).

But even though were emphasizing eating lots of plant foods, The Cactus Plan allows us plenty of servings of a variety of nutrient-rich animal foods if we choose: 1 percent low-fat and skim milk, low-fat or nonfat yogurt and low-fat or nonfat cheese, and poultry, fish and other seafood, and eggs.

BUT PUH-LEEZE! NOTE The Cactus Plan, in honor of long-term health considerations, recommends that you vary your choices in the LEAN ANIMAL PROTEIN group. Eggs and lean red meat should be eaten in moderation. Also, there are suggested limits on how much and how often we should eat certain specific fish because of possible mercury contamination. Do read and follow government guidelines posted in your grocery store and/or on food packaging.

Questions? Call the USFDA Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition information line: 1-888-SAFEFOOD. Or call your local health department to find out what fish should be limited.

NOTE: There are special recommendations for pregnant women (see here).

CALLING ALL VEGETARIANS!

If you dont eat animal foods, be sure to talk to a doctor or registered dietitian about appropriate plant substitutions for animal foods, how to vary these substitutions effectively so that you get enough of the right kinds of nutrients, and whether or not you should take calcium or multi  vitamin/multimineral supplements.

The same goes if you cant tolerate dairy foods and other foods with lactose in them. Your doctor can help you come up with a strategy to make sure you get enough calcium. Lactose intolerance and vegetarian plans are explained in chapters 3 and 9 of this book.

OCCASIONAL FOODS Foods noted as occasional foods in the cactus key are represented as sections of cactus with prickles on the ends.

The plan isnt suggesting that you dont eat or drink these.

Do eat them and drink them occasionally if you like.

But e-a-s-y does it!

Limit your portion size.

Dont go overboard.

ENERGY OUTPUT Everything on The Cactus Plan graphic relates to a healthy y-o-u!

Routine physical activity recommendations are represented on the right side of the cactus plantand thoroughly explained in chapters 13 and 14.

If you have a physical condition that prevents you from exercising normally dont be discouraged. But do talk to your doctor before beginning or changing your exercise program.

That way you can work together to tailor a plan thats safe and effective for you.

Recommendations for energy intake can vary according to a girls age, size, physical activity levels, and what stage of puberty shes in. The Cactus Plan is meant to give general guidelines. To reflect this, there is a range in regard to numbers of servings of foods and energy intake. See here for a website that can help you estimate your energy needs. Specific questions? Run them past your own health care professional.

OTHER ELEMENTS Sleeping enough, letting the sun (gently) shine on your arms and legs, two to three days a week for about fifteen to thirty minutes, and taking one daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids as a backup (if your doctor recommends this) are also elements of the plan.

And so is the rainbow, representing the positive feelings that result from maintaining strong communication with your family, friends, teachers, medical professionals, and other trustworthy, responsible adultsand asking for help when you need it.

Open to enjoying every food there is under the sunin amounts your body can put to work optimally?

Nutritional guidelines arent strict rules. Theyre suggestions that can lead you into a healthy eating pattern.

If you dont score enough servings from every group represented on the cactus every day, thats fine.

SERVING SIZES Theres a key to understanding the concept of serving sizes: Guesstimate.

(Yes, guess!) A SERVING IS DIFFERENT FROM A HELPING AND/OR A PORTION A helping/portion (like half a barbecued chicken) may actually count for two or three servings of poultry.

A great big, crispy salad with ruffly lettuce, cherry tomatoes, onions, green peppers, and carrots may count as two or three servings of vegetables.

A turkey sandwich with lettuce, sliced tomatoes, and low-fat cheese, a bowl of beef vegetable soup, a carne asada burrito, pasta primavera, falafel, chicken chow meinall of these are combo foods and count as servings but in different groups.

You really have to guesstimate with combo foods!

AND ANYWAY!

How do you accurately measure a cup of something that cant fit into a cup? You cant. So dont. And dont stress about it.

HOCKEY PUCK, DECK OF CARDS, TENNIS BALL, AND A TUBE OF LIPSTICK?

Familiar objects? These can help give you a general idea about serving sizes.

Fluids are liquids. The recommended total daily amount of fluids for girls your age is about seven to eight (eight-ounce) cups spaced over the course of a day. Your fluid intake should include water. Why not keep a pitcher full in your fridge with slices of lemon in it?

DOES SEVEN TO EIGHT CUPS SEEM LIKE A LOT?

Remember: Everything counts toward the total.

Soups, 1 percent low-fat or skim milkincluding the milk you put on cerealcount. And fluids may be contained in solids; fruits and vegetables contain water. Think about watermelon! It all adds up.

FRUIT JUICE Actually you dont need more than one small glass of (100 percent) fruit juice a day. Its healthiest to meet requirements for fruit by eating the actual fruit, which has way more fiber than fruit juice. But heres a tip: Cutting 100 percent fruit juice with water is a refreshing way to up your fluid intake.

SPORTS DRINKS Its best to save sports drinks for when youre exercising vigorously and/or you need to replenish your bodys reserves of carbs, salts, and water because youre exercising very hard for a very long time or when it is hot outside (see here).

LIMIT! DRINKS WITH ADDED SUGAR Drinks sweetened with added sugar, like soda, juice drinks, fruit-flavored drinks, fruit punch, fruitades, and sweetened teas are also fluidsbut these should be drunk only occasionally Dont be lured into choosing large or supersize drinksall for a few cents more. Who needs that amount of sugar?

The high energy content (calorie content) of these drinks isnt accompanied by many nutrients. Drinking (and eating) too many energy-dense, nutrient-poor fluids (or foods) isnt a good direction to go in.

F.Y.I.

The king-size soda sold at movies is 32 ouncescontaining 27 teaspoons of sugar! See here.

CACTUS GUIDELINE: TRY TO EAT WHOLE GRAINS AT MOST MEALS. EAT A VARIETY!

Each of these equals one serving: 1/2 cup of cooked oatmeal, brown rice, or whole wheat noodles/pasta (1/2 cup is about the size of a hockey puck) 1 slice of whole grain bread 1 small whole grain tortilla 1 small whole grain roll 1 small whole grain muffin 1 ounce of ready-to-eat whole grain cereal (Check the box to see what one ounce equals in cup measurement.) Choosing whole grains over refined grains and foods made with refined flour whenever you can is a great strategy. Scout out foods that list whole grains first on the ingredients list (see here).

When you eat brown rice instead of white rice, whole grain pasta instead of white pasta, whole grain bread instead of white bread, you will have more sustained energy.

Eating whole grain cereals will generally do better things for you in the long run, like keeping your heart healthy, than eating refined grain cereals. Regardless, avoid cereals with lots of added sugar. Who needs candy for breakfast?

SO: EASY DOES IT!

With white rice, white pasta, and white bread. And easy does it with sugary refined cereals and sugary refined baked goods like cake, cookies, doughnuts, brownies, and pastries. Likewise: Easy does it with candy!

A NOTE FROM THE TOOTH FAIRY Bacteria (germs), which are always present in your mouth, are the culprits when it comes to gum disease and tooth decay. These frightful little critters form a sticky substance on the surface of your teeth called plaque.

Plaque harbors the bacteria. When you eat something sweet, they gobble up the sugar and turn it into acid, which dissolves the hard enamel that coats your teeth. This can start a cavity (hole). (Starchy snacks can also promote tooth decay because starch breaks down into sugar once it gets into your mouth.) Acids continue to do their dirty work for approximately twenty minutes, at which point theyre neutralized (and made harmless).

If you feel a need to eat a sweet snack when youre at home, book it to the sink afterward and brush those choppers!

Good advice: If youre out and about and cant brush after eating, rinse your mouth with water.

F.Y.I.

Brush two times a dayand floss! Need a demonstration? Ask! Use toothpaste that has fluoride in it. Fluoride definitely protects your teeth from decay. If your water isnt fluoridated, please ask your dentist or health care provider if you need supplemental fluoride.

Sweet snacks are fine sometimes, but most of the time go for fresh fruit, a few nuts, cut-up veggies, sunflower seeds, plain popcorn, frozen 100 percent juice bars, low-fat dairy foodslike low-fat yogurt and low-fat cheeseand whole grain crackers (without hydrogenated oils).

F.Y.I.

Dentists recommend that kids have dental checkups twice a year Teeth need to be cleaned in a dentists office routinely in order to avoid cavities and maintain the good health of your gums.

CACTUS GUIDELINE: EAT AT LEAST 3 SERVINGS OF FRUIT EACH DAY.

Each of these equals one serving: 1 medium whole fruit (think: size of a tennis ball) 1/4 cup dried fruit 1/2 cup of canned fruit, berries, sliced raw or cooked fruit 1/2 grapefruit 1/4 cantaloupe 11 cherries 12 grapes 7 strawberries 3/4 cup of 100 percent fruit juice (Check the label. Do you see the word drink? Thats your tip-off. Its not what you want. Fruit juice drinks are often little more than flavored water with added sugar. Same with fruit-flavored drinks, fruit punch, and fruitades.) CACTUS GUIDELINE: EAT AT LEAST 4 SERVINGS OF VEGGIES EACH DAY.

Eat lots of (colorful) vegetablesred, orange, yellow, blue, green, purpleto get the nutrients you need. White ones, too!

Red: beets, red peppers, tomatoes, red onions Orange: carrots, yams Yellow: squash, yellow pepper Green: spinach, broccoli, green beans, romaine lettuce Blue/purple: eggplant, purple cabbage White: cabbage, cauliflower Each of these equals one serving: 1/2 cup of cooked or sliced raw veggies 1 cup of tossed salad 3/4 cup of vegetable juice 1/3 cucumber 5 cherry tomatoes 1 medium tomato 2 cooked broccoli spears 7 to 8 (3-inch-long) carrot sticks 1/2 cup of tomato/spaghetti sauce Tip: Why not double up on serving sizes of veggies every time you eat em? Your body likes lots and lots of veggies.

LIMIT WHITE POTATOES, ESPECIALLY FRIES!

UH?@$!#$@?!?!?

Thats right!

Fast as a jackrabbit, your body converts the starch in white potatoes to sugar. Fries definitely dont have enough nutritional value to be included in the vegetable group.

Tip: Fries that are cooked in good plant oils rather than saturated fats or trans fats are the better choice (see here).

CACTUS GUIDELINE: COOK WITH PLANT OILS AND USE THEM FOR SPREADS AND DRESSINGS.

Canola, olive, soybean, corn, sunflower, peanutyour heart loves these!

EASY DOES IT With coconut and palm oil and oils that have been processed to be solid at room temperature (vegetable shortening and stick margarine, for example). Theyre not heart friendly (see here). Limit these.

CACTUS GUIDELINE: EAT 12 SERVINGS A DAY FROM THIS GROUP. EAT MORE IF YOU ARE A VEGETARIAN.

NUTS Each of these equals one serving: 2 tablespoons of peanut or almond butter 1 ounce of nuts, which is about 20 almonds or 6 Brazil nuts or 16 cashews or 18 hazelnuts or 10 macadamia nuts or 18 pecan halves or 150 pine nuts or 45 pistachios or 14 walnut halves F.Y.I.

Nuts are energy-rich and a good source of protein, heart-helpin fats, vitamins, minerals, fiber, and disease-preventing chemicals (phytonutrients).

Just one little ounce of nuts can turn out to be a very satisfying snack.

OH NUTS!

Unfortunately, some people are allergic to nuts. If you are, definitely dont eat them. And do check the ingredients list on food packaging (see here) to make sure nuts arent hiding out in an unexpected place.

BEANS (AND LENTILS) Each of these equals one serving: 1/2 cup of cooked black beans, chickpeas (garbanzo beans), pinto beans, or kidney beans (think: hockey puck) 1/2 cup of cooked lentils TOFU AND OTHER SOY PROTEIN FOODS Each of these equals one serving: about 1/2 cup of tofu or tempeh about a 3-ounce soyburger CACTUS GUIDELINE: EAT 3 SERVINGS EACH DAY.

Each of these equals one serving of low-fat dairy: 1 cup of low-fat or skim milk (see here) 1 cup of low-fat or non-fat yogurt 1 1/2 to 2 ounces of low-fat or skim cheese (think: tube of lipstick) 1/2 cup of low-fat cottage cheese DONT DO DAIRY?

Calcium-fortified foods and drinks are available. So are calcium supplements, which are different from a daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids. Talk to your doctor to see what he or she recommends for you. See here for alternative sources of calcium.

LIMIT: BUTTER Butter is a dairy product that is basically saturated fat. Yup, its yummy spread on bread, but use it sparingly Dont slather it!

ICE CREAM Ice cream is a treatan occasional one! It is too high in saturated fat to eat on a regular basis. Have half a cup and eat it s-l-o-w-l-y Savor it!

F.Y.I. LIGHTS, CAMERA, ACTION!

Popcorn is a nutritious, whole grain snack. But why drench each lovely puff with butter?

At the movies? Go for one of the smaller cups of popcorn, not the giant tub (even though it may only be twenty-five cents more). Ask the server to go light on the butteror to hold the butter completely. The small (not jumbo) drink will be the perfect amount to wash it down (see here). Better yetdrink sparkling water!

POULTRY, FISH AND OTHER SEAFOOD, EGGS GROUP CACTUS GUIDELINE: EAT 12 SERVINGS EACH DAY.

(Remember: If you dont eat foods in this group, talk to your doc about substitutions. See here.) Okay, lets break this down.

A. PLUCKY POULTRY One serving: 2 to 3 ounces, cooked (think: deck of cards) B. DELICIOUS FISHES One serving: 2 to 3 ounces, cooked (think: deck of cards again) C. SCRUMPTIOUS SHELLFISH One serving: 2 to 3 ounces, cooked (yup: deck of cards again) D. EG-G-G-GSELLENT EGGS One serving: 1 whole egg or 2 egg whites ROARIN RED MEAT One serving: 2 to 3 ounces, cooked (think: deck of cards) Red meat is called red meat because its red or dark pink when raw. It includes beef, lamb, and pork.

Most red meat has more saturated fat (see here) than poultry, fish and other seafood, or eggs. Eating red meat frequently can increase your colon cancer risk. Raising livestock also is a drain on our planets water, increases our carbon footprint, and contributes to global warming. So dont choose red meat every day. Eat it only occasionally And when you do choose it, go for the leaner cuts.

F.Y.I.: LEAN RED MEAT Lean cuts of red meat include: Beef: eye of round, top sirloin, extra-lean ground beef, tenderloin Pork: tenderloin, sirloin, top loin Lamb: leg shank Luncheon meats: 95 to 99 percent fat free PROCESSED MEATS Processed, preserved, and/or cured meats like salami, bologna, hot dogs, sausages, bacon, and pepperoni arent lean red meattheyre fatty red meat and the saturated-fattiest of all. They can increase the risk of various cancers. Do minimize these.

VARY YOUR CHOICES!

Remember: Lean red meat and certain fish should be eaten in moderationnot on a daily basis. See here (for saturated fats in meat) and here (for fish). Up to an egg a day is okayand its okay to eat all the egg whites you want.

SEASONALLOCAL Its healthy for the planet when we buy seasonal local foods from farmers markets and grocery stores. Transporting food has an overall negative effect on the environment: it uses lots of fossil fuel and packaging. If not recycled properly, packaging fills our landfills, creates litter, and may end up in the ocean, where it makes a big mess and endangers marine animals.

Besides giving us energy and nutrients and satisfying our appetite and providing the sensual pleasure of experiencing taste, temperature, color, and texture, food has another critical function: It brings people together.

Food links us to our cultureand to the cultures of our friends, extended families, and communities.

Preparing and serving food is a way of expressing love and affection. Eating food prepared and served to us is a way of acknowledging this loving expression.

Allow yourself to celebrate and appreciate the varied, positive experiences associated with eating: energizing your mind and body, satisfying hunger, connecting with friends and family, and celebrating yourself as a beautiful, living being nurtured by planet Earth.

SLOW FOOD Fast food can be affordable, convenient, socialand, well, really fast. But dont forget about slow food.

Sit with your grandpa on a park bench and shell pistachio nuts.

Plan a family picnic at the beach. Get sand in your sandwich. Throw a Frisbee around.

Organize a homework group on the weekend. Have nutritious snacks on hand for study breaks. Go with nuts, fruits, and vegetables with dips (see here for snack suggestions).

Plan a family dinner Expand it to include a friend. Turn off the TV. Talk!

Shopping together, fixing meals together, sitting down together at a tableand even cleaning up together after a meal are all great ways to connect with family and friends.

LEARN HOW TO COOK!

Check out a beginners cookbook from the library. Ask the librarian to help. Librarians love to help! Find a book with simple, straightforward instructions.

Flip through it. What sounds good? Choose a recipe (or two) that fits your familys budget. If youre not allowed to use the stove, find a recipe that doesnt require cooking!

Ask your parent to schedule some time to shop and cook with you. Bring along a list of what you need (see here for a Cactus Plan shopping list; make copies of it if you want).

When you cook, dont stress. Have fun! Cooking is an art form. And artists make big messes. Plan to clean up.

DO IT UP PROPER Prettily fold the napkins.

Set the table.

Pop a daisy in a little vase.

BUT IM SO BUSY ALL THE TIME!

Interested in doing things quickly? Sometimes we all are. But when it comes to food, its good to s-l-o-w down and reflect on what we are consuming.

HIGHLY PROCESSED FOODS Because were on the run so much of the time, we often find foods in the grocery store, in restaurants, in vending machines, or in school cafeterias that have been put through complicated processes and packaged to be prepared with very little time and effort.

These foods, which include things like microwavable precooked dinners, are referred to as highly processed foods. These foods are often high in sugars and sodium.

Convenient? Yes, they are. And we have developed a taste for processed foods. But we can also appreciate more subtle flavors of foods that are closer to their original state.

Sometimes foods are so highly processed, its hard to distinguish what the original food source even is.

Example? Boned, precooked, breaded, reformed frozen fish sticks  just pop em in the microwave!

But how far away from a fish is a fish stick? A fish cracker looks more like a fish!

An apple, cored and uniformly sliced by machine, sweetened with sugar and cinnamon, and baked in a crispy crust along with thousands of other little minipies, then frozen, stored in a box in a warehouse, shipped, shelved, reheated in a microwave, and sold to you in a small cardboard package isnt a bad thing. But  THERES A TRADE-OFF The process of turning a fish into a breaded stick and an apple into the filling of a minipie may result in the loss of nutrients and/or the gain of fats that arent heart friendlyor bothand much more sodium.

MINIMALLY PROCESSED FOODS A fish stick isnt required to have fins and a tail. An apple doesnt have to have a leaf and a stem. But do let some of the food you eat be minimally processed: in Mama Natures original packagingor very close to it.

SAVOR YOUR FOOD A crisp, ripe apple picked from a tree and washed under clear wateran apple whose shape and color and texture you can actually experience in its original state is very fast food. Its already ready!

Bite into it. Hear that first crunch. As you chew, think about what you are eating.

Mmmm.

Mmmm!

BETWEEN-MEAL SNACKS: DO!

Theres an old saying: Dont eat between meals.

Thats so wrong!

Snacking is an essential part of a healthy eating plan. You need these nutritional pick-me-ups.

Also, snacks keep you from getting starved and making food choices based on the fact that youre as hungry as an alligator and you want to eat anything within snapping range.

SNACK SUGGESTIONS  Salsa with whole grain chips (made without hydrogenated fatcheck the ingredients list on the package)  Hummus (a Middle Eastern bean dip) with vegetables or whole grain crackers (made without partially hydrogenated oilscheck the ingredients list on the package)  Whole fruits: bananas, apples, pears, pineapple slices, strawberries, grapes; and peanut butter for protein  Slices of carrot, celery, green pepper, or zucchini with yogurt dips  Part skim string cheese  Nuts: almonds, peanuts, walnuts, mixed nuts  Dried fruits  Roasted soy nuts  Tabbouleh  Guacamole and tomato slices with whole grain pita or tortilla  Falafel  Melon wedges  Minestrone soup*  Lentil soup*  Chicken noodle soup* DONT SKIP MEALS Especially especially! eat a nutritious breakfast. Its a proven scientific fact: Eating a nutritious breakfast boosts your performance in school. It enables your brain to focus and concentrate better.

GRRRRR!

Dont you know youre a worn-out, tired, grouchy, frazzled grump bucket when you dont eat?

You are!

BUT! BUT! BUT I DONT HAVE TIME!

Yup, its so fun to snuggle down into the covers for that extra ten minutes of sleep on school mornings! And sleep is important! (Remember: You need about eight hours of snooze time a night.) You know your brain relies on breakfast energy to think clearly. So clearly you need to think breakfast! Its fine to keep it simple: a bowl of whole grain cereal with 1 percent low-fat or skim milk (maybe sprinkled with a few nuts) and a piece of fruit will do the trick.

Talk to your parent about making a switch from regular orange juice to calcium-fortified orange juice and from whole milk to 1 percent low-fat or skim milk on your behalf. (Remember: Little children in the family may need higher-fat milk, though. Ask the pediatrician.) GOOD BREAKFAST IDEAS (Ask permission before using the stove. See here.)  Granola or muesli (European-style granola) topped with fresh fruit, 1 percent low-fat or skim milk, or calcium-fortified soy milk  Scrambled, poached, or hard-boiled egg with whole grain toast  Whole grain toast with peanut or almond butter (choose nut butter without partially hydrogenated oil whenever you can)  Multigrain dry cereal, nuts with dried fruit  Hot oatmeal with nuts and fruit  Sliced banana, nutty dry whole grain cereal with 1 percent low-fat or skim milk or calcium-fortified soy milk  Tofu, noodles with miso soup  Whole grain bagel with a slice of low-fat cheese  Multigrain pancakes/waffles with fresh fruit slices and yogurt  Whole wheat noodles with tahini sauce  Whole grain pita with hummus  Whole grain crackers with peanut or almond butter  1 percent low-fat or skim milk yogurt with raisins  And always, some fresh fruit: apple, pear, grapes, or banana. Whatever you like!

WHY 1 PERCENT LOW-FAT OR SKIM MILK?

Since milk is such a great source of calcium and vitamin D, and since whole milk contains more saturated fat than is desirable on a day-in, day-out basis, the companies that produce milk give us options to buy milk that has most (or all) of the saturated fat removed: 1 percent low-fat or skim (fat-free) milk.

Shoot for 1 percent or skimyoull get used to it.

WHY CALCIUM-FORTIFIED ORANGE JUICE?

Fortified means strengthened. In this case, with calcium.

F.Y.I.

A switch from whole milk to 1 percent low-fat or skim milk and other low-fat dairy products is something you can do when youre younger that can have a positive effect on your health for the rest of your life. Its so easy. Why not go for it?

Orange juice makers add calcium to the juice before packaging to make it easy for those of us who cannot drink milk (lactose intolerant) to get the calcium we need. But orange juice is also loaded with sugar. Limit it to 6 ounces (3/4 cup) a day.

Same goes for soy milk and rice milk: you can buy them fortified, too.

QUICK BREAKFAST IDEAS Spread a dollop of cold refried beans onto a tortilla, add a splash of your favorite hot sauce, roll it up. Drink a glass of 1 percent low-fat or skim milk.

Or: Navigate some granola into a carton of low-fat or nonfat yogurtstir it up and youre good to go. Cold pizza in the fridge? Lift the lid and sneak a slice out of the box.

An inviting carton of leftover rice, pea pods, and chicken chillin in the refrigerator? Snag it before somebody else does!

Drink a glass of 1 percent low-fat or skim milk, a small glass of orange juice, or water.

Pop a slice of whole grain toast into the toaster. While its toasting, hunt down that elusive jar of peanut butter in the back of the fridge. Allergic to nuts? Then add a slice of cheese on the toast instead. Drink a small glass of fruit juice or low-fat milk.

WAIT WAIT WAIT!

If your doctor recommends it, dont forget your one daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids.

F.Y.I.

If you eat too fast, your hunger mechanism wont get the message that youre full! Chew, taste, enjoy your food. That way you wont overeat!

HOW MUCH ENERGY DO YOU NEED?

How much energy do you need in a day?

It depends on what stage of puberty youre in (how fast youre growing) and how physically active you are.

Think in terms of eating three nutritious meals each day and one or two healthy snacks in between.

That should do it.

F.Y.I.

During puberty, kids often gain weight and then grow tallerrelatively quickly.

Its important to understand that an appropriate plan for many overweight adolescents is to maintain your current weight. Follow a nutritious eating and healthy physical activity plan (like The Cactus Plan).

In time, youll grow taller. Your weight will then fit your height. Check out your individual situation with your doctor.

Also, crash/fad diets promote unhealthy eating practices and attitudes. And guess what. They dont work! Frequent dieting by adolescent girls is related to binge eating (overeating), which results in weight gain over time.

WEIGHT CONCERNS?

It takes a health care professional to determine if youre in a healthy weight range for whatever stage of puberty youre in.

If you have weight concerns, make an appointment to discuss them with your doctor. Ask to see a registered dietitian.

Your doctor needs to be involved in evaluating your growth and determining whether you should gain weight, maintain your weight, slow your weight gain, or lose weight while youre going through puberty.

HOW THE ENERGY INTAKE/ENERGY OUTPUT BALANCE RELATES TO WEIGHT Over time, if you take in about the same amount of energy as you use up through growth, metabolism, and physical activity, your weight will remain in a healthy range.

Back in the day, humans could bank on going through some pretty harsh times, living off the land. At times, food was scarce.

People who were genetically programmed to use energy efficiently were able to survive on less food, stay healthier, live longer, reproduce moreand pass their survival gene (called the thrifty gene) on to their kids.

WERE DESIGNED TO KEEP ENERGY IN RESERVE- In the event of getting lost in the wilderness, marooned on a desert island, or having food sources dwindle.

This isnt likely to happen at this place and time.

FOOD IS NOW EVERYWHERE Plentiful, fast, convenient, tempting, super-stimulating, and always within your reach. Think about malls, highways, movie theaters, and amusement parks. You smell and see food everywhere, tempting you to eat even though you are not hungry.

WAYS TO AVOID EXCESS ENERGY (CALORIE) INTAKE 1. Manage your hunger by eating regular, balanced meals and snacks that feature vegetables and fruit, whole grains, and healthy sources of protein. Eat them S-L-O-W-L-Y. Enjoy them!

2. Pay attention to portion size. Moderation is key.

3. Eat lots and lots of fruits and vegetables.

4. Drink plenty of water. Skip sweetened beverages. Dont supersize soft drinks (sodas).

5. Follow nutritional guidelines (see here) when it comes to eating foods that are very high in added sugar, saturated fat, and/or trans fat. Occasional means sparingly. Every once in a while. Not often.

6. Pay attention toand followyour hunger cues. Eat when youre hungryand stop when youre full.

7. Please also pay attention to the effects that advertising may be having on you. Theres a difference between being hungry and having an urge to eat (see here).

HEADS UP!

Do you have a friend who seems totally stressed about eating or not eating? Are you? If so, tell your parent, teacher, or another trusted adult.

Sometimes, emotional problems take the form of extremely negative behaviors related to food and physical activity These kinds of problems always require help from a mental health care professional (see here).

*Read labels and try to get low-sodium soups whenever possible! Ask permission before using the stove (see here).

FOOD CHOICES Smell the intoxicating scent of a warm, squishy cinnamon bun as you walk through the mall? Hey! You! Its callin your name!

Food choices are influenced by such a wide range of thingsfrom TV commercials to friends and family to neighborhood stores and local restaurants to vending machines and school cafeterias.

Choices are also influenced by the media and advertising.

WANT TO EAT HEALTHIER? DO!

If your friends dont, so what? Dont hound them.

Avoid comparing the nutritional value of what theyre eating to what youre eating. Nobody likes to be compared.

Also: Its unclassy and inappropriate to criticize food that another individual is eating that you personally find distasteful. You may run the risk of insulting someone. Treat others the way you like to be treated.

How many ads do you see on TV for vegetables, whole fruits, whole grain products, fish, seafood, nuts, and beans?

Hmmm. Not many!

Fast-food marketers want your $$$! Be aware of how TV commercials influence your food choicesso you can make healthy ones. see here.

SPEAKING OF WHICH All schools are required to properly address bullying and harassment, including in the cafeteria.

If you become aware of a bullying problem at your school, tell a teacher, school counselor, or principal. An adult definitely needs to know.

Dont be a bystander Report all bullying, including cyberbullying. Its fine to report anonomously, if thats what you prefer Or, your parent can report. Bullies need to be stopped, for everybodys sakeincluding their own.

So many meals and snacks can be given a quick, extra nutritional boost without much effort on your part.

ORDERING PIZZA?

Onions, mushrooms, black olives, sliced tomatoes, green pepperseven pineapplecan be added. Or go for the veggie combo!

STOPPING BY THE DELI?

There are many ways to up the nutritional content of deli sandwiches. Here are two: 1. Ask for whole grain bread.

2. Say yes to sliced tomatoes and lettuce.

You can also:  Choose lean meats like sliced turkey or chicken. Want red meat? Stick with lean roast beef rather than bologna or salami.

If theyre available, ask to sample partially skim milk cheeses to see which ones you like. Add a slice to your sandwich.

FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT?

Fast-food restaurants are part of our culture. If you go, be aware that healthier options are becoming more and more widely available.

Chicken can be a welcome change of pace from burgers. Chicken fajita pita (fa-hee-ta pee-ta)? Try it! Grilled-chicken sandwich? Good. How about fresh fruit and yogurt parfait?

Fast food can also include California rolls (sushi), brown rice bowls topped with veggies, wraps, and other quick meals from our wide range of cultures. Experiment!

BE THE BUNNY Add a green salad to your order.

F.Y.I.

Certain fast foods are loaded with calories. Many are also high in saturated and trans fat. Calorie-dense sauces and other toppings are freely dolloped on. If you eat fast food often, its a great idea to look into the nutritional value of your favorite meals. Fast-food restaurants are required to publish this data and may make it available on their websites. Be aware. Compare. Make healthy choices. Advocate! Ask that this information be posted.

Dressings made with plant oils are just so good for you! Theyre energy rich. A smallish glug or blob should do the trick.

Its fine to ask for dressing on the side so you can taste it first.

SHARE Sure, we could eat a million friesbut why? Theyre so superloaded with energy (calories), we dont need a whole bagful. Share an order. Construct a little ketchup-dipping station and sidle up with a friend.

Milk shake? Ask for an extra cup and split it.

Deep-fried chicken strips or nuggets? A few will do. Let others poach. Pass them around.

YEE-HAW!

Americans are famous for our Texas-size portions (big). But listen up, pardner: SUPERSIZING Godzilla-size soft drinks, jumbo fries, and burgers stacked one on top of another, topped with cheese and bacon, are fast-food meals that provide a level of energy you just dont require on an everyday basis.

Ads on TV make it seem like we can and should eat these day in, day out for our whole lives and not suffer harmful results or consequences, but thats not true.

If you eat fast food often, self-regulate on portion size.

Like burgers? Have a regular burger, a regular order of fries, and a small soft drink. Still thirsty?

Drink water.

F.Y.I.

For many people, routine, daily soda intake results in pounds of unnecessary weight gain every year.

How much sugar is in soda?

Regular size (20 ounces): 16 teaspoons King size (32 ounces): 27 teaspoons Supersize (42 ounces): 35 teaspoons AT HOME?

Keep a stash of cold, crisp, colorful cut-up veggies in a plastic bag in the fridge: celery; carrots; red, green, yellow peppers; sliced summer squash; sliced zucchiniwhatever. Maybe your parent could be recruited to help you slice them up.

You may have to guard the refrigerator, thoughbecause once theyre sliced, iced, and there for the taking, you can expect some sneak attacks on the storehouse from family members.

Make sure you have permission before using sharp knives, and if you dont feel comfortable using them, ask for help.

Finished slicing? Dont drop that knife in a sinkful of soapy water Someone might get cut when they reach in. Carefully clean the knife and put it back where it belongs.

CHIP TIP Chips vary in nutritional value. Some are made from whole grains (corn, for example) and baked or fried in plant oil (rather than in saturated or partially hydrogenated oil) and have fiber. Nab those.

Dip em in salsa: canned, jarred, or homemade.

COLD OUT?

Warm up.

Va-room! Soup up a can of soup (low sodium if you have it) by adding extra goodies: carrots, peas, corn, beans, broccoli, tomatoes, and other nutritional heavy hitters.

GET PERMISSION BEFORE USING THE STOVE Not confident? Ask for help from an adult.

SAFETY TIPS Keep curtains, dishcloths, oven mitts, paper towels, and other flammable things away from the burner. Tie back your hair if its long. Filmy billowy, loose clothes arent safe for chefs of any age. Dont reach across the stove-top.

Make sure the pot handle isnt sticking out where you could accidentally topple it.

Dont allow the phone or TV to distract you. Dont leave the room when the stove is on.

Steam burns! Use a pot holder or oven mitt to lift the lid from a pot full of hot food. Lift the lid in the direction thats away from you, away from your face.

HOT OUT?

Chill with a chilly snack.

Freeze your favorite juice in an ice tray. While youre at it, slice a couple of bananas in half (the long way), carefully seal them in a sealable plastic bag (squeeze the air out first), and pop em in the freezer.

Forget theyre there. Youve got other things to do than wait for fruit to freeze.

A few hours later, when youre really hungry, grouchy, and hot  Yay! Youll remember them! Have an icy banana and add the frozen juice cubes to a glass of bubbly water (seltzer).

ON THE ROAD AGAIN?

Travel with a couple of apples, a bottle of water, and some nibblies: a small bag of granola, an energy bar, some dried fruit, and/or nuts in your pack or purse. Sound like rabbit food? Whats not to like about a rabbit?

AT SCHOOL?

Why not turn your locker (or pack) into a minimart? Apples and tangerines last quite a while. Energy bars also have a good shelf lifewhen sealed up in their original wrappers. (But check the ingredients listsome energy bars are the nutritional equivalents of candy bars!) Mixed nuts are a good standby. So are individually wrapped packets of whole grain crackers or chips.

The ants come marching one by one, hurrah. And some schools even haveyikes!a roach problem. Keep your snacks sealed in containers or closed up in sealable plastic bags.

Snacks cant last forever in the depths of a backpack or the rubble of a locker. Check the expiration date of provisions that have been around for a while.

How do you choose an energy bar? Look at the ingredients list and Nutrition Facts label.

Choose bars that contain whole grains (like oats, millet, and barley) and have at least 4 grams of fiber  Go for bars that have at least 7 grams of protein and dont contain partially hydrogenated oils or trans fat  Nuts, nut butter, or dried fruits are great additions (if youre not allergic to nuts).

Sugar should be listed toward the end of the ingredients list (see here). Sugar has many names, including glucose, galactose, dextrose, fructose, sucrose, lactose, maltose, corn syrup, brown sugar, and corn sweetener Sugar is sugarnone is more healthy than another Look for bars that have no more than 12 grams of sugar.

FOOD CHOICES AT SCHOOL Whats available to eat in your school cafeteriaand on your school site?

IS SOME IMPROVEMENT CALLED FOR?

Get some friends, maybe a parent or two, and a couple of teachers together and ask for a meeting with your principal to discuss how your school can increase nutritional awareness and expand and improve food choices for students. Keep the tone of the meeting upbeat and positive. Dont make accusations that put anyone on the spot.

Could you conduct a faculty/student survey for input and ideas?

Some possible topics to put on the table: Is 1 percent low-fat or skim milk available in the cafeteria?

How about getting more colorful fruits and vegetables on the menu? What about a salad bar? Veggie burgers?

Could  la carte fruit (sold separately) be made available at lunch? (Locally grown? All the better.) Can the vending machines and snack bars be stocked with more tasty and healthy varieties? Maybe your parent-teacher association could get involved.

Recycling opportunities should be in place. And ask that the school have working water fountains.

OFFENDING VENDING Soda and candy calling to you from strategically placed machines around your school campus? Many schools are getting rid of them.

If these machines are going to remain in your school for fund-raising or other purposes, ask for equal time for foods that do really good things for youincluding boosting your academic and athletic performance.

Ask that 1 percent low-fat or skim milk, cold water, whole grain chips and whole grain crackers, nuts, dried fruits, and other healthy snacks be included as choices in your schools vending machines.

NEED SUPPORT?

So many people care! Look for support among faculty (including the school nurse), student council reps, parents, and other students. Find out if your school has a wellness council that focuses on nutrition and safe, fun physical activities (both competitive and noncompetitive) during and after school. Think of it: everything from Ping-Pong to salsa dancing could be considered.

If your school does not have a school wellness council, speak up to the principal and start one.

AND WHY NOT GO FOR THE GOLD: A GARDEN!

Food gardens are springing up in schools all over the United States, including in the middle of cities.

Developing and using food gardens as teaching tools is really catching on.

How much fun would it be for you and your friends at school to get some exercise, fresh air, and bonding time while you dig in the dirt, plant and harvest your own crops, and maybe grow beautiful flowers?

While youre learning interesting information about scienceare there other subjects that tie in?

The same sun rises and sets over the city as it does over the country. Plants need soil, water, and sunshine.

Got those three things in your schoolyard?

Yup, you do!

Too much asphalt and concrete?

Aboveground gardens in great big wooden boxes work. Parents can help you build em.

Why not set up a meeting with a teacher and/or principal to discuss the possibilities?

Make it happen.

To learn more about gardening and what you can do, visit www.kidsgardening.org, a website from the National Gardening Association.

WORKING TOGETHER, WE CAN MAKE A CHANGE!

Parent and teacher volunteers can help guide an effort to organize a food drive at your school. Contact a local food bank to find out what contributions would be the most helpful, get together a committee to make containers for the food, advertise with posters. Set a goaland work toward reaching it!

Considering becoming a vegetarian?

Why not share this bookand this chapter in particularwith your parent so you can discuss the pros and cons?

INTRO: VEGETARIAN FOOD PLANS There are lots of ways of being a vegetarian.

Generally speaking, being a vegetarian means that you dont eat red meat, fish and other seafood, pork, or poultry.

Many vegetarians do eat eggs and/or dairy products.

Modified vegetarians also include fish and other seafood in their plan.

VEGANSPLANTS TO THE MAX Vegans are vegetarians who dont eat any food that comes from an animal. Zero, none.

Vegans dont eat red meat, fish, other seafood, poultry, pork, eggs, dairy productsor honey, since honey is technically an animal product. (Some also avoid leather, wool, cashmere, beeswax, and all products that come from animals.) WHY BE A VEGETARIAN?

The reasons why people choose to be vegetarian vary. Some make the choice for cultural, religious, or philosophical reasons. Some do it because they feel its the healthiest eating planfor them and for our planet, to help prevent global warming.

A SERIOUS COMMITMENT Becoming a vegetarian during adolescence calls for a serious commitment. If youre up to the challenge, go for it.

If youre not, wait until you are.

Regardless of the motivation (or inspiration), being a vegetarian or a vegan works for adolescents only if you meet your nutritional needs for growth, metabolism, and physical activity.

MEETING YOUR NEEDS If you want to exclude all animal foods, like red meat, poultry, pork, eggs, fish and other seafood, and/or dairy, youll need to find substitutions for these foods because they are such excellent sources of nutrientsincluding calcium, iron, zinc, B vitamins, and complete protein (containing all of the essential amino acids that our bodies need).

Before eliminating animal sources of protein from your eating plan, you need to be completely sure of how to make the correct replacements.

WELL PLANNED A well-planned vegetarian or vegan eating pattern works for teensbut well and planned are the key words here.

Maybe your family, cultural, and religious traditions set you on a healthy vegetarian path years and years ago. If so, you will undoubtedly have a healthy eating pattern in place.

But if a vegetarian or vegan eating pattern is new to you, work with a registered dietitian or other health care professional who can guide you as you establish a pattern that conforms with healthy vegetarian principles and practices.

FAMILY AND PEER PRESSURE Its understandable that teens who become vegetarians face a certain amount of resistance from parents, grandparents, and peers.

Teens are often on the run. A poorly planned vegan eating pattern can set you up for nutritional deficiencies.

Quantity and quality of nutrients are the issuesand nutrients must be present in a form that is readily usable so that the body can absorb them effectively.

However, theres no reason why you cant win the support of your family and friendsby becoming fully aware of the responsibilities that go along with adopting a vegetarian eating plan and making (and keeping) a serious commitment to achieving a healthy eating routine.

1. PROTEIN Protein is basically about growth and cell repair.

A vegetarian plan that includes eggs and dairy products covers the protein requirement with no problem.

Good plant sources of protein for vegans include chickpeas (garbanzo beans), peanut butter, almonds, pumpkin seeds, quinoa, tofu, soy milk, and lentils and other legumes, as well as whole wheat bread and brown rice. But be aware that covering all of our protein needs requires that a variety of protein-containing foods be eaten throughout the day: brown rice and beans, for example.

2. ENERGY INTAKE All is good with a vegetarian plan, provided your nutritional requirements are metand you get enough energy to support growth.

An adolescent girl needs energy (calories) from a wide variety of sources rich in a variety of nutrients: three nutritious meals and one or two healthy snacks.

Carbohydrates found in whole grain foods, fruits, nuts, and legumes will keep your energy level right up there. So eat these throughout the day.

Most leafy vegetables arent energy dense (calorie rich), but lots of plant-based foods are. Beans, starchy vegetables, avocados, and nuts are examples of energy-dense vegan foods.

3. VITAMIN D Vitamin D just isnt found in plant foods at all unless they are fortified. During the spring and summer months, fifteen to thirty minutes of sunshine on your arms and legs, two to three days a week; a daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids or vitamin D supplement (if recommended by a doctor); and fortified/enriched foods like soy milk can bring vegans right up to speed in the vitamin D department.

4. CALCIUM If you drink 1 percent low-fat or skim milk and eat dairy products, youll cover your calcium requirement.

Vegan diets should include a variety of calcium-fortified foods like soy milk and tofu.

Other good sources of calcium for vegans are okra, sesame seeds, collard and turnip greens, soybeans, figs, tempeh, almond butter, broccoli, bok choy commercial soy yogurt, calcium-enriched breakfast cereals, and breads fortified with calcium.

Daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplements for kids only partly fulfill the calcium requirement. Vegan calcium supplements are available; check with your doctor.

5. IRON Plant foods that are good sources of iron include raisins, dried fruit, soybeans, lentils, black-eyed peas, blackstrap molasses, firm tofu, chickpeas (garbanzo beans), kidney beans, and pinto beans. Iron-fortified cereals and iron-fortified whole grain breads are also very good.

SUPERSLEUTH Oxalic acid found in spinach, chard, and beet greens reduces calcium absorption. These plant foods are absolutely great for youbut when considering dietary plant sources for calcium, include other dark green vegetables like broccoli or bok choy.

Daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplements for kids contain iron. Should you take one each day? Ask your doc.

6. VITAMIN B-12 Essential for healthy blood and healthy nerves, vitamin B-12 is found in animal foods, not plant foods. Please take special note of this.

Vegetarians eating no animal products need to consult with a doctor about taking a daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplement for kids and/or eating the right fortified foods to get the B-12 they need.

Vitamin B-12 deficiency (not enough of the vitamin over time) can cause severe anemia (see here) and irreversible damage to the nervous system. Symptoms dont appear right away because the body stores and recycles this vitamin for a while.

However, vitamin B-12 is plentiful in fortified foods: breakfast cereals (Grape-Nuts is a good one), fortified soy milk, B-12-fortified meat stand-in products, and vegetarian-support-formula nutritional yeast (for example, Red Star nutritional yeast).

Supersleuth: Look for cyanocobalamin on the ingredients list. Thats the form of vitamin B-12 thats best absorbed.

Tempeh, miso, and seaweed are often labeled as having lots of B-12, but the B-1 2 may have been changed by the processing. Dont rely on these.

7. ZINC Essential for growth, development, and a wide range of the bodys functions, zinc can be found in wheat germ, legumes, beans, nuts, tofu, seedsand daily (complete) multivitamin/multimineral supplements for kids.

VEGETARIAN VARIETY Mmmm-mmm! Hows this for variety? Stir-fried veggies, fortified whole grain breakfast cereals, seeds, multigrain toast, three-bean salad, dates, apples, macaroni, fruit smoothies, popcorn, spaghetti, vegetarian baked beans, vegetarian refried beans, pumpkin seeds, tortillas, tofu lasagna, guacamole, meatless chili, hummus, corn chowder, muffins with fruit spread, pasta salad, sandwiches with white bean pt and lemon and garlic, vegetable soup, rice pudding, fava beans, banana muffins, sunflower seeds, spinach pie, eggless French toast and pancakes made with soy milk, collards, black beans with marinated tomatoes, bean burritos, flavored brown rice, meatless spaghetti sauce, sesame tahini, grilled marinated vegetables, grape leaves, cantaloupe, eggplant spreads, mustard greens, turnip greens, bok choy, textured vegetable protein, blackstrap molasses, apple juice, V8 juice, olive oil, falafel, corn fritters, soy hot dogs, veggie burgers  SAMPLE VEGAN DINNER (Get permission before using the stove, and if you need help from your parent, do ask for it.) Brown rice, maybe seasoned with herbs and lemon and sprinkled with chopped nuts or sunflower seeds, salad, beans, and fruit.

Brown rice takes about forty minutes to cook, so plan ahead. Follow the directions on the package.

While the rice is cooking, make a crisp, colorful salad with tomatoes, radishes, green onions, carrots, peppers, avocados, and a couple of different kinds of leafy green lettuce-topped with kidney beans, chickpeas (garbanzo beans), and sunflower seeds.

Dressing? How about olive oil and vinegar, a little salt and pepper? Thats simple. (Use one tablespoon of vinegar for every three tablespoons of olive oil.) EASY VINAIGRETTE DRESSING 1 tablespoon of vinegar (white wine, balsamic) for every 3 tablespoons of extra-virgin olive oil 1 teaspoon of French mustard (optional) Put the vinegar olive oil, and French mustard in a small jar with a cover Cover tightly and shake until all ingredients are combined. Season with salt or soy sauce and pepper.

Vegetarian refried beans conveniently come in a can. Just heat em up when the rice is almost done. Put the rice and beans right next to each other on a plate. Pile on some salad or cooked vegetables. Pretty!

Munch an apple or savor an orange for dessert.

(Well be right over!) Want more information and ideas about a vegetarian eating plan?

Check out: The Vegetarian Resource Group www.vrg.org No thanks.

Leaving food out of the fridge for too long, undercooking food, microwaving food unevenly, cooking or reheating food at too low a temperature, thawing/marinating food on the counter instead of in the fridge, keeping leftovers too long in the fridge, cooling large quantities of food the wrong way, having the wrong refrigerator/freezer temperature setting, overstuffing the fridge so it doesnt work right, eating from unclean plates and utensils, and preparing food on unclean countertops or with unclean hands are all common causes of food-borne illness.

WHAT ARE FOOD-BORNE ILLNESSES?

Bacteria and viruses are way too small to see, and theyre everywhere. Most bacteria are harmless to humans. Some of them are actually helpful to humans.

But some of them are up to no good, and those are the ones were talking about here: the weasels responsible for food-borne illnesses (illnesses you get from food).

Food-borne illnesses are caused by our bodies becoming invaded by certain germsbacteria and virusesor by little critters called parasites. Illnesses may also be caused by toxins (poisons) produced by bacteria contained in food.

Parasites take up residence in our digestive systems and/or other organs and happily live there until we can drive them out with medications. We avoid getting them in the first place by killing them through heat or by washing them off what were about to eatbefore we eat it.

GERMS Happily, we do have our own built-in germ patrol (the immune system). Our immune system is set up to zap bacteria, viruses, and other teeny invaders that get into our bloodstream or infect the lining of our gastrointestinal tract.

When disease-causing bacteria and viruses come on too strong, they make us sick until our immune systems can beat them back and/or kill them off completely.

SYMPTOMS Sometimes people with food-borne illness think they have the flu, but they dont. Theyre sick, sick, sick from some lousy food or drink they inadvertently consumed.

One famous and very unpleasant symptom of certain food-borne illnesses is the Green Apple Two-step, better known as diarrhea.

Other symptoms may include vomiting, headache, fever, cramping, and utter exhaustion. But symptoms vary. And they can occur within a half hour of eating contaminated food or they can show up days, or even weeks, later.

Food-borne illness can especially be a problem for pregnant women, infants, old people, and people whose bodies cant fight infection very well (see here).

LIQUIDS NEED TO BE DRUNK   to replace fluids lost through vomiting and/or diarrhea. When symptoms are severe (bloody diarrhea, excessive nausea and vomiting, high fever), food-borne illness can become a medical emergency. Get medical help, pronto.

In some cases, a medical professional will need to figure out what kind of germs or critters are involved and exactly what medication to use to get rid of em. So preserve the evidence. If the suspect food is still available, wrap it, mark it DANGER, and freeze it. Save all packaging materials. You may be asked to make these things available for testing and/or alerting the public.

Also: If the food was served at a large gathering, a restaurant, or a food-service facility, or if it is a commercial product, call your local public health department.

ESPECIALLY WATCH OUT FOR THE LITTLE ONES If a baby in your care develops vomiting or diarrhea, notify a responsible adult and call the pediatrician! Dehydration (loss of fluids) in infants can become a life-threatening medical emergency.

1. THE FOOD IS PREPARED IN AN UNCLEAN MANNER AND GERMS FROM THE ENVIRONMENT OR FROM THE COOKS HANDS GET ONTO IT.

Separate raw, cooked, and ready-to-eat foods while shopping for, preparing, and storing them.

Wash your hands with soap and water after using the bathroom, changing a diaper, or playing with your pets. Count to thirtyslowlyas you wash. Rinse well.

Have a cut or sore on your hand? If you cant cover it effectively, dont prepare food for others. (You need plastic gloves to be effective, since cloth gets wet and becomes unprotective.) Wash your hands (as above) before preparing and serving food. Prepare and serve food on clean surfaces and with clean kitchen utensils. Germs have a field day on sponges and dishcloths; end the jamboree by replacing sponges often and washing dishcloths in hot soapy water in the washing machine.

Opening a can? First, rinse off the top in running water to keep dirt from getting into the food.

Wash your hands very well (as above) after handling raw meat, poultry, fish or other seafood, or eggs. Also: Dont let germs from raw food get onto ready-to-eat food by way of contaminated utensils, dishes, pans, or countertops. Dont rinse raw meat or poultry. It spreads the germs. Wash anything that comes in contact with raw meat, poultry, fish or other seafood, or eggs with hot soapy waterimmediately Use separate cutting boards for meats and fruits/veggies.

2. GERMS AND/OR PARASITES ARE IN THE FOOD RIGHT FROM THE GET-GO.

Raw meat, poultry, fish or other seafood, and eggs arent sterile (germ-free) or parasite-free when we buy them from the store. We have to make them germ- and parasite-free by cooking them at a high-enough temperature to kill the little beasts.

Germs also lurk in unpasteurized (un-heat-treated) dairy products, untreated juicesand raw bean and alfalfa sprouts!

Fruits and vegetables arent completely clean, either.

CAREFULLY WASH FRESH FRUITS AND FRESH VEGETABLES UNDER RUNNING WATER BEFORE EATING THEM.

When appropriate, you can use a little veggie brush to get dirt out of the crevices! Dont eat raw sprouts.

DRINK AND EAT JUICE AND DAIRY PRODUCTS, INCLUDING MILK, CHEESE, AND YOGURT, THAT ARE PASTEURIZED (HEAT TREATED).

COOK MEAT, POULTRY, FISH, AND EGGS AT A HIGH-ENOUGH TEMPERATURE. COOK EGGS UNTIL YOLK AN D WHITE ARE FIRM.

If you dont already own a food thermometer (different from the kind of thermometer people use to check for a fever!), put one on the familys shopping list.

FOLLOW MICROWAVING TEMPERATURE INSTRUCTIONS ON THE PACKAGE; COVER, TURN, AND STIR IF NECESSARY SO FOOD COOKS EVENLY. (DONT PUT METALINCLUDING FOIL-IN THE MICROWAVE.) 3. GERMS ARE THERE BECAUSE THE FOOD IS ALREADY SPOILED.

Check expiration dates before you buy and/or eat packaged food. And be aware that certain foods deteriorate even if theyve been refrigerated and packaged properly.

Recommended Safe Cooking Temperatures For certain groups of people, including pregnant women, there are additional food safety recommendations. See here.

These food temperatures are for home use.

They are not intended for processing, institutional, or food-service preparation.

Adapted from: US Department of Agriculture Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2000.

PREVENTION Green mystery fuzz? Liquid lettuce? Yup. Weve all seen it. The outer limit for keeping leftovers in the fridge is three days. Some things need to be eaten upor thrown outsooner. If in doubt, throw it out. Smelling wont give you any answers, since some spoiled food smells fine.

Nononono! Dont taste test food that you think might be a goner. What if youre right?

Some bacteria produce bad chemicals that are not destroyed by cooking, even though the bacteria will be. So cooking at a high temperature isnt going to solve the problem. Food that is spoiled should be thrown out!

4. GERMS ARE THERE BECAUSE THE FOOD HAS LINGE RED TOO LONG IN THE DANGER ZONE!

Yuptheres a temperature range that disease-causing bacteria just love. To prove it, they multiply, multiply, and multiply more. The danger zone is from 40 degrees to 140 degrees Fahrenheit (F).

Foods left in the danger zone for more than two hours, or one hour in temperatures over 90 degrees, may make people really sick. Picnickers and barbecuers, beware! Use those icy coolers!

PREVENTION When keeping cooked food hot, the food needs to be continuously kept at a temperature above 140 degrees F.

Leftover foods (or foods that have been cooked and cooled) should be reheated to at least 165 degrees F. (Hot!) And: When reheating food in the oven, crank the oven temperature up to at least 325 degrees until the food reaches an internal temp of 165 degrees F.

Cold food needs to be kept chilledbelow forty degrees F. (Cold!) Your fridge should be set at 39 degrees F or below.

Within two hours, or within one hour if the outside (or inside) temperature is 90 degrees F or above, put leftovers in the fridge, in the freezer, or in a cooler well stocked with ice or commercial freezing gels.

Divide large amounts of leftovers into small, shallow containers for quick cooling in the fridge. Maximum depth (and thickness): two inches. Slice meats and refrigerate; dont just shove the whole roast (or turkey) in.

Dont partially cook food with the plan of finishing the job later. This increases the risk of bacteria growing in it.

Check out package and jar labels to see how food is supposed to be stored. (Mayo, hot sauce, and ketchup, once opened, need to be kept in the fridge.) Transfer canned foods into plastic containers for storage in the fridge.

Dont stuff that refrigerator! Air needs to circulate for the system to work right.

Marinate and thaw food in the fridge, not on the counter. Or thaw it in the microwave, using the defrost settingthen cook it right away.

You can also defrost frozen food in cold running water or submerged in cold water with cold water running over it fast enough to break up and float off loose particles in an overflow.

FOOD SAFETY UPDATES Food safety information is continuously being updated. And there are extra food safety recommendations for special groups, including pregnant women. The additional recommendations are critically important for mothers-to-be, their developing babies, and newborns! Before shopping for or preparing food for someone who is pregnant, call the Food and Drug Administrations food information line at 1-888-723-3366.

Specialists are available from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. (Eastern Standard Time) Monday through Friday. They can provide advice and information.

Or you can visit FoodSafety.gov at www.foodsafety.gov There is detailed, up-to-date information on the website.

LAST BUT NOT LEAST Please wash your hands before you eat. If you cannot, use alcohol-containing sanitizing gels that kill bacteria.

REUSABLE BAGS Reusable bags can pick up germs and get moldy Wash them and keep them clean. If you cannot wash them regularly, it is safest to stick with paper or plastic bags from the grocery store, then recycle them.

There is a growing national campaign to bring more grocery stores and other food retailers to underserved urban and rural communities across the United States. The goal is to make sure everyone has access to fresh, healthy, affordable food.

LETS MOVE Your parent may want to join the national campaign to help kids be more physically active and make healthy, affordable food available in every part of our country: www.letsmove.gov.

DO YOU SOMETIMES RUN OUT OF FOOD AT HOME?

Local food banks, listed in the phone book, provide food for families throughout the United States. Or have your parent contact Feeding America: www.feedingamerica.org, toll-free phone: 1-800-771-2203.

Eligible families can get additional assistance through government programs. You may want to share the info on here with your parent.

When it comes to shopping for food, from the corner store to the supermarket, nutritious choices can be found.

You can use The Cactus Plan shopping list on here to help guide your choices.

Check it out. (Fine to copy it.) READY TO GO?

Whether its your list or ours, do take a few minutes to make out some kind of shopping list before you go to the store. Then youll get what you actually need.

Tank up on a glass of water and have a nutritious snack. That way you wont be starving and dying of thirst and tempted to choose icy soft drinks or buy sugary treats or other snacks that are expensive and low in nutritional value.

FOOD SAFETY SHOPPING TIPS Perishable refers to food that spoils relatively quickly at room temperature. So its kept refrigerated or frozen in the storelike dairy products and chicken.

When you shop, pick out perishable foods last. That way theyll stay cooler longer, since theyll be chillin in the refrigerator cases while you shop for the other things you need.

After shopping, youll need to get the perishable stuff into your fridge, pronto. Plan your day accordingly.

BUYING CANNED FOODS?

Check each can to make sure that it isnt dented. Or bulging! A bulging can is evidence that the food inside has spoiled and bacteria are producing some kind of stinko gas. (Likewise, if you open a can with a can opener and it hisses at youuh, dont even think about eating whats inside. Throw the whole can out!) Is the can sticky? Good griefdont buy it. It may be leaking.

To help others, please point it out to a store employee.

BUYING FOOD IN JARS?

Check to make sure the jar isnt cracked and that the lid isnt bulging or loose. Jars need to remain well sealed for food to stay fresh.

BUY EGGS THAT ARE REFRIGERATED Open the box first and check to make sure the eggs arent cracked or broken.

BUYING DAIRY?

Check the use by or sell by date on cartons of milk, cream, cottage cheese, cream cheese, yogurt, sour cream, etc. Pick the ones that will stay freshest the longest and dont buy any whose expiration dates have passed or will pass before youll use them up.

Remember: Buy only pasteurized dairy products. (Check the label.) BUYING FROZEN POULTRY, FISH, SEAFOOD, OR LEAN MEAT?

Take only packages that are below the freezers frost line (not the ones sitting on top). If you can see into the package, check for signs of ice or frost, because this could mean that the contents have thawed and refrozen. Dont buy packages that are open, torn, or crushed.

PUT RAW MEAT, POULTRY, FISH, AND SEAFOOD IN SEPARATE PLASTIC BAGS Find a place in your cart where juices from the meat, fish, and poultry packages cant drip on your other food.

OKAY. LETS HIT IT.

Fruits and vegetables. Whats in season?

Head to the fresh produce section and get ready to pinch.

Be aware that some fruits continue to ripen after being picked; plums, peaches, and apricots are examples. Others dont continue to ripen once plucked from the plant; strawberries and oranges are examples.

Frozen and canned vegetables are convenient and nutritionally sound alternatives to fresh produce. Canned beans are a fast way to up the beans and legumes in your daily plan. Ask your family to stock them. When buying canned fruit, look for those with natural juices, not syrup.

Load up your cart.

LOCALLY GROWN Buying locally grown fruits and vegetables supports local farmers; this is great. Theyre also dependably fresh and deliciousalthough sometimes a little more expensive than produce grown on a grander scale.

Lots of people think its worth a little extra money to buy locally grown fruits and vegetables.

Have a weekly farmers market in your area? Take a field trip there with your family and friends.

Enjoy some quality time together, out in the fresh air, as you pick up a few days worth of fresh, crisp fruits and vegetables in rainbow colors.

Buying a combination of fresh, frozen (if you have the freezer space), and canned and jarred fruits and veggies may be best.

Frozen fruits and vegetables may actually contain more nutrients than fresh ones, since certain nutrients begin to break down during the time it takes to transport, display, and sell the produce.

Flash-frozen fruits and vegetables are fantastic; the nutrients are instantly frozen in time and released when you thaw them.

Some canned foodsand foods in jarsactually have increased nutrients. The process includes heating them, and in some cases, heating releases antioxidants and other chemicalswhich are very heart-friendly little guys. Also, sometimes nutrients are added to the food by the manufacturer.

Theres also the matter of fresh vegetables just plain losing it while theyre sitting around waiting for you to eat them!

How fast can a bowl of fresh peaches get fuzzy on you; how soon do those bananas spot up and get soft?

KEY WORDS: WHOLE GRAIN, CALCIUM FORTIFIED, FORTIFIED, ENRICHED Take advantage of these little words. They mean good things to you, especially in foods that are minimally processed.

F.Y.I.

Wheat flour isnt whole grain flour Whole wheat flour is.

KEY WORDS: 100 PERCENT FRUIT JUICE Drinks labeled fruit juice drink, fruit flavored drink, fruit punch, or fruitade usually consist of water, water, and water, loads of sugarand a small percentage of juice.

Check out the labelthe law says it has to reveal the percentage of actual juice content. Five percent juice? Thirty-five percent juice? Go for the ones that say 100 percent juice, and limit to six ounces (3/4 cup) per day.

If you want, you can take it home and stretch it by adding your own water and ice. Delicious!

KEY WORD: ORGANIC Natural isnt the same as organic. An organic food label is very specific: It certifies that the way the food is grown complies with regulations set up by the government. Organic food is great, but not essential. Food doesnt have to be organic to be good for you. FYI: Sustainable agriculture refers to producing food with the goal of preserving land for future generations, being fair to labor, being healthy for consumers, being humane to animals, and being profitable to farmers and farming communities.

Other practices you may see noted on food labels may include raising poultry with freedom to roam outside, raising livestock that can graze in pastures, catching fish without harming the species or ecosystem, and growing coffee under shady trees.

F.Y.I.

Organic foods are great but not essential. Dont stress if your produce isnt organically grown.

KEY WORDS: LOW-FAT Good words in the dairy sectionbut not necessarily words that signal a nutritional advantage otherwise. Your goal is to moderate fat intake.

Fat-free? Why go there? Many fat-free products are loaded with sugar or refined carbs. And remember that good plant fats like olive, canola, soybean, corn, sesame, sunflower, or peanut oil can help you feel more satisfied with your meals.

KEY WORDS: PARTIALLY HYDROGENATED VEGETABLE OILS These are trans fat tip-off words (see here). Trans fats lurk in large amounts in vegetable shortening, stick (hard) margarine, pound cake, and microwave popcorn. Okay occasionally, but try to minimize these.

Check the ingredients lists (see here).

Dont have access to a supermarket? Not everybody does. If your neighborhood convenience store or corner market is the only store close to where you live, you can shop there for nutritious food.

ADVOCATE!

If you dont find the foods you want, ask the storekeepers to start stocking them. Speak up. Let them know there is a demand!

FRUIT GROUP You might see apples and oranges, since they last a long time and the convenience store owner doesnt have to worry so much about their going bad before somebodyyou, we hopesnaps them up.

Canned and dried fruit, including canned (or jarred) applesauce, is also good stuffand its usually available.

Youll also be able to locate canned fruit juice and bottled 100 percent fruit juice in the aisles and containers of cold 100 percent fruit juice in the refrigerator case. Its key that the juice be labeled 100 percent fruit juice (see here). Remember, its better to get your fruit from whole fruit than from juice.

JIFFY LUNCH: LOW-FAT COTTAGE CHEESE AN D FRUIT How about canned fruit on top of low-fat cottage cheese for breakfast, lunch, or dinner? Cottage cheese is in the dairy case. If you can, choose fruit thats sweetened in its own juice rather than heavy syrup.

VEGETABLE GROUP Convenience stores usually dont have many fresh vegetables. Sometimes you can find a few tomatoes or carrots and possibly a sad-looking head of lettuce.

Canned vegetables? If you like em, thats what counts. You should be able to find green beans and a few other veggies in cans. Go for low sodium. Or head for the low-sodium canned soups that have vegetables in em, like minestrone soup. Or get frozen vegetables instead. Some convenience stores have them!

Vegetable juice can be found in the cold drinks caselike low-sodium V8, and thats a good choice.

Tomatoes are fantastic for youfull of vitamins, minerals, and heart-lovin chemicals. Tomatoes can be found in lots of foods that are canned and jarred (low-sodium pizza sauce or pasta sauce).

Be on the lookout.

Does a blob of ketchup count as a serving of vegetables? No, it doesntbut ketchup still is fine for you as a taste booster because it contains our real nutritional starlet: tomato.

WHOLE GRAINS GROUP: BREAD, CEREAL, RICE, AND PASTA Bread? If you have the choice, go for 100 percent whole grain bread. And you may be able to snag a box of multigrain or whole wheat crackers, preferably made without partially hydrogenated oils. See any whole grain tortillas?

Cereal? Cereal boxes that brag about being enriched or fortified on the front or back are a good bet as long as theyre not loaded with added sugar. Stone ground, whole grain, and high fiber are also key words to find on the package. Look for cereals with at least four grams of fiber and no more than eight grams of sugar.

A bowl of whole grain cereal with 1 percent low-fat or skim milk (and a little fresh or canned fruit thrown on top, when handy) is a universal fast meal. Or head for the (unsweetened) oatmeal. Its relatively inexpensive and easy to prepare, and it will make you feel happily full.

Rice? Brown rice is whole grain and white isntand you may not find brown in a convenience store. Ask the storekeeper to start stocking quick and convenient brown rice. Rice and (canned) beans are a delicious, nutritious combo.

Pasta? Pasta is a good standby especially whole grain pasta. As an alternative to tomato-based pasta sauce, frozen vegetables can be thrown together with pasta, olive oil, basil, and grated Parmesan cheese.

PLANT OILS GROUP Canola oil, olive oil, corn oil, peanut oil, sunflower oil, safflower oil, sesame seed oil, and soybean oil can probably be spotted.

LEAN ANIMAL PROTEIN GROUP: POULTRY, FISH, SEAFOOD, EGGS, AND LEAN RED MEAT Sliced deli meats in plastic packets are often available in the refrigerated section; turkey and chicken are good choices. Check the expiration date to make sure these havent expired before buying.

Eggs are in the dairy case. Theyre a great, affordable source of protein.

Have you ever eaten scrambled eggs topped with salsa, rolled up in a whole grain tortilla? If youre allowed to use the stove, try em this way.

NUTS AND BEANS (AND OTHER LEGUMES) GROUP Canned beans abound. Hunt them down. Rinse before eating them to get rid of excess salt.

No convenience store is complete without nuts and sunflower seeds. Sunflower seeds are a great snack, but goshtheyre so little!

Nuts are usually found by the chips, in small packages near the cashier, or on the ends of aisles. Expensive? Maybe. But theyre more filling than chips and other snacks.

Youll also undoubtedly be able to locate peanut butter. More nuts for your bucks! Hopefully, you can find a jar that doesnt have partially hydrogenated oil listed in the ingredients.

How about canned lentil soup? A tasty and easy way to get your legumes.

LOW-FAT DAIRY GROUP Go to the dairy case. There you will find 1 percent low-fat or skim milk, low-fat cottage cheese, low-fat or nonfat yogurt, and skim milk cheese (like string cheese).

Dont drink milk? Head to the juice case, where you will probably be able to find fruit juice thats marked calcium fortified.

START COOKING Cooking is a great way to learn about whole foods and cut back the amount of highly processed foods in your diet. Cooking is fun!

Look for your favorite quick vegetable recipes from the web. Get your family to try them out. See which recipe they like the most. Become the vegetable chef for the family!

A SPECIAL NOTE Is your family unable to shop for healthy food for financial reasons? Do you sometimes feel like you dont have enough to eat at homeor in school? Government assistance is available for eligible applicants. It depends on the circumstances. Your parent can find out if your family qualifies by contacting: NATIONAL SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAM (NSLP): www.fns.usda.gov/cnd/lunch/ Phone: 1-703-305-2286 Or call your school for information.

SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (SNAP): www.fns.usda.gov/snap Phone: 1-800-221-5689 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.

portal.hud.gov/portal/page/portal/HUD/topics/homelessness Phone: 1-202-708-1112 TTY: 1-202-708-1455 As you stroll around the store, you may want to check out the food labels and ingredients lists on the packages of foods youre considering buying.

A little in-aisle, on-the-spot comparison shopping is a way of building your knowledge base.

WHATS UP WITH FOOD LABELS?

A food label, also known as a nutrition facts label, tells you information about the food that is considered extremely important from a nutritional standpoint.

DONT NOODLE No need to tally and count like a madwoman. If you find yourself obsessing over food labels, stop reading them.

Dont stress.

If you are following The Cactus Plan (see here) recommendations for three nutritious meals, (breakfast, lunch, and dinner) and a couple of healthy snacks in between, youll be fine in the protein, carb, fat, vitamin, minerals, fiber, and calorie departments.

INGREDIENTS LIST This is different from the nutrition facts label. The ingredients list tells you every last thing inside the package: E-V-E-R-Y-T-H-I-N-G. If you have food allergies, check the ingredients list on food packaging so you can know what foods to avoid.

By law, all of the ingredients in a package must be listedand listed in a specific order. The first ingredient on the products list must be the ingredient that there is most of by weight. Then the rest must follow in descending order by weight. The ingredients at the end of the list are the least abundant.

FOOD LABELS FOR BEGINNERS Sometimes we casually check food labels out of boredom while we are eating or drinking something.

Or we check them out after were done.

At some point, you may want to pay closer attention to food labels, and if you do, keep in mind their purpose: to help make sure were getting enough nutrients and fiberand not too much heart-unfriendly fat, cholesterol, or sodium.

F.Y.I. SCAN FOR SODIUM We need sodium, but most of us get too much. Processed food tends to be high in salt, and sodium amounts can vary widely from brand to brand. Scan the food label and look for processed foods that have no more than 300 milligrams of sodium per serving.

LEARN IN STAGES For now, just get a feel for the territory.

Understanding daily value is key: Daily value (DV) is the amount of each nutrient (and fiber) an adult would want to shoot for in a day, based on a 2,000-calorie plan. (For the purpose of learning to use food labels, you can pretend to be an adult.) Its based on percentages. One hundred percent in a day covers it for each category.

When you want to increase a nutrient or dietary fiber, go for foods with a DV of 20 percent or higher per serving.

When you want to limit somethinglike saturated fat, cholesterol, and sodiumgo for foods that have 5 percent or less DV per serving.

WHATS A SERVING?

Five chips, ten chips, two cookies, twenty fish crackers?

It depends!

Check out the serving sizes and servings per container at the top of the label. But note that the serving size on a nutrition facts label may not be the same as a serving size in The Cactus Plan. For example, The Cactus Plan counts half a cup of cooked pasta as a servingbut a nutrition facts label may count one cup of pasta as a serving.

HOW TO UNDERSTAND AND USE THE NUTRITION FACTS LABEL (Remember: Checking out food labels is totally optional. But it can help you make better nutritional choices, become a smarter shopper, and get the most nutritional value out of the dollars you spend!) WANT TO CHECK OUT CALCIUM, IRON, AND SATURATED/TRANS FAT?

CALCIUM Since calcium is such a key mineral for girls in the growth spurt, why not check food labels on dairy products, calcium-fortified orange juice, calcium-fortified soy and rice milkand other packaged foodsto see how youre doing in the calcium department?

IRON Yes, yes, yes. Girls do need iron, no doubt about it. And you can easily scout it out because many packaged foods are fortified with iron.

Food labels can help you figure out how to reach your goal of 100 percent. Check for iron listed on the label of, say, a ready-to-eat whole grain cereal box. If it says Iron: 50%, it means one serving of the cereal would get you about halfway there.

SNACKS AND SATURATED FAT/TRANS FAT Got the munchies?

Craving a little packaged something?

Choosing snacks with less than 5 percent DV of saturated fat (see here) per serving can contribute toward keeping your saturated fat intake in a healthy range over time.

As stated at the bottom of the Nutrition Facts label (here), at the level of 2,000 calories a day, no more than twenty grams (or 10 percent of calories) should come from SATURATED FATS. As a matter of fact, THE LESS SATURATED FATS, THE BETTER! And zero trans fat is best!

Want to increase your food label knowledge? Log on to www.cfsan.fda.gov/label.html.

So heres how it works: One glass of 1 percent low-fat or skim milk and one cup of yogurt along with 1/4 cup of firm (calcium-set) tofu would satisfy the adult daily requirement, because 35 percent DV plus 35 percent DV plus 35 percent DV adds up to over 100 percent DV: 35 + 35 + 35 = 105 See? Its a math problem.

Actually, the calcium requirement of an adolescent girl is a little higher than for an adult under fifty years old. Yogurt, cheese, almond butter, white beans, sesame tahini, calcium-fortified foods and drinks, and (if recommended by your doctor) a calcium supplement can help you reach your daily goal (see here).

Physical activity can boost self-esteem, improve your self-image, lower stress, help relieve depression, reduce anxious feelings, get you out in the sunshineand help keep your energy input and output in balance.

And more. Sustained (which means continuous) moderate to vigorous physical activity can do all of the above, plus strengthen your heart! See The Cactus Plan recommendations on here.

Remember that weight-bearing physical activityactivity that involves carrying weight (including the weight of your body)can help build strong bones. Muscle-strengthening physical activityactivity that involves making your muscles work a bit harder than usualis also important.

Being physically active can reduce your chances of developing health problems now and as an adult.

What kinds of problems? Now: Obesity (which is weighing way more than whats recommended for a persons height) and type 2 diabetes. Later: heart disease, brittle and weak bones, and certain kinds of cancers.

Lets put healthy eating and physical activity patterns in place!

ABOUT NOW Physical activity helps you create and maintain a powerful presence: energy, strength, focus, athletic ability, confidenceand the sense of well-being and self-esteem you naturally acquire when your body operates at peak performance.

It helps you build and maintain a positive self-image and an upbeat attitude.

Being fit helps you perform better in school.

It also enables you to do physical work, play sports, dance fast, exerciseand move your body from place to place without getting tired.

Training your body to function at more active levels makes it stronger and more productive during physical activity. It helps you build and maintain strong bones, muscles, and joints.

It helps improve balance, agility (the ability to move quickly with skill and control), power, reaction time, speed, and coordination.

BEING FIT IS FANTASTIC!

Physical activity includes play, dance, games, sports, house and yard cleaning, transporting yourself from place to place, recreation, PEor other planned exercise in the context of family, school, and/or community activities.

Being physically active isnt a chore, and its not something to get through, not something you assign yourself to do out of a sense of guilt.

The key is to identify ways of being active that you really look forward to, that you totally enjoy.

Its fun!

It feels good!

Those are the two best reasons to go for it! Heres another one: It keeps energy input in balance with energy output.

To recap, energy output is about growth, metabolism, and physical activity.

Growth and metabolism just happen. Physical activity?

We have some guidelines for you.

THE CACTUS PLANS GUIDELINES FOR PHYSICAL ACTIVITY REMINDER: If you are extremely overweight or underweight or have other health considerations, talk to your doctor about personalizing an activity plan just for youbefore you start (or change) your physical activity routine.

1. PARTICIPATE IN SAFE, SUPERVISED PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES THAT ENABLE YOU TO ACCUMULATE (ADD UP) AT LEAST AN HOUR OR MORE OF MODERATE OR VIGOROUS EXERCISE EVERY DAY You can estimateloosely tally your time up during the course of the day Its natural to alternate bursts of activity with brief periods of rest.

Romping around outside with your family playing supervised outdoor games and sports, participating in PE classes, shooting hoops, playing badminton, bicycling, or walking briskly with a parent all qualify. Vigorous activity causes you to breathe harder, makes you sweat, and causes your heart to beat faster (see below). Make sure to include this three days a week.

2. 3 DAYS OR MORE A WEEK, SOME OF YOUR HOUR (ABOVE) SHOULD BE MUSCLE-STRENGTHENING ACTIVITY; 3 OR MORE DAYS A WEEK, SOME OF YOUR HOUR SHOULD BE BONE-STRENGTHENING ACTIVITY. See here FOR MORE INFORMATION ON BONE-STRENGTHENING ACTIVITY; see here FOR MORE INFORMATION ON MUSCLE-STRENGTHENING ACTIVITY.

You may need to work up to this goal slowly. And thats okayin fact, its the right way to begin. No pain, no gain? Wrong. There is no need for exercise to be painful.

ENJOYMENT IS ESSENTIAL Figure out fun ways of being really activeactivities that can get you breathing hard, make you sweat, and make your heart beat faster. These are called vigorous activities. It makes sense that if you love doing them, youll be motivated to keep on doing them! Why not make exercising a family event? Its fun!

Dancing counts, so turn up the radio and dance with yourself in the mirror. So does jumping rope. (Double Dutch? How vigorous is that!) Talk to your parents about playing tennis, soccer, or hockey with you; or roller-skating, in-line skating, swimming laps, or joining an aerobics class together. Get back in touch with the little kid in you who loves to run and skip, jump and play.

TELL ME AGAIN: SO WHATS THE PAYOFF? YOU ASK Its huge. Along with improving fitness, theres a laundry list of other benefits from being physically active: CRAZY EIGHT GREAT PAYOFF LIST 1. Physical activity elevates the mood and relieves stress.

2. Its fun to be activeget in on it!

3. There are huge social perksthe potential to make new friends and spending time with friends are two of them.

4. You can learn and improve skillsvery personally satisfying. And who knows how far youll want to take it? A place on the team? An athletic scholarship to college? It happens all the time.

5. Staying in shape feels really good physicallywhich translates into feeling good all over.

6. Physical activity improves your appearance. How? Feeling really good is linked with looking your best.

7. You can increase your strength, endurance, and flexibility This is fantastic for all sportsincluding noncompetitive sports. An Olympic medal? Maybe its in the stars for you. Dont count anything out.

8. You can keep your energy intake (calorie intake)/energy output in balance more easily when you are consistently physically active.

AND!

When you limit inactivity.

HUH?

Video games, TVs, computers, car pooling, riding the bus. What do these things have in common?

You guessed it: Sitting on the derriere.

The sorry fact is that we sit sit sit for hours and hours and hours and hours!

Every day.

Were not designed for this.

CHILLIN LIKE A VILLAIN?

The Cactus Plan advises you to: limit TV watching (and screen timemeaning video game playing and computer use) to two hours a day.

UH???!?!?@?@#!??

Sorry, but if you stare at a screen for hours each day, you exercise your imagination less and spend less quality time with family and friends and less time developing your talents, interests, and intellect. And guess what.

Parking in front of a TV or computer for hours each day puts you at risk for becoming unfit.

Not moving around enough can cause you to lose flexibility strength, and cardiovascular (heart) fitness over time. The goal is to gain flexibility and strength and endurance over time!

THE SCREEN TIME TRAP Plus, when youre watching TV all day long, youre missing out on doing other activities that are more creative.

And personally satisfying.

And esteem building, which means feeling good about yourself.

So excessive TV viewing works against mental fitness, and the force of advertising lures you to eat and drink more of the unhealthy choices unconsciously.

It isnt satisfying for your spirit to fall into the TV trap, especially not nowat the time when your mind and body are all about growing and changing and exploring the world. Choose a couple of your favorite programs to watch alone or with your familyand skip the rest.

HERES THE KICKER Humans are designed to move throughout the day. Thats whats natural.

Watching TV throws off your balance regarding your intake of food (calories) and your natural output of energy.

1. Lounging around in front of the TV uses way less energy than doing just about anything else (except sleeping, maybe).

2. Not only are you not moving (unless you count an occasional blink), but you might just also be mindlessly turbo snacking.

3. While you are watching TV, your food choices are being influenced by lots of bogus ads.

Certain food advertisements have the goal of getting us to eat larger quantities than we want or need, to eat more often than we want or need, and to eat when were not hungry.

Ads often feature beautiful, popular people grubbing gargantuan feasts of fast food dressed with mayo and slugging down soft drinks by the gallonsas if we could (and should) be doing this.

AS IF It goes without saying that this approach to marketing has everything to do with $$$$$, may have little to do with nutrition, and is completely idiotic. But youve got a brain and can use it.

SPEAKING OF WHICH  Sure, its fun to just veg out sometimes in front of the TV. But sometimes its good to elevate the level of the info.

Public broadcasting stations (PBS) have programs that challenge your dome and have no ads.

Documentary films, wildlife programs, programs about books and music and art and science and history and geography and geology can be so fascinating.

How about tuning in to a cooking show and watching it with your parent? Get out that pencil and paper. Youll learn about cooking and get great new ideas for meals and snacks.

Maybe you and your parent will see something so scrumptious, youll be inspired to add the ingredients to your shopping list and make immediate plans to cook it together!

Remember: Youre growing intellectually, which is all about your ability to think, reason, and understand. TV can be part of that process when you bump it up a notch or two.

DENIAL IS A RIVER IN EGYPT So be honest with yourself. About how long are you spending watching TV every day?

Estimate.

Once you confront the true time factor, you (and only you) can make a necessary adjustment.

Set some limits for yourself.

You can!

TEXTING Texting represents one method of communication. It shouldnt replace actual conversations, which are essential to developing and maintaining relationships.

GETTING IT STRAIGHT Okay. So physical activity is any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that results in energy expenditure. This includes things you do all day longgoing up and down stairways, walking into the bathroom, and even brushing your teeth.

Exercise is any kind of physical activity that is planned, structured, or repetitive. So exercise is also physical activity. But it includes stuff like jumping rope for five minutes straight or taking a few laps around the track to get your heart beating fasteron purpose.

Physical fitness is a set of attributes (characteristics) that is either health related or skill related.

Health-related fitness includes cardiovascular endurance, muscular strength and endurance, and flexibility and body composition.

Skill-related fitness includes balance, agility, power, reaction time, speed, and coordination. These skills improve as we participate in physical activities like games, sports (both noncompetitive and competitive), exercise programs, and recreational (for pleasure and relaxation) physical activities.

REMEMBER: If your weight seems to be an obstacle to your moving around easily and/or comfortably, make a physical activity plan with your doctor before starting to exercise.

LETS GO!

Being fit involves paying attention to three kinds of exercise: healthy heart (cardiovascular) endurance, muscle strength, and F-L-E-X-I-B-I-L-I-T-Y.

EXERCISING AND WORKING OUT Physical activity is about movement, and exercise is one brand of movement. Think of exercise as planned physical activity.

HEADS UP!

To avoid injury, check out the warm-up/cooldown exercises on here and here.

The number one rule for exercising is: Be safe. Nothing in this book stands in the place of adult supervision.

Pace yourself. Maintain a comfortable speed so that you can perform your exercise over an extended period.

And keep in mind that even a moderate workout requires a warm-up, stretch, cool-down, and cooldown stretch.

Warming up is the first part of a safe workout. Warming up helps prevent injuries, increases your body temperature, and softens the muscles and gets the body ready for the rest of the workout.

You can warm up by doing a series of slow movements for five or ten minutes; slowly jog in place or do jumping jacks, for example.

Stretching improves flexibility fitness, improves the bodys ability to move, and decreases the number of injuries related to physical activity.

Its important to use proper form to avoid injuries while stretching. Ask your PE teacher, coach, health care professional, or other qualified adult to demonstrate safe stretching form and techniques before you begin stretching.

Safe stretching involves understanding proper form and that you should NOT go beyond comfortable levels, that its important to stretch s-l-o-w-l-y, that you should hold the stretch gently (for about ten seconds), and that you should not bounce.

Cooling down lets the body slow down and recover from the fitness activity and helps prevent soreness (and injury). Cool down by walking slowly or walking slowly in place.

Cooldown stretches help prevent soreness and improve fitness flexibility.

Yoga and tai chi are other great ways to stretch as well! Check one out when a family member or friend goes to their next class.

FLEXIBILITY FITNESS The ability of muscles and joints to flex is called flexibility fitness.

Your muscles need to move and stretch through a full range of motions. When youre flexibly fit, youre less likely to get hurt during physical activity.

Increase your flexibility! Stretch those muscles so that they stay flexible enough to support your joints.

Check out the stretching exercises on the following two pages.

EXAMPLES OF STRETCHES YOU CAN LEARN HOW TO DO WITH HELP FROM A QUALIFIED INSTRUCTOR Remember: Its important to use proper form to avoid injuries while stretching. The extent of stretching depends on your flexibility! Ask your PE teacher, coach, health care professional, or other qualified adult to demonstrate safe stretching form and techniques before you begin.

Safe stretching involves understanding how NOT to go beyond comfortable levels, how to stretch s-l-o-w-l-y, how to hold the stretch gently (for about ten seconds), and that you should NOT bounce.

BUTTERFLY NECK STRETCH PALMS TO CEILING ARMS AND SHOULDERS STRETCH Adapted from Eat Well & Keep Moving by Dr. Lilian W. Y. Cheung, Dr. Steven L. Gortmaker and Hank Dart (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2001).

QUAD BURNER WAVE REACH BACK LOWER LEG STRETCH Improve flexibility fitness by combining stretching with yoga and aerobics!

Rent an exercise video, borrow one from the library, or join a class at your local Y, Boys and Girls Club, church, or community center. Aerobics classes are a great place to make new friends.

Or bring your parent along!

FITNESS CLOTHES Hmmm. Tights and belly shirts? Do we actually need to wear such things when we exercise?

Keep in mind that the fashion industry sometimes connects with the fitness industry to create the illusion that we need to LOOK a certain way before we work out. Why?

To sell stuff!

Working out feels good and is good for you mentally, emotionally, and physically. Those are the reasons to do it.

Dont stress over what you are wearing or how you look when you move, bend, dance, reach, or jump.

Worrying so much about how you look that it prevents you from working out is totally counterproductive.

Dont do this to yourself!

GET COMFORTABLE A magazine ad portrays a model out in the great outdoors with her friends. Shes wearing, perhaps, a pair of microshortsand maybe a flimsy pair of sparkly flip-flops?

First of all, kids need to exercise in the great outdoorsaccompanied by an adult!

When exercising, dress appropriately. Consider the temperature so you dont get too hot (or cold). Wear comfortable underwear (cotton is best) and a sports bra that hugs your breasts close to your chest if you need one. Throw a shirt over it and put on some sweats or other loose-fitting pants or shorts, socksand shoes appropriate for the activity.

Tie a sweatshirt around your waist if its chilly out.

Have fun!

LETS NOT PRETEND It would be just so great if you could walk, hike, jog, in-line skate, skateboard, or ride a bike or scooter whenever and wherever you want to EXERCISE YOUR OPTIONS!

You can find so many fun ways to be active that are safe and supervisedso start looking! Explore your options at school in PE or in after-school programs, in classes at your local Y or Boys and Girls Club, or in other supervised programs for kids sponsored by your city, county state, religious group, or other community or government organization. without being at risk of harm.

But lets not kid ourselves; you cant.

WALKING TO SCHOOL Your parent can determine if its safe for you to walk to school, and, if it is, who should accompany youand what is a safe route. Call your school district to see if safe routes for your area have been identified.

SRTS: NATIONAL CENTER FOR SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL Walking school buses and bicycle trainswhere parents accompany kids to schoolare safe, fun, and social! They may be appropriate for your area. Interested in learning more? Go to www.saferoutesinfo.org.

SOME BASIC SAFETY TIPS FOR WALKING TO AND FROM SCHOOL Dont walk alone.

Stay together. Stick to the agreed-upon route. Dont take shortcuts. Stay away from isolated places.

First, walk the route with your parent. Review safety procedures. Decide on safe places you could go to for help.

Stay alert and aware of your surroundings. Dont wear headphones.

Follow traffic regulations, signs, and signals. Before crossing, look both ways.

Wear something bright and walk in daylight. Dont display your name on your clothing or pack; carry an ID in your pocket.

Dont interact with people you dont know WELL. Acquaintances, not just strangers, can be a threat. If someone offers you a ride, say no, unless you have specifically discussed it with your parent in advance. Trust your instincts. Report anything that concerns you.

If anyone tries to take you somewhere, or is following you, quickly get away. If the person is in a car following you, the opposite direction that the vehicle is heading is often your best retreat. Yell, THIS PERSON IS NOT MY MOTHER/FATHER/GUARDIAN! That will alert others that you are in danger. If someone tries to grab you, make a scene and every effort to get away by kicking, screaming, and resisting. Attract the attention of people who can help you.

Your parent may want to visit the NCMEC website for more recommendations: www.missingkids.com.

ENDURANCE/CARDIOVASCULAR (HEALTHY HEART) FITNESS Your heart needs to deliver in lots of different ways.

At rest, it needs to beat at a slow, steady pace and pump lots of blood with each beat so that oxygen and nutrients can be carried through your blood vessels to every area of your body When your heart is strong, it works more efficiently You can move faster and work and play harder for longer periods without getting tired and wanting to quit.

Endurance fitness helps improve your heart muscle, your lungs, and your blood vessels.

BUILD YOUR ENDURANCE THROUGH AEROBIC EXERCISE Aerobic exercise is about air. Its about breathing hard, moving fast, sweating, and having your heart beat faster.

A reasonable goal is to find a pace (speed) that you can do continuously for about fifteen to twenty minutes, with brief periods for rest and recovery. Pace, dont race. see here and The Cactus Plan (on here) for more specific recommendations. Weight or health concerns? First talk to your doctor about tailoring a physical activity plan just for you.

SWEAT Sweating is a good thing; in fact, its essential. It cools your body and keeps your temperature in a healthy range.

THE FLUID FACTOR Its especially important to drink water when youre exercising hard. Your body sweats to cool itself. Fluids are lost that need to be replaced.

Drink water before, during, and after vigorous exercise (see here and here).

HEADS UP!

Apartment/building stairwells are not safe places to exercise alone. The recommendation to take the stairs instead of the elevator doesnt apply in your situation. Stay safe!

Have stairs in your house? They can be your stationary StairMaster. Climb them a few times.

Limited space? Try jumping jacks. Get out that jump rope! How fun is it to skip rope to music!

Like to dance? Go for it.

DANCING IS UNIVERSAL!

Are there traditional dances that are a part of your cultureor a friends?

Native American dance, Greek dance, Chinese dance, salsa, Irish dance, African dance, Russian dance. What culture doesnt dance?

Celebrate your cultural heritage!

Look into possibilities in your community.

Dancing also totally improves your coordination.

LOVIN YOUR HEART Like every other muscle, with exercise your heart can grow stronger. You improve the endurance of your heart by getting it to beat faster through vigorous aerobic exercise.

AEROBIC IS ABOUT OXYGEN (AIR) Aerobic exercise is the exercise that helps your heart the most.

When youre physically fit, more blood is pumped with each heartbeat, and so your heart can beat more slowly at rest and beat more efficiently during vigorous physical activity.

With a healthy heart, youre able to do more physical activity (and work) for longer periods before becoming tired.

Why?

Because your heart will be very efficiently getting oxygen to all areas of your body, including your muscleswhich need plenty of oxygen to keep on working.

And stop to think about it: Your heart is a muscle, and when its healthy, its delivering plenty of oxygen to itself!

HEADS UP!

Undereating and overexercising is a dangerous combination; it puts your heart at risk. Eat well. Enjoy exercising. Dont take it to extremes.

If you have a friend who seems to be overexercising, tell an adult.

MIGHTY BONES WITH EXERCISE!

Besides having enough calcium, weight-bearing exercise is very important to build your bones and keep them strong.

Hike with your family.

Play badminton in the backyard.

Join a basketball, soccer, baseball, or volleyball team.

Jump rope.

And dance!

Go for it!!

F.Y.I.

Find out more about powerful bones, powerful girls at www.cdc.gov/powerfulbones www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpabonehealth/bonehealth.htm VIGOROUS PHYSICAL ACTIVITY Playing soccer, playing basketball, playing Ping-Pong, and numerous other activities are considered vigorous.

Rent a workout video or DVD, borrow an aerobic video or DVD from the library, or join a class at your local Y, Boys and Girls Club, church, or community center.

Or swim!

HAVE FUN!

Many communities have a YWCA or other public facility where you can take swimming lessons taught by a certified swimming instructor (through a Red Cross or YWCA certified program) and swim for a reasonable fee.

Swimming is just such great exercise. Its low impact: easy on the joints. Since youre supported by water, theres less chance of injury-compared to land sports.

When you swim, you use almost every major muscle group in your body, and if you swim long distances, youll get fantastic aerobic exercise that will improve your cardiovascular endurance. Playing games in the water with your friends and family helps keep you fitbecause it keeps you moving!

Best of all, swimming and playing in the water is completely relaxing and fun.

Why not call around? Start with your citys parks and recreation department.

BUT WHAT ABOUT MY HAIR!

What about it?

You either swim and dont careor swim and do care.

But you dont let the bother of it keep you from swimming.

If you have long hair, after you dip, be ready to smack some conditioner in it, wrap it up in a ponytail, and call it a day.

Or wrestle your hair into a bathing cap before your dunk.

Your healthy, invigorated, after-swim look will cancel out any perceived hair (or makeup) problems.

CHLORINE Pool water has chlorine in it to zap germs. After a swim, your skin and hair will like it better if you take a moment to rinse your beautiful self off in the showerhead to toe.

And special shampoos for coping with chlorine?

Look into it.

COMMIT TO BEING ACTIVE AND GO WITH THE FLOW Refuse to allow minor fashion details to get in the way of your physical activitywhich de-stresses you and builds confidence and self-esteem. And tones your muscles.

And puts sparkles in your eyes!

Thats way more magnetic than mascara!

Physical activity can make you feel great, and how you feel shows.

Feeling good physically can be your biggest asset.

Its part of the message youre capable of putting out in the world: Its great to be alive!

SAFETY TIPS Dont swim alone, even if youre a good swimmer.

There should always be somebody in or near the pool while you dip, dunk, and swimin case you bump your head or have another health emergency.

Swim where there are lifeguards.

Dive only from the end of a diving board into deep water where you can clearly see the bottom.

If you get tired while youre swimming or get a crampdont panic. Just roll onto your back and floatslowly kicking to the nearest edge or to shallow water.

GET READY TO MAKE SOME WAVES AT YOUR SCHOOL Speak up!

You know that being physically active can help you (and everybody else) maintain better self-esteem and lower levels of stress and anxiety. Get some friends together and speak as a group.

Ask for resource support ($$$$$$$$$ and trained supervision) for school-based intramural sports programs and physical activity clubs, like aerobics clubs, dance clubs, hiking clubs, bike-riding clubswhatever seems to fit your school environment.

And while youre at it, ask that your school have daily PE classes that are fun and varied with activities that can be carried on throughout your life. Bowling, bicycling, swing dancingeven kayakingare included in PE activity in some schools.

Why not yours?

NO ROOM FOR STUDENTS WHO ARENT VERY ATHLETIC IN PE CLASSES?

If this is true in your school, ask a parent, teacher, or doctor to have a little chat with the coach or principal. Is anybodys parent a health care professional who could go to bat for you? All schools should offer diverse, fun physical activities that take into consideration the fact that students have different levels of athletic abilities (and interest).

Less athletic, overweight, or obese (see here) students should NOT be shut out of routine physical activity opportunities during PE at school.

No way!

HATE SPORTS?

Lots of people do, so join the club. Still, be active. Noncompetitive physical activities that stress participation rather than winning are great ways to go. How about suggesting a supervised extended recess program where you have a blast playing kickball, dodgeball, steal the bacon, and other fun games you played back in the day  when you were a little twerp?

Want to find out more about staying physically active? Log on to GirlsHealth.gov at www.girlshealth.gov/fitness.

STRENGTH/RESISTANCE FITNESS Strength fitness improves the ability of your muscles to move or resist a force or workload. It helps you perform your daily tasks without getting pooped. Moderate exercise that involves using your muscles can improve your strength fitness. Strong muscles lead to strong bones.

Strength/resistance training refers to the amount of work and time your muscles can perform (lift, pull, push, carry, etc.) before getting tired. It helps prevent injuries and improves your skills in games and sportsincluding jumping rope and shooting baskets.

DONT ATTEMPT WEIGHT LIFTING WITHOUT THE ADVICE OF A TRAINED PROFESSIONAL You can build up your strength fitness by going faster, going longer, lifting heavier objects, exercising more oftenbut you can also injure yourself doing any of these things too strenuously, too rapidly, or in the wrong positions.

Does your coach, PE teacher, or health care professional have information for you? Check it out.

Remember: Traindont strainand dont do too much, too soon.

Build muscles slowly.

Regular, modest weight training is the way to go.

YAKKITY YAKDONT TALK BACK!

Very few people want to spend their spare time doing chores. But somebody has to do em!

Chores can involve combinations of lifting (which improves strength), reaching (which improves flexibility), and aerobic (cardiovascular) exercisewhich improves endurance and keeps your heart healthy and strong.

First, put on some music. Its easy (well, easier, anyway) to be a merry maid  with a good sound track behind you.

FOR ALL THE WAYS YOU PLAY Little sisters and brothers in the house? Big sisters influence their younger siblings. Be a role model.

Romp and play with them!

Playful daily shenanigans tame the wild beast!

(Including if the wild beast happens to be you.) Youre in the process of evolving into an adult and establishing your own way of being in the world.

Your outlook, thoughts, words, and actions have such great potential for contributing positively.

BEAUTY IS DEFINED IN SO MANY WAYS And it definitely doesnt refer exclusively to physical characteristics. Universally, there are few people considered more attractive than those who are self-assured and considerate, avoid judging othersand notice (and help bring out) the best in other people.

A GREAT VIBE Having a beautiful presencea great vibeincludes having a positive attitude toward yourself and others.

Being kind, caring, intuitive, and able to get along with others; having a sense of inner strength; being able to bounce back; being real, spontaneous, creative, inspired, peaceful, connected, in touch with the present, conscious of nature, evolving  these are characteristics that can be associated with having a great vibe.

TRUST A powerful, positive vibe obviously doesnt include betraying confidences and hurting others when they are vulnerable (when they are open to harm).

Being someone whom other people trust puts you in a position of honor, responsibility, power, and respect.

HEADS UP!

Do keep in mind that some secrets shouldnt be kept. If a friend seems extremely depressed, overwhelmed, or in despair, tell a trusted adult. Also tell if a friend talks to you about abuse of any kind. Your friend needs help. Its very important to tell, even if you promised you wouldnt.

APPROACH LIFE INTELLIGENTLY Read.

Listen to music.

Go to school.

Arrive on time, well rested, and well nourished so your brain can stay focused and operate at peak performance.

Listen to other people, read, think things through for yourself, and express your point of view.

BE CLASSY Interact caringly with the people around you.

Be aware that things you say and do are making a statement about who you are.

SEXTING: Sexually explicit messages or images sent via phone or the Internet cant be taken back and are often forwarded, without your knowledge. Just dont do it.

KEEP IT POSITIVE Focusing too much on physical appearance can get in the way of normal development into a confident, productive adult.

Youre a person, valued most for your inner qualitieslike wisdom, honesty, integrity, loyalty, creativity, determination, compassion, and courage. Develop your interests, talent, and intellectthe things that really relate to success, style, accomplishment, and power.

Value these qualities in yourself!

Power, beauty, excitement, and sensuality arise from feelings of good health, high energy, physical fitness, self-esteem, and self-confidence.

THINK ABOUT IT If you often comment on other peoples appearance, you give the impression that you have a superficial view of others; this is no way to make (or keep) friends.

Have an opinion on somebodys size or shape? Save it.

And while youre at it, show respect for yourself. If you are saying and thinking negative things about your physical appearance, you may end up believing them. And convincing others that theyre true.

BODY IMAGE Body size and shape are two small parts of an incredibly complex and beautiful package: you.

PEOPLE ARE VARIED. WERE SUPPOSED TO BE.

Imagine if everybody looked and acted the same. How boring would that be? Celebrate your unique characteristics and those of the people around you.

The color of your eyes, the texture of your hair, the shade of your skin, the shape of your bodyall of these things were determined before you were born.

MAINTAINING A POSITIVE, HEALTHY ATTITUDE TOWARD YOUR CHANGING BODY IS SO IMPORTANT!

It is just not okay for anyoneand we mean anyoneto make comments or behave in a way that makes you feel uncomfortable about your body. If this happens to you, tell an adult you trust.

HEADS UP!

Is someone outside of your age group (an older teen or adult) expressing a romantic interest in you?

This is not okay. And its not your fault.

Say no and talk to your parent or another adult you trust about it.

BODY IMAGE AND SPORTS Certain sports have the potential of stressing out young athletes by overly emphasizing weight and body type.

Gymnasts?

No, you will NOT maintain the body of a little kid.

Youre not supposed to!

Who knows what size youll naturally be once you go through your growth spurt? You are not a pixieyoure a person, a young woman athlete.

There are lots of sports that demand strength, flexibility, concentration, and balance and honor (and value) our naturally beautiful wide range of body types.

Calling All Ballerinas!

Is having the perfect ballerinas body just getting to be too much for you to stand? If so, tell your parent, teacher, or coach.

BREAK THE MOLD!

Insist that a wider range of body types be accepted by your dance group or troupe.

What? Bigger girls cant dance?

What total rubbish is that?

NO LUCK?

There are many ways of dancing that showcase and express your creativity and talent without running the risk of sabotaging your self-esteem. Explore your options.

A SENSE OF STYLE Youre born with certain looks, but you create your own style. Be original. You are about you. So dont measure yourself against other girls.

Developing a unique presence and sense of style happens over time, not overnight. It begins with the realization that appearance is more than just how you look and that style is more than appearance.

Your sense of style can involve fashion that expresses and makes a statement about you. Fashion is an incredible, wonderful vehicle for expressing the emerging you! Choose clothing because you love the look, because it expresses the inner you. Dont limit yourself.

Dont restrict your fashion choices because your body doesnt happen to look like a models body.

Express yourself!

GET IT GOING ON!

Love the creative aspects of fashion; put together outfits that you like to move in. Express yourself with fashiondont limit yourself with it!

SECONDHAND ROSE Thrift stores and secondhand stores shouldnt be overlooked.

Any hand-me-downs available in your family from the older generation? Styles generally make an encore appearance every twenty years. Vintage is cool because everything has a story.

Whats in the way, way back of your grandmas closet?

Ask her if you can take a look.

MEDIA LITERACY Media literacy is about being skilled at understanding the information being presented in newspapers, magazines, and books and on radio, TV, and the Internet. Its about being able to sort out what is reliable, what is true, whether or not there is a hidden agenda behind the informationand if there is, how to identify it.

Understanding how advertising works is one step toward becoming media literate.

MARKETING SPECIFICALLY TO TEENS Companies who sell goods and services aggressively market to kids through ads and TV commercials because kids and teens spend gazillions of dollars on products.

Theres plenty of misinformation headed your way neatly packaged in ads that appeal to your age group.

ADS IN DISGUISE In a romantic movie, a starlet steps out on the balcony and lights a cigarette. A cute guy sees her through the window. He strolls out to join her.

They stand there, gazing out at the twinkling city lights below themsaying nothing. Just standing in the moonlight.

Its a cigarette ad.

JUST SO YOU KNOW  Heres a partial list of products that are presently aggressively marketed to you: TVs Cell phones DVDs Clothing Sneakers Cosmetics Video games/other electronics Hair products Fitness equipment Sodas Fitness clothing Weight-loss products Fitness gimmicks Fast food/convenient food/candy.

AND  Alcohol (fizzy, sweet alcoholic drinks) Tobacco (cigarettes) How irresponsible is that?

YOURE NOT GOOD ENOUGH?

Yes, you are.

But one basic goal of advertising is to make you believe, somehow, that your life will be better if you buy the product thats being advertised. Or that you need to change.

To improve!

While watching commercials or checking out magazine ads, its important to identify just whose interests are being served.

Ask yourself: What is being advertised here? What strategy is being used to convince me to buy it? Do I really need it? Is it actually good for me?

ADS THAT ENCOURAGE PREOCCUPATION WITH THE BODY Certain companies associated with the diet, fitness, and fashion industries make a huge profit by getting people to link food and fitness with appearancerather than with optimum health and peak performance.

THINK ABOUT IT Energy output happens through growth, metabolism, and physical activityyou know this. There is nothing that people can eat or drink that burns fat.

Fat burner products, like all quick weight loss powders, pills, and herbal potions, are a complete scam.

Some are dangerous.

Dont buy or use them.

KEEP IT REAL People are genetically programmed to be a variety of body types. Fitness ads, especially those featured in teen or fashion magazines, are famous for portraying unrealistic images of both women and men.

Achieving the supposedly perfect body is not a meaningful goal. Accepting ourselves and each other, including our different body types, is!

F.Y.I.

Photos of models in ads are often enhancedwhich means faked. The photos touched up.

Many models have had breast enlargement surgery, tummy tucks, rear lifts, rib removal. Pretty brutal things to do for no medical reason, wouldnt you say?

Having the goal of achieving the body type pushed by the media and the fashion and fitness industries can really get in the way of your healthy development.

Dont sacrifice your health and energy to perform well for the sake of fulfilling somebody elses shallow definition of beauty.

Stay focused. Dont get stuck! Stick with The Cactus Plan, get enough sleep, nourish your body with healthy eating, and stay active. You will be where you want to be.

JUST SAY NO If certain magazines make you feel down about yourself, heydont read them!

DUMMIES?

Girls are regularly portrayed in fashion ads as silly mindless puffs of fluff whose main job is to look babyish and relatively dopey and to be weak and nonthreatening, and whose only goal is to reel in and land a cute boy.

The sorry fact is that these ads are totally off base. Girls rock.

REGULATE You and your friends and classmates can have an effect on irresponsible advertising.

Suggest to your teacher or youth group leader that she or he sponsor a contest to find who can bring in the best and worst ads targeting kids.

Ask that a few minutes at the beginning of each meeting be reserved for discussing and evaluating the ads kids bring in.

To keep it cool for school, limit ads to those found in teen magazines or magazines you could find in the public library.

After the contest, have a letter-writing campaign to influence the companies (and magazines) sponsoring the worst ads.

A POSITIVE SPIN ON THE CONTEST Do make sure to include great ads in the mix. Then write those companies to signal your total approval!

Advertising responsibly for legitimate, useful, helpful products, services, and organizations is a powerful way to make a positive impact on the world. Ever consider a career in advertising?

PUBLIC INTEREST ADS Reality check: Smoking does NOT make people slim, popular, romantic, or powerful. Its an expensive, useless, smelly addiction thatamong other thingsinterferes with athletic performance and causes bad breath, stained teeth, gum disease, and potentially fatal illnesses like cancer and heart and lung disease. Maybe your class could develop an ad campaign against smoking for your school.

Use the new media. Speak up!

The love of your family and friends, sunlight, water, the good things food containsalong with your natural ability to physically experience the worldwill help support your healthy physical, intellectual, and emotional growth as you continue becoming an adult.

YOUR BUDS During puberty, friendships become more central in your life. Shopping, chatting, eating meals, preparing food together, exercising togetherthese are great ways to spend time with your friends.

BRANCHING OUT As you experience more independence, you can take advantage of your communitys resources. You can become more active in school, more able to advocate for yourself and your friends. Youll reach out and discover that the world is full of people who care about each other and that your future is full of promise and possibilities.

PEOPLE NEED PEOPLE Feel the love.

PEOPLE NEED NATURE Experiencing nature can give you a reassuring sense of place in the universe. You were born into this world; youre a part of this place.

FOR SURE You belong.

YOUR ROOTS Your relationship with your parents and family is changing, evolving.

Youre becoming more independent.

This doesnt mean you have to separate from your parents and adult caregivers, though.

Thats a myth.

Being connected to your family and culture is about as basic as it gets.

F.Y.I.

News stations too often portray teens as rebellious, rude, delinquent, and alienated from their families. Why? Because stories about conflict sell best Dont fall for the teen stereotype (oversimplified image). Its not real; dont let it get you down. Kids your age are full of ideas, energy, and imagination. You are appreciated.

RELATE Look to your parents for support and advice.

Separating isnt the issue; understanding and defining your changing roles is.

Theres a wide range of parenting styles. Honor and value your own familys approach to parenting as you negotiate change in your relationship.

Make time for your parents, siblings, and grandparents. Maintaining strong family ties that span generations gives a powerful message to the world: You are loved and cared about.

BUT CAN THEY MAKE TIME FOR YOU?

Parents can get into quite the frenzy as they attempt to juggle a wide range of commitments and responsibilities.

So you may need to actually schedule a time when you can get your parents undivided attention so you can discuss your concerns, viewpointor whatever.

No, its not always a bed of roses. And yes, conflicts do come up in all family relationships.

YOU CAN WORK IT OUT Human emotional and intellectual development is a lifelong process. Your parents are continuing to develop emotionally and intellectually. Theyre growing with you and sometimes find themselves in uncharted territory.

FAMILY COUNSELING Your parents may not always parent skillfully or wisely, perhaps because of difficulties that they may have encountered or are now experiencing.

If communication isnt as good as youd like it to be between you and your parents, it might be best for your family to get help from a mental health care professional.

Talk to your pediatrician, school counselor, school nurse, or other health care professional about what options are available to help your family grow stronger-together.

PARENTING CLASSES?

A great option for parents.

Tactfully put it out there at a time (and in a place) where you feel your parent will be receptive. Or maybe your health care professional could help you out by suggesting this.

These classes can help the entire family.

THE STRESS FACTOR Nurturing the inner you is tied into taking care of your physical self.

Managing stress and identifying when you need to reach out for help with the emotional part of you are also key. Its stressful to grow upno doubt about it.

How do you reduce stress?

Physical activity may be number one, coupled with getting enough sleep.

F.Y.I.

Coffee, many teas, and colas all have caffeine in them. So do other drinkscheck the labels. Caffeine increases the level of hormones related to stress. It also promotes dehydration. Moderation is the key.

Breathing exercises, listening to music, singing, playing music, expressing yourself with writing or art and (for some people) yoga, tai chi, prayer, and/or meditation, and spending time outdoors with nature are helpful for stress reduction.

Stressed to the max? For a long time? Ask your health care professional to refer you to a counselor.

CHILL Learn how to plan how much time you can spend participating in different activities. Sports, homework, clubs, meetings, social events? Just how much do you expect you can pack into a day before becoming overwhelmed? Pul-eeze pace yourself.

Youve just got to build some downtime into your busy schedule! You really can do thisand will be so happy and relieved to have saved a peaceful place in your life.

TALK Talking about painful, overwhelming, unhappy feelingslike sadness, anxiety, fear, frustration, and lonelinesswith someone you trust and love can reduce stress and make the feelings less painful.

It also builds strong, healthy family relationships.

Its good to rely on your parents for emotional support and comfort. Hang out with your parents and other family. They love you and know you the best.

But your friends know you and care about you, too!

They can be there for you.

YOU CAN BE THERE FOR YOU Certain ways of thinking can cast a shadow on your sunny outlook. You may need to remind yourself that: 1. Something that isnt quite perfect is NOT a total failure.

2. If something goes wrong, it doesnt mean that everything will go wrong.

3. Your accomplishments and positive qualities do too count. Acknowledge and appreciate them.

4. Without evidence to back up your conclusions, it would be better that you dont assume the worst. There may be positives youre not acknowledging because youre so stressed!

5. You dont have a crystal ball, so dont predict things will turn out badly. Assume things will work out; if they dont, deal with it.

6. Exaggerating your shortcomings and problemsand at the same time minimizing your positive qualities? How unfair is that? Give yourself a break.

7. We all make mistakes. You are not the same as what you do. Dont label yourself as a loser. It may not seem like it, but mistakes can be great for teaching us to do things differently.

8. Things dont always have the outcome we wish and hope for. Some situations are hard to accept, but eventually you will feel happier. Do think of the good side whenever possible.

9. Things are continuously changingincluding feeling low. Remember that your outlook will brighten!

10. Having a problem with someone? Try to see how you may have also contributed to the problemand at the same time, see how others involved may have contributed.

Take responsibilitybut dont take responsibility for things that youre not responsible for.

RELATIONAL BULLYING Relational bullying is bullying by friends.

Basically, its about making up lies, spreading rumors, betraying trust, and dumping people for no apparent reason. Who does this to friends?

All forms of bullying, including relational bullying, need to be reported. Reach out to a responsible adult (see here).

CYBERBULLYING If you receive bullying messages sent on the Internet, dont respond. Tell your parent, teacher, school counseloror the police, if its a threat. If you become aware of cyberbullying directed at another person, report it.

ASK FOR HELP WHEN YOU NEED IT You do have the power to help improve your moods, but you might need help to do this in the best way possible.

Not all troublesome feelings or conflicts can be resolved by talking about them with your family and friends.

Not all can be resolved by thinking positively, either.

If you are experiencing sad, worried, angry, or anxious feelings that dont go away or keep coming back again, ask for help. If your emotions or behaviors seem out of control, ask for help. If you are suffering from a traumatic event, ask for help.

Just about every community has mental health care available for children and teens who need helpincluding help with anger, anxiety, depression, and eating disorders (see here).

Mental health care may include therapy and/or medication.

HOW TO GET THE BALL ROLLING A physician, pediatrician, or other health care provider can give you a referral to a mental health professional. Talk to your parent, your school counselor your school nurse, or another responsible, reliable adult about helping you find professional mental heath care in your area. Your county health department (listed in government listings under County Government Offices in the front of the phone book) has a childrens mental health division. In an emergency, call 911 or the police emergency number for your area. Also: See Hotlines on here.

THERAPY Therapy is a process that involves talking, listening, and having a trained professional really, really listen to you!

With guidance, you can identify and explore whats making you feel bad and work through the problem. As the problem is resolved, positive thoughts and good feelings will begin to replace the negative, sad ones.

It isnt necessary to feel sad, scared, anxious, or out of control to get counseling or help. Lots of people talk to mental health care professionals to get ideas about themselvesunderstand themselvesand improve coping skills.

Getting therapy doesnt mean youre crazy or cant help yourself. It enables you to understand your life better and feel more in control of it. A counselor can help guide you as you discover new possibilities, ID your dreams, and set goals for yourself that you can accomplish!

HEADS UP!

If you have extremely anxious feelings about food, physical activity and/or body image, talk to your parent and definitely make an appointment to talk to a counselor.

Sometimes (not always) these feelings can be related to the development of an eating disorder.

The behaviors associated with eating disorders are physically, emotionally, and mentally harmful and can become life-threatening if not treated.

Anorexia and bulimia are the names for two eating disorders that you may have read about in newspapers or magazines.

JUST DONT GO THERE Its unhealthy and dangerous to try to control weight by intentionally interfering with the bodys natural process of metabolizing food and fluids. These behaviors may put the person at risk for developing an eating disorder or may indicate that the person already has one.

Also: Drugs that dehydrate the body or speed up the normal process of eliminating waste are sometimes improperly used by people who have the mistaken belief that these are weight-loss techniques. (Theyre not.) Misusing these drugs (or others) is dangerous and unhealthy and may be an indication that a person has, or is in the process of developing, an eating disorder.

Remember: Drugs (including herbal and over-the-counter drugs) taken by kids and teens should only be used under the supervision of a parent or health care professional.

ALL EATING DISORDERS REQUIRE TREATMENTALL OF THEM Concerned about a friend? Talk to her or his parent or your parentor another trusted adultabout the situation.

Friendship means watching out for one another. This includes getting help from a trusted adult when you think your friend has a problem.

QUESTIONS?

Reliable information about eating disorders is available from: National Eating Disorders Association 603 Stewart Street, Suite 803 Seattle, WA 98101 Phone: 206-382-3587 Fax: 206-829-8501 www.NationalEatingDisorders.org National Institute of Mental Health Office of Communications and Public Liaison Public inquiries, phone: 301-443-4513 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.gov Or try contacting your local county health department, listed in the front of the phone book under government listings.

YOU ARE CARED ABOUT When you need help, please reach out to a trustworthy, reliable adultlike an adult family member or friend, health care professional, teacher, school administrator, public safety officer (like a police officer or firefighter), or any other responsible adult you think can help you. In an emergency, call 911 or the police emergency number for your area.

HOTLINES Hotlines are telephone numbers you can call when you need help with a problem. The very first pages of the phone book usually list hotline numbers along with other emergency numbers. The information operator (411) or regular operator (0) also can help get hotline numbers.

The Boys and Girls Town National Hotline is set up to help kids in crisis.

This organization is staffed by trained volunteers who can help callers identify their problems, explore options, and develop a plan of action. They also offer referrals to community-based services, support groups, and even shelters if necessary.

Boys and Girls Town National Hotline: The call is freeand its available twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.

1-800-448-3000, United States & Canada Hearing impaired?

1-800-448-1833 (TTY) Help is out thereits just a phone call away.

Would you like to get on trackor back on track? Heres a tip list: QUICK START Beginning tomorrow, or as soon as possible, eat a nutritious breakfast, lunch, and dinnerand one or two healthy snacks in between. Review The Cactus Plan (chapter 5) regarding recommendations for healthy eating.

Focus on eating a total of at least seven servings of rainbow-colored fruits and vegetables each day (combined).

Drink fluids throughout the day, mostly water. Drink about seven to eight cups, totaland, of course, not all at once!

The next time you buy milk, make yours 1 percent low-fat or skim.

The next time you buy bread, make yours whole grain.

The next time you buy breakfast cereal, make yours whole grainwith whole grains at the top of the ingredients list printed on the box, low in sugar, and high in fiber.

Sleep for eight to nine hours tonight and every night you can.

Enjoy a little sunshine.

Schedule some quality time with a parent in the very near future. In this case, quality time would mean together timewhen you can have the opportunity to talk and listen to each other. Maybe it could involve taking a walk, playing a game, preparing a meal.

Set reasonable goals for yourself involving safe, supervised, fun physical activity. Review The Cactus Plan regarding recommendations for routine physical activity.

Keep track. Are you reaching your goals?

Make a list of physical activities that you like or you think youd like to try out if theres an opportunity. Ask your parent to help you find out where there are safe, supervised physical activity programs/classes for kids and/or families in your community. Schedule a time for you and your parent to call around, visit the facilities, and get information. Sign up for something that sounds good and go for it!

Do you have enough options for varied, enjoyable physical activity at school? Think about specific PE and after-school programs that could be added to your school programs. What would really be fun? Make a list. Talk to friends. Think about a responsible adult associated with your school who might advise you and your friends on how to get the ball rolling.

Is your neighborhood safe for walking and biking? If not, get your parents to join you to speak up at the town hall for change.

Take an informal survey on what foods, including snacks and drinks, are available in your school. Check out the vending machines. Can you think of ways choices can be improved? Jot down your ideas. Begin to think about which friends, teachers, parents, and/or school administrators you might ask to join forces with you to help initiate positive changes.

Challenge yourself. Begin viewing ads more critically Try to figure out what is being marketed to you, how its being marketed, and why. Ask yourself: Do I really need this? Is this good for me?

For the next few days, write down each TV program you watch and how long you watch it. Also, log time spent at the computer or playing video games. Total it up at bedtime each night. Then take some time to sit down and review your notes. Figure out where you can make some cuts in screen time with your ultimate viewing goal being not more than two hours a day.

Reassure yourself. You can be healthy, strong, and prepared to meet lifes challenges.

Set goals. Make plans. Keep track of your progress.

You can do this.

VITAMIN CHART Want to know what vitamins do for you?

VITAMIN A Needed for: Immune functions (fighting infection and disease), healthy eyes, growth and repair of cells and tissues (skin, hair, organs), protecting cells from damage (antioxidant) Some sources: Eggs, carrots, sweet potatoes, kale, spinach, fruits, low-fat fortified dairy products.

VITAMIN C Needed for: Protecting cells from damage (antioxidant), wound healing, strong blood vessels, healthy gums and skin, boosting immune system Some sources: Oranges, grapefruit, tangerines, berries, melons, broccoli, green and red peppers, tomatoes VITAMIN D Needed for: Bone and teeth formation, boosting immune system, possibly preventing certain types of cancer, reducing inflammation Some sources: Egg yolk, salmon, fatty fish, vitamin-D-fortified milk, multivitamins; also made in skin exposed to sunlight during the spring and summer months (fifteen to thirty minutes of sunshine on your arms and legs, two to three days a week, can produce vitamin D, but dont tan) VITAMIN E Needed for: Protecting cells from damage (antioxidant) Some sources: Corn oil, seed oils, milk, wheat germ, nuts, dark green vegetables, whole grains, beans VITAMIN K Needed for: Formation of blood-clotting agents and bone formation Some sources: Green leafy vegetables, cereal, milk, egg yolk, sardines, broccoli, cabbage, kale, turnip greens VITAMIN B-1 (THIAMINE) Needed for: Carb metabolism, maintaining appetite, nerve function, growth, and muscle tone Some sources: Wheat germ, pork, whole and enriched grains, legumes, nuts, seafood VITAMIN B-2 (RIBOFLAVIN) Needed for: Carb, protein, and fat metabolism; healthy eyes, skin, and nerves Some sources: Low-fat milk products, green leafy vegetables, whole and enriched grains, eggs VITAMIN B-3 (NIACIN) Needed for: Carb, protein, and fat metabolism; health of digestive system; blood circulation; nerve function; appetite; healthy skin Some sources: Poultry, fish, eggs, whole and enriched grains, dried beans and peas VITAMIN B-6 (PYRIDOXINE) Needed for: Carb and protein metabolism; formation of antibodies, red blood cells, nerve function Some sources: Fish, poultry, nuts, soybeans, whole grains, eggs VITAMIN B-12 Needed for: Carb, protein, and fat metabolism; maintaining nervous system; blood formation Some sources: Fish, poultry, eggs, 1 percent low-fat and skim milk, vitamin-B-12-fortified soy products BIOTIN Needed for: Carb, protein, and fat metabolism Some sources: Egg yolk, meat, 1 percent low-fat and skim milk, dark green vegetables; also made by microorganisms in intestinal tract FOLIC ACID Needed for: Red blood cell and other cell formation; protein metabolism Some sources: Green leafy vegetables, dried beans, poultry, enriched grain products, oranges (and orange juice), nuts, kale, spinach, yeast, soybeans, wheat germ PANTOTHENIC ACID Needed for: Conversion of food into energy, vitamin utilization, nerve function Some sources: Most plant and animal foods, especially lean meats, whole grains, legumes MINERAL CHART And heres what certain minerals do for you: CALCIUM Needed for: Bone and teeth formation; regulation of heartbeat, muscle action, and nerve function; blood clotting Some sources: Foods containing low-fat (or nonfat) milk1 percent low-fat and skim milk, low-fat cheese, yogurt, cottage cheeseand broccoli, calcium-fortified soy milk, calcium-fortified rice milk, salmon with bones, green leafy vegetables, tofu IRON Needed for: Formation of hemoglobin in blood (and myoglobin in muscle), which supplies oxygen to cells Some sources: Fish, shellfish, poultry, lean meat, beans, whole and enriched grains, green leafy vegetables, liver POTASSIUM Needed for: Fluid balance, controlling activity of heart muscles, nervous system Some sources: Bananas, oranges, apricots, avocados, potatoes, bran, peanuts, legumes, lean meat, low-fat milk products ZINC Needed for: Growth, taste and smell sensitivity, immune function, wound healing Some sources: Oysters, legumes, lean meat, liver, eggs, seafood, whole grains, low-fat milk products IODINE Needed for: Function of thyroid gland, which controls metabolism Some sources: Seafood, iodized salt CHROMIUM Needed for: Glucose and fat metabolism to energy, increasing effectiveness of insulin, muscle function Some sources: Cheese, whole grains, lean meat, peas, beans, wheat germ COPPER Needed for: Formation of red blood cells, skin, and connective tissues Some sources: Nuts, seeds, seafood, oysters, cocoa powder MAGNESIUM Needed for: Food metabolism, nerve and muscle function, bone growth Some sources: Nuts, green vegetables, whole grains, beans MANGANESE Needed for: Bone growth and development, sex hormone production, cell formation Some sources: Nuts, whole grains, vegetables, fruits, tea, coffee, bran SELENIUM Needed for: Protecting cells from damage (antioxidant), healthy heart muscle Some sources: Seafood, whole grains, seeds SHOPPING LIST (okay to copy this) THE CACTUS PLAN SHOPPING GUIDELINES FLUIDS 100 percent vegetable juice Tomato juice 1 percent low-fat or skim milk Calcium-fortified soy milk Calcium-fortified rice milk Soups (low sodium) Mineral water/bottled water Others: WHOLE GRAINS Bagels (whole grain) Barley Breadwhole grain Bulgur Breakfast cerealswhole grain, low sugar (no more than eight grams per serving), high fiber (at least four grams per serving) Chips, whole grain (fried in unhydrogenated plant oil) Crackers, whole grain (without partially hydrogenated oils) Couscouswhole wheat Cooked cerealswhole grain, enriched Flour, whole grain Oatmeal Whole wheat pasta Whole wheat pita bread Popcorn kernels Rice, brown Whole grain rolls Whole wheat tortillas Soups containing whole grains (barley, brown rice, etc.) Others: VEGETABLES: THINK RED, YELLOW, ORANGE, BLUE, GREEN, WHITE Fresh Canned Frozen Jarred (beets) Low-sodium vegetable juice (in cartons, bottled, canned) Also: Salsa Tomato sauce Spaghetti sauce (low sodium) Soups with vegetables in them (low sodium) Others: PLANT OILS Canola oil Olive oil Peanut oil Soybean oil Corn oil Salad dressings made with the above oils Soft tub margarine Others: FRUITS: THINK RED, YELLOW, PINK, ORANGE, BLUE, GREEN, WHITE Fresh Canned Frozen Dried Jarred (applesauce) Others: NUTS, BEANS (AND OTHER LEGUMES), AND SOY PROTEIN FOODS Canned beans Dried beans Dried lentils Seeds Nuts Peanut/almond/soy butter (look for those that are made without hydrogenated oils) Hummus Tahini Tofu (produce/dairy section) Tempeh Soups with beans and lentils in them (low sodium) Others: LOW-FAT MILK, LOW-FAT YOGURT, LOW-FAT CHEESE, LOW-FAT DAIRY Reduced fat, partially skim, and skim milk cheese Low-fat cottage cheese Low-fat cheese dips and spreads 1 percent low-fat or skim milk Low-fat sour cream Low-fat yogurt Non-fat dry milk Frozen low-fat yogurt Soups (low sodium) with low-fat milk in them Others: POULTRY, EGGS, FISH, SEAFOOD Eggs Egg whites Chicken Tuna Turkey Ground turkey Salmon Sardines Shellfish Fish Canned fish, poultry, seafood, meat Cooked, sliced, packaged deli poultry Soups with poultry, fish, seafood in them (low sodium) Others: CONDIMENTS AND SAUCES Hot sauce Mayo Mustard Relish Salad dressings Soy sauce (low sodium) Olives Peppers Others: HERBS AND SPICES Basil Cilantro Ginger Parsley Rosemary Sage Others: HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES Pet food and supplies Paper napkins, paper towels, paper bags Plastic bags for snacks, food storage, trash Fluoridated toothpaste (dental floss/toothbrush) Hand/face soap Lotion Shampoo, conditioner Others: Lilian Cheung and Mavis Jukes became close friends while working together on Be Healthy! Its a Girl Thing: Food, Fitness, and Feeling Great.

Dr. Cheung is lecturer, director of Health Promotion & Communication, and editorial director of The Nutrition Source website (www.thenutritionsource.org) at the Harvard School of Public Healths Department of Nutrition. Her work focuses on the translation of science-based recommendations into public health communications and programs, to promote healthy lifestyles for chronic disease prevention and control. Her extensive experience in school-based programs and health communication includes being the director of the Harvard Nutrition and Fitness Project at the Center for Health Communication; co-principal investigator and co-author of Eat Well & Keep Moving (2001, 2007), a widely disseminated school-based nutrition and physical activity program for upper elementary school children (www.eatwellandkeepmoving.org); and co-investigator at the CDC Harvard Prevention Research Center on Nutrition and Physical Activity She co-edited Child Health, Nutrition and Physical Activity (1995) with the late Surgeon General Dr. Julius Richmond. She also co-authored Mindful Eating, Mindful Life with Zen Buddhist master Thich Nhat Hanh, released by HarperCollins in March 2010 (www.savorthebook.com).

has twenty years of writing experience and twenty years of teaching experience and is a member of the California Bar.

She has written many books for kids and teens, including three other health-related titles: Its a Girl Thing: How to Stay Healthy, Safe, and in Charge (for girls 12 and up); Growing Up: Its a Girl Thing: Straight Talk About First Bras, First Periods, and Your Changing Body (for girls 8 and up); and The Guy Book An Owners Manual: Maintenance, Safety, and Operating Instructions for Teens (for boys 13 and up).