BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS Coronavirus: Weapon of Mass Destruction?

BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS Coronavirus: Weapon of Mass Destruction?

by Dr U C Jha & Dr K Ratnabali Vij Books India Pvt Ltd New Delhi (India) First Published in India in 2020 Published by Vij Books India Pvt Ltd (Publishers, Distributors & Importers) 2/19, Ansari Road Delhi  110 002 Phones: 91-11-43596460, 91-11-47340674 Mob: 98110 94883 e-mail: contact@vijpublishing.com web : www.vijbooks.com Copyright  2020, Wg Cdr UC Jha ISBN: 978-81-94697-48-0 (HB) ISBN: 978-81-94697-47-3 (PB) ISBN: 978-81-94697-46-6 (ebook) All rights reserved.

No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Application for such permission should be addressed to the publisher.

Contents Preface Chapter - I Biological Weapons: An Introduction Chapter - II History of Biological Weapons Chapter - III The Biological Weapons: Threat from Pathogens Chapter - IV The Biological Weapons: Threat from Coronavirus Chapter - V The Biological Weapons: Impact of New Technology Chapter - VI The Biological Weapons Prohibition Regime Chapter - VII The Way Ahead Appendices Appendix A Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, 17 June 1925.

Appendix B Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, 10 April 1972 Appendix C The Weapons of Mass Destruction and Their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 Appendix D Principles of International Law Recognized in the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and in the Judgment of the Tribunal, 1950 Bibliography Index Preface Biological warfare, from a military perspective, is the intentional use of harmful biological agents to affect an adversarys armed forces, population, crops, or livestock. Biological agents are many times more deadly than chemical warfare agents in terms of their scope and span of impact. For instance, ten grams of anthrax spores could kill as many people as a ton of the nerve agent sarin. It is, therefore, highly likely that biological agents will become the preferred choice of weapon for terrorists in future. The pertinent question isAre there norms to curb and control the use of biological agents in warfare?

The 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC), which established norms against the weaponization of pathogens, provided hope that States would commit themselves to ensuring a world free of biological weapons. However, the BTWC had certain congenital defects which provided loopholes for misuse and diversion of pathogens. It was expected that in due course the world community would reach a consensus in overcoming these defects by establishing a verification regime under the Convention. However, the States are yet to achieve this. Fortunately, after the 2001 anthrax attack in the United States, there has not been recorded or established incident of the use of biological weapons around the world.

Currently, SARS-CoV-2 virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic is now reshaping the world and has stirred a lot of discussion. In spite of the advanced healthcare facilities in the developed countries, the death toll has reached a new milestone. The pandemic is the worst global health emergency being faced by the world as per World Health Organization (WHO). In a matter of nine months or so, the world has been transformed. As of 30 September 2020, there were about 33.44 million cases of COVID-19, including more than one million deaths, in 216 countries and territories, and on every continent other than Antarctica. These figures are likely to be great underestimations of the true numbers of infections and deaths. A number of countries have had to deploy their armed forces to supplement medical resources. The pandemic has caused widespread loss of jobs the world over and has seriously impacted every sphere of life. Governments, economies, markets and individuals are facing a global crisis situation. The International Monetary Fund predicts that over the next two years, cumulative output losses from the pandemic could reach US $9 trillion.

There have been allegations that the virus responsible for the pandemic was released accidently from a laboratory in China.1 Whether this is true or otherwise, keeping in view the extent of its impact, the possibility of it or similar potent biological agent, becoming a weapon of the future cannot be ruled out. As the world community is fighting hard to bring the situation under control, rogue actors may take advantage of the pandemic and may use biological weapons to similar effect. Such terrorist attacks would be widespread and indiscriminate, affecting every State.

New technologies for gene-editing, such as CRISPR and 3-D laboratory printing equipment have added a new dimension to it by making it possible to produce militarily significant quantities of pathogens and toxins in a make-shift laboratory or garage. In contrast to nuclear or chemical weapons, no specialized starting materials are required for the production of biological and toxin agents except for a small seed stock of a disease-producing organism, which is easy to procure due to possibility of dual-use. This calls for greater cooperation amongst the States, biologists, doctors and international organizations to thwart every such attempt. It would involve the sharing of information and effective mitigation strategies against bioterrorism.

The deciphering of the human genome sequence and the rapidly increasing domain of bioengineering offers unprecedented opportunities to use biological science to counter threats from pathogens. However, these same developments also allow biotechnology to be misused to create new agents of mass destruction. The UN and the Council of Europe have warned against such bioterrorism attacks. There are reports that the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and other terrorist organizations have shown a keen interest in the use of biological weapons during the COVID-19 pandemic. The ISIS is understood to be re-examining its experiments on using bubonic plague as a weapon and there are concerns that the extremist group will try to attack a high-security biosafety laboratory.

Any biosecurity threat or epidemic could easily become a global concern. Pathogens do not recognize borders and will spread indiscriminately, once released, along with its intrinsic ability to mutate as it spreads. Scientists are afraid that a new disease as destructive as COVID-19 could paralyse humanity in the future. The post-pandemic period can provide an opportunity to think about the future of BTWC and the subsequent challenges that we may face from biological weapons. We must focus on cooperation and global unity of the kind exhibited by scientists sharing information related to the development of an effective vaccine against COVID-19 virus.

This book makes an attempt to take a fresh look at biological weapons and explore the possibility of the use of the COVID-19 virus or its genetically modified version as a biological weapon. It examines the impact of modern biotechnology, artificial intelligence and cyber capabilities on biological warfare agents. It looks into the weaknesses of the international legal regime which controls biological weapons and suggests measures which need to be considered by the States on priority. The challenge should not be limited to ensuring global compliance with the BTWC, but to control the business of biotechnology to prevent its misuse by wrong hands. This would require strong foreign policy and building trust among the States to facilitate the sharing of information in various domains. The States would need to work together proactively to develop collective strategies to overcome any future pandemic. At the same time, they would have to strengthen the international legal regime to stop the proliferation of pathogens for sinister activities and establish an effective legal system to punish wrongdoers. The international community must work together to prevent the use of biological weapons to ensure national and international safety.

Although it was not possible to cover every aspect of biological weapons and bioterrorism in this volume, we are hopeful that readers will gain significant understanding of the historical context and the present concerns about the proliferation and use of biological agents, some of the potent biological agents, covert biological weapons programmes of different countries and ways to curb the same. The chapter on Coronavirus will provide them with details about the new pathogen which may be developed as weapon of future warfare by rogue States and non-State actors. Readers will also be able to understand the status of the current legal regime relating to biological weapons, its shortcomings and the expectations from the world community in preventing future biological warfare. The BTWCs Ninth Review Conference in 2021 will provide an opportunity to address these issues.

U.C. Jha K. Ratnabali * * * 1 The three corona-viruses that cause severe disease  SARS-CoV (the cause of SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2  all came from bats. The origin of SARS-CoV-2 is still not known, but the virus shares 96% of its genetic material with a virus found in a bat in a cave in Yunnan, China. Cyranoski David, Profile of a Killer Virus, Nature, Vol. 581, 7 May 2020, pp. 22-26. The US President Trump has dubbed COVID-19 the China virus and Wuhan virus. The Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has stated that there was enormous evidence the virus had escaped from Shis lab in the city. Charlie Campbell, Yuxi Yunnan and Alice Park, Inside the Global Quest to Trace the Origins of COVID-19and Predict Where It Will Go Next, Time, 3 August 2020.

Chapter - I Biological Weapons: An Introduction Biological warfare1 dates back to antiquity and the history of warfare and the history of humans understanding of disease are intertwined. Military leaders, without knowledge about microbial pathogens, understood that a cause and effect relationship existed between certain activities, locations, or exposures to victims of disease that resulted in the spread of infections that ultimately provided a military advantage.2 The early use of biological weapons included the contamination of water with animal carcasses and filth. Militaries also used another ancient tactic of allowing an enemy to take sanctuary in an area endemic for an infectious agent in anticipation that the enemy force would become infected.3 It has been claimed by a few authors that biological warfare had already started 14 centuries before Christ, when the Hittites sent infected rams to their enemies. It is difficult to say with certainty that such acts were a part of natural epidemic or planned biological attacks. The reason being, before the advent of modern microbiology at the end of the 19th century, little was known about the pathogens and truth might have been manipulated for political reasons.4 Before discussing further on biological agents and the history of the biological warfare, a few basic terms need to be defined: Biological Agents: The 1969 United Nations study for the Secretary-General states, Bacteriological (biological) agents of warfare are living organisms, whatever their nature, or infective material derived from them, which are intended to cause disease or death in man, animals or plants, and which depend for their effects on their ability to multiply in the person, animal or plant attacked.5 This definition does not include toxins in the term biological agents.

Biological Weapons: Biological weapons refer to munitions, equipment or other means of delivery including bombs, aircraft spray tanks and other devices, intended for use in the dissemination of biological agents and toxins for hostile purposes. The principal means of dissemination are as an aerosol to be inhaled by a target population or as a spray to be deposited on crop plants. An aerosol is a suspension in air of particles so small that they travel with air currents instead of settling to the ground.

Biological Warfare: Biological warfare is a planned and deliberate military employment of pathogenic strains of microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses,6 or their toxins to produce death, temporary incapacitation, or permanent harm in humans or to kill or damage animals or plants for a military objective.

Bioterrorism: The US Centre for Disease Control has defined bioterrorism as the deliberate release of viruses, bacteria or other agents used to cause illness or death in people, and also in animals or plants by non-state actors. Bioterrorism aims to create casualties, terror, societal disruption, or economic loss, inspired by ideological, religious or political beliefs. However, bioterrorism might also be used to cause significant economic losses by infecting livestock or crops, or contaminating buildings.

Bioterrorist: A bioterrorist can include any non-state actor who uses or threatens to use biological agents on behalf of a political, religious, ecological, or other ideological cause without reference to its moral or political justice. This includes non-state actors who operate with support of military establishment of a rogue state and biological agent was procured and disseminated with covert, improvised delivery means.

Biocrime: Biocrime implies the use of a biological agent to kill or make ill a single individual or a small group of individuals, motivated by revenge or monetary gain through extortion, rather by than political, ideological, religious or other beliefs. For example, Dr. Taranath Bhatacharyna was a physician with training in bacteriology. He and Benoyendra Chandra Pandey murdered 20-year-old Amarendra Pandey (half brother of Benoyendra) with a lethal dose of Y. pestis after a feud over the division of their fathers estate.7Other examples are the use of, for example, ricin to get rid of a partner, or the murder of the Hungarian dissident Georgi Markov in London in 1978 with a ricin-containing pellet injected with an umbrella.

Biohazard: A biohazard is defined as any microorganism (including, but not limited to, bacteria, viruses, fungi, rickettsiae, or protozoa, parasite, vector, biological toxin, infectious substance, or any naturally occurring, bioengineered, or synthesized component of any such microorganism or infectious substance that is capable of causing the following: (i) death, disease, or other biological malfunctionin humans, animals, plants, or other living organisms; (ii) deleterious alteration of the environment; or (iii) an adverse impact on commerce or trade agreements.8 Biosecurity: Biosecurity aims to minimize the risk of theft, loss, intentional exposures and releases of pathogens or toxins. It covers a broad spectrum of potential risks and threats ranging from criminal activities, such as sabotage and isolated acts of aggression, to bioterrorism and espionage. Safeguarding infectious agents is also a national legal obligation under the 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) and the UN Security Council Resolution 1540. Applied biosecurity has a number of important components like, employee accountability; material control; development of standard operating procedures; compliance with biosecurity procedures; physical security; access control; information security; transport security; proper routines for security-incident reporting and response; maintaining continuous evaluation and revision; and providing training and education.

Biosafety: Biological safety or biosafety is application of combinations of laboratory practice and procedures, laboratory facilities, and safety equipment when working with potentially bio-hazardous agents. A fundamental objective of any biosafety programme is the containment of potentially harmful biological agents. The purpose of containment is to reduce or eliminate exposure of laboratory workers, other persons, and the outside environment to potentially hazardous agents. Biosafety is dependent on three elements: standard microbiological laboratory practices and techniques, safety equipment and facility design. Biological safety, or biosafety, is the application of concepts pertaining to risk assessment, engineering technology, personal protective equipment (PPE), policies, training, and preventive medicine to promote safe laboratory practices, procedures, and the proper use of containment equipment and facilities.9 Biosafety protects people from germs, whereas biosecurity protects germs from people--- and there are large areas of overlap between them. Biosecurity and biosafety are both different approaches to ensure containment, and they both share an end goal of minimizing the risk of accidental or intentional exposures and releases of pathogens or toxins. Other commonalities include inventory control, access restriction, accountability and compliance, incident reporting, evaluation and revision, and education and training.

Black biology: Black biology is the use of genetic engineering to enhance the virulence of a pathogen or the targeting of a specific genetic code for use in terrorism. This new area of biology could create a designer virus. For example, a virus could be designed with secondary effects inducing the neurodegenerative, fatal by-products of botulinum toxin and the DNA sequence engineered for attacking any particular individual, say the President of a country.

Pandemic: A pandemic (from Greek pan meaning all and demos meaning people) is an epidemic of infectious disease that spreads through human populations across a large region; for instance, a continent, or even worldwide. A pandemic, in contrast to an endemic, is not limited in time or place. Further, flu pandemics exclude seasonal flu, unless the flu of the season is a pandemic. Throughout history there have been a number of pandemics, such as smallpox and tuberculosis. In the 20th century three pandemic outbreaks were observed: the 1918 Spanish flu (death cases: approx. 50 million), the 1957 Asian flu (death cases: approx. 2 million) and the 1968 Hong Kong flu (death cases: approx. 1 million). More recent pandemics include the HIV pandemic, the 2009 flu pandemic, and the COVID-19 pandemic.

Pathogens: The vast majorities of microorganisms do not cause disease, but are instead beneficial to humankind in that they contribute decidedly to our health and general well-being in many cases. A few microorganisms can, however, cause infectious diseases and these are designated as pathogens. The pathogenicity of a microorganism is sometimes difficult to define, but the term generally means the ability to inflict damage, or the ability to cause disease. Potential biological weapons can be found among these pathogenic microorganisms.

Toxin: Toxin is a poison of plant or animal origin, especially one produced by or derived from microorganisms and acting as an antigen in the body.

Biological Warfare Agents As defined earlier, biological warfare is the deliberate spreading of disease by the armed forces amongst humans, plant and animals resources of the enemy. Diseases are caused when small numbers of living microorganisms enter into the target population of humans, animals, or plants.

The microorganisms are essential for human and environment, yet disease outbreaks due to pathogenic microorganisms have killed large number of people. These micro-organisms multiply, and, after an incubation period, the symptoms of the disease become apparent. In some cases, micro-organisms produce toxins; non-living toxic chemicals, that cause symptoms. Depending upon the biological agent chosen, the resulting disease may cause incapacitation or death of the target population. There are hundreds of pathogens which can cause diseases in human, plant and animals population and the list is ever increasing.

The United States Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has composed a pathogen priority list, which contains the most likely biological warfare agents. For this, it has divided the emerging infectious diseases into three categories: A, B and C. The biological agents placed in Category A can be easily disseminated or transmitted person to person. They cause high mortality, with the potential for major public health impact. They might cause public panic and social disruption, and require special action for public health preparedness. The CDC has labeled six biological agents as category A, namely: Bacillus anthracis (anthrax) Clostridium botulinum toxin (botulism) Yersinia pestis (plague) Variola major (smallpox) and other related poxviruses Francisella tularensis (tularemia) Viral hemorrhagic fevers, such as Ebola Biological agents placed in Category B are moderately easy to disseminate. They can cause moderate morbidity and low mortality. They require specific enhancements of CDCs diagnostic capacity and enhanced disease surveillance. Category B agents include: Coxiella burnetti (Q fever) Burkholderia mallei (glanders) Staphylococcus enterotoxin B Epsilon toxin of Clostridium perfringens Ricin toxin (from castor beans) Brucella species (brucellosis) Encephalitis viruses Category C biological agents could be engineered for mass dissemination in the future because of their availability. They are easy to produce and disseminate. They are potentially linked to high morbidity and mortality and major health impact. Category C agents include: Nipah virus (encephalitis with high mortality) Hantavirus (pulmonary syndrome) Yellow fever virus Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis A table showing major biological agents that could be used as bioweapons is as follows.10 Table 1: The US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention: Microbiological Agents Group Diseases Agents A Anthrax Bacillus anthracis Botulism Clostridium botulinum toxin Plague Yersinia pestis Smallpox Variola major Tularemia Francisella tularensis Viral hemorrhagic fever Filoviruses and Arenaviruses B Brucellosis Brucella spp.

Epsilon toxin Clostridium perfringens Food safety threats Salmonella spp., E.coli Glanders Burkholderia mallei Melioidosis Burkholderia pseudomallei Psittacosis Chlamydia psittaci Q fever Coxiella burnetii Ricin toxin Ricinus communis Staphylococcal enterotoxin B Staphylococcus spp.

Typhus fever Rickettsia prowazekii Viral encephalitis Alphaviruses C Emerging infectious diseases Nipahvirus and Hantavirus According to NATO guidelines, biological agents (included those used as biological weapons) can be further classified according to certain characteristics that define the hazard to health.11 These are: (i) Infectivity--the aptitude of an agent to penetrate and multiply in the host; (ii) Pathogenicity--the ability of the agent to cause a disease after penetrating into the body; (iii) Transmissibility--the ability of the agent to be transmitted from an infected individual to a healthy one; and (iv) Ability to neutralize--having preventive tools and / or therapeutic purposes. NATO Handbook on the medical aspects of NBC defensive operations has listed 31 pathogens and 8 toxins as potential biological warfare agents. These are shown in the Table 2 as follows.

Table 2: NATO: Potential Biological Warfare Agents Agent Disease Bacterial Anthrax, Brucellosis, Cholera, Melioidosis, Plague (pneumonic), Shigella, Tularemia, and Typhoid fever Rickettsial Epidemic typhus, Q Fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and Scrub fever Chlamydial Psittacosis Fungal Coccidioidomycosis, Histoplasmosis Viral Argentine hemorrhagic fever, Bolivian hemorrhagic fever, Chikungunya fever, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Dengue fever, Ebola, Eastern equine encephalitis, Influenza, Korean hemorrhagic fever, Lassa, Omsk hemorrhagic fever, Rift Valley fever, Russian spring-summer encephalitis, Smallpox, Venzuelan equine encephalitis, and Yellow fever.

Toxins Botulinum toxins, Clostridium perfringens toxins, Mycotoxins of trichothecene group, Palytoxin, Ricin, Saxitoxin, Staphylococcal enterotoxins, and Tetrodotoxin In China, Pathogenic microbiology laboratory biosafety regulations, which were published by the State Council in 2004, divided pathogenic microorganisms into four groups, with group 1 defined as the highest risk. The Chinese Ministry of Health published the List of human transmission of pathogenic microorganisms in 2006, which identified harmful levels of each pathogenic microorganism and the laboratory BSL at which they should be handled.12 The categorization and listing of biological agents by various agencies are not conclusive. Various types of modified biological agents could potentially be produced through genetic engineering methodologies today.13 Each of these techniques, as listed below, seeks to capitalize on the extreme lethality, virulence, or infectivity of biological agents and exploit this potential by developing methods to deliver agents more efficiently and to gain control of the agent during warfare.14 Benign microorganisms genetically altered to produce a toxin or bioregulator (naturally occurring organic compounds that regulate diverse cellular processes in multiple organ systems, such as heart rate).

Microorganisms resistant to antibiotics, standard vaccines, antivirals, and therapeutics.

Microorganisms with enhanced aerosol and environmental stability.

Immunologically altered microorganisms able to defeat standard detection, identification, and diagnostic methods.

Combinations of the above four types with improved delivery systems.

Characteristics of Biological Warfare Agents The desirable characteristics of a microbial agent developed for military use include: (i) the ability to infect in small doses; (ii) high virulence, or the capacity to cause acute illness resulting in incapacitation or death, without necessitating an undue loss of potency during production, storage and transport; (iii) a short incubation period between infection and the onset of symptoms; (iv) minimal contagiousness of the disease to avoid triggering an uncontrolled epidemic that could boomerang against the attackers population; (v) the absence of widespread immunity, either natural or acquired, to the disease in the population to be attacked; (vi) lack of susceptibility to common medical treatments, such as generally available antibiotics; (vii) suitability for economic production in militarily significant quantities from available raw materials; (viii) ease of transport, and stability under wartime field conditions of storage and delivery; (ix) ease of dissemination; and (x) availability of protection against the agent for the attacking troops, such as a vaccine, antibiotics, and/or protective clothing and respirators. In addition, environmental conditions also affect the viability of biological warfare agent or toxin. These conditions include: solar (ultraviolet) radiation, relative humidity, wind speed, and temperature gradient. Ultraviolet light decreases the viability of most aerosol disseminated biological agents. However, encapsulation through man-made processes, natural sporulation, or arthropod vectors may protect biological agents from the impacts of the environment and increase agent viability.15 Biological agents can be transmitted through one or more ways. The transmission modes could be the following: (i) Parenteral: Agents that are transmitted through body fluids or blood; (ii) Airway (by droplets): Agents that are emitted by infected people, which can then be inhaled by surrounding people; (iii) Contact: Through which the agents present on the surface of the infected organism can infect another organism; and (iv) Oral-faecal route: Through objects, foods or other items contaminated with the faeces of infected patients, or through sexual contact. However, these criteria cannot be applied rigidly in case of every biological warfare agents. For instance, COVID-19, a new airborne and highly lethal virus has caused a deadly pandemic in 2019-2020. Initially, it was reported that COVID-19 virus is primarily transmitted between people through respiratory droplets and contact routes. Therefore, transmission of the COVID-19 virus can occur by direct contact with infected people and indirect contact with surfaces in the immediate environment or with objects used on the infected person (e.g., stethoscope or thermometer). However, in July 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) acknowledged that the evidence of airborne spread of COVID-19 virus is emerging and possibility of airborne transmission in specific conditions, crowded and closed poorly ventilated settings cannot be ruled out.16 In general, agents dispersed as dry powder are more viable than those dispersed as wet aerosols. Biological agents can also be transmitted directly by arthropod17 vectors or by an infected individual. Infected arthropod vectors are useful for penetrating the skin.

Environmental Impacts of Biological Weapons Humans are not the only target of biological weapons. These weapons might be used to attack herds of animals, crops or even a material supply that is vital for revenue. For example, if purposely introduced into a cattle farm, a bio-weapon could kill all the animals. This attack could be carried out with relative ease and virtually no immediately visible signature. The usual method of controlling such widespread disease is mass slaughter of the infected animals, but this could be economically or militarily devastating for many countries. For instance, in a number of countries militaries are dependent on mules for transportation. A population dependent on a staple crop such as rice could be rendered helpless by the introduction of a specific disease that devastated its unprotected rice crop.18 If a countrys agricultural lands are attacked with biological weapons, serious economic consequences could follow.19 Modern agricultural methods dictate that large areas can be planted with genetically identical crops. This genetic homogeneity leaves entire regions susceptible to attack with an anti-plant agent to which the crop is not resistant. Entire crops could thus be wiped out during a single harvest season.20 For instance, in 1944 and 1945, serious consideration was given to destroying the Japanese rice crop using a variety of fungus. Anti-material biological warfare might be attempted by an adversary because biological agents are hard to detect and identify and are readily concealed, and their use can plausibly be denied.21A purposely introduced organism that degrades specific metals and renders them useless could be devastating for a small countrys economy. As technology continues to develop further, specific anti-material agents could be designed and create enormous problems.

A supply of standard biological agents for covert sabotage or attacks against broad-area targets would be relatively easy to produce and disseminate using commercially available equipment, such as agricultural sprayers. The environmental harm caused by biological weapons exceeds the damage caused by most explosive munitions.22 The environmental harm caused by these weapons is measured by their capability to contaminate soil and water, and hence despoil an ecosystem for a prolonged period. Despite the legal ban on biological weapons, biological warfare will always be an attractive option for adversaries in future conflicts and biotechnology will continue to have a profound impact on biological weapons.

The development and use of biological weapons is clear cut  as weapons of mass destruction, can have regional, if not global, impact and destabilizing effects. Biological weapons can have a primary, secondary or tertiary environmental impact.23 In other words, they can directly degrade the environment, or their use can have an unintentional impact, or the response to an incident related to a biological weapon can have a negative environmental impact. In addition to those weapons that could intentionally target aspects of the environment, it is possible that biological weapons designed to target humans could have an indirect environmental impact. Open-air release of biological agents may require the removal of large amounts of topsoil, which could have serious consequences for the local ecosystem. In the case of an anti-animal attack, it may be necessary to carry out large-scale culling to control the spread of disease. Disposing of the large number of carcasses can pose significant environmental problems.24 The biological agent might seep into the water supply, contaminating rivers and streams, and lead to additional infections. For example, the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the UK in 2001, resulted in the death of over 6.5 million animals, of which approximately 4.2 million were culled as part of disease control and 2.3 million animals were culled and paid upon for welfare reasons or under the light lambs scheme. The above figure of 6.5 million does not include many slaughtered new born lambs and calves, which were not counted in the Departments database maintained for compensation purposes, as their value were included in the valuation assigned to their mother. Disposing of these carcasses caused a series of environmental concerns. At first, the bodies were buried, but concerns were raised that the virus might seep into the water supply, contaminating rivers and streams, and lead to additional infections.25 The mass grave for sheep caused another problem as blood began to bubble up through the topsoil. This led to a change in policy and burning of carcasses. Therefore, virtually every all activity associated with biological weapons, from their development and production through their use to even the measures designed to respond to them and mitigate their effects, could have a significant environmental impact.

Out of weapons of mass destruction, biological ones are those which dread people the most. In fact, most biological weapons have a unique quality that other non-conventional weapons (such as chemical and nuclear) do not have; biological agents are able to multiply in the host organism and be transmitted in turn to new hosts, generating in this way with unpredictable effects on the population, both in terms of number of victims and geographical spread. This has been witnessed in the case of spread of COVID-19 virus across the world during 2019-2020, infecting more than 33.4 million and killing nearly over one million individuals across the world.26 Outline of the book Human activities and capabilities today have its foundation in the past in some form or the other. So, looking back at the past, tracing the evolution in the use of the biological agents, and contextualizing the norms that have been developed are essential for better understanding the issues pertaining to it. Chapter II of this book covers in the first part few instances of the historical use of biological agents, as well as their use by certain countries in the First and the Second World War. The second part of the chapter discusses the various steps taken by states to control the use of biological weapons in the past up to the signing of the 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons (BTWC) Treaty which came into force in 1975. This chapter also highlights the fact that multiple nations have pursued clandestine biological weapons programmes even after being a state party to the BTWC Treaty which prohibited the development, production, stockpiling, acquisition and retention of biological weapons unless required for prophylactic or other peaceful purposes. The third part of this chapter includes discussion on the biological weapons programme in various countries which are party to the treaty.

Biological weapons contain some form of bacteria, virus, or other agents that cause serious diseases in human beings like cholera, smallpox, and yellow fever, etc. Some biological weapons contain toxins, which are dead substances made from living organisms. Examples include the botulism toxin and shellfish poison. Biological warfare agents are inherently indiscriminate and uncontrollable. Almost every biological agent deliberately used against humans, plants, or animals has the capability of causing widespread panic and adversely affecting a nations perception of its national security. Chapter III, analyses the Category A biological warfare agents which includes, Anthrax, Ebola, Marburg and Lassa, Smallpox, Plague, Tularemia, and Toxins.

An interconnected world increases the opportunity for biological agents to emerge and spread so that a disease threat anywhere is a disease threat everywhere. The spread of COVID-19 world over in less than three months has exhibited that infectious diseases travel without visas and cross borders indiscriminately. Infected travelers in large number of cases did not manifest any symptoms of the virus responsible for COVID-19 pandemic. There are few reports which also allege that it was an experimental germ that accidently escaped from a Chinese laboratory. In chapter IV, a detailed account of COVID-19 virus has been undertaken. It also examines whether COVID-19 virus or its mutated versions could be used as biological weapon by terrorists or non-state actors in the near future.

The biotechnology revolution has generated a range of methodologies that have been exploited for the control and prevention of infectious disease, development of diagnostics, antimicrobials and vaccines. In particular, the availability of full genome sequences for most recognized pathogens has provided the tools to design diagnostic reagents as well as new generation vaccines.27 Molecular biology techniques allow us to detect, amplify, and express virtually any gene in a matter of days. Such techniques have rapidly accelerated our ability to study the virulence of bacterial and viral pathogens and have even resulted in the identification of many new agents of disease. However, just as these techniques have proven invaluable in the control and prevention of infectious disease, the same powerful techniques could be used for the development of enhanced biological weapons. Creating pathogens with increased virulence, multidrug resistance or strains that are not targeted by standard vaccines, are now possible.28 Chapter V of the book evaluates the impact of these technologies including the dual-use ones on the future of biological warfare agents.

The biological weapons are considered weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Currently, two international agreements provide the existing framework for transnational regulation of biological warfare: the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention. In addition, the Rome Statute of International Criminal Court makes their use in armed conflicts, both international and non-international, a war crime. The United Nations, through its Security Council Resolution 1540 has attempted to combat non-state actor involvement in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Chapter VI of the book critically analyses international legal regime, including its inadequacy in prohibiting the use of biological weapons by states or non-states actors.

Unlike chemical or nuclear weapons, the components of biological warfare are found in nature. Thus, the presence of any quantity of these organisms in the environment does not necessarily connote a sinister motive. This is the main drawback, as biological warfare can always be carried out under the pretext that such traumatic occurrences are the result of natural circumstances that lead to outbreaks of diseases and disasters of either endemic or epidemic proportions.29 Today, almost every country has the capability, if not necessarily the intent, to develop at least crude biological weapons based on standard microbial and toxin agents. As an increasing number of developing countries become involved in commercial biotechnology, they may be tempted to explore its military potential. The devastation that could be brought about by the military use of biological agents can be gauged from the fact that throughout history, the inadvertent spread of infectious disease during war has caused far more casualties than actual combat.30 Even though biological warfare arouses general repugnance, it has never been conducted on a large scale, and is banned by international treaty systems. Biological and toxin warfare agents were stockpiled during both the World Wars and continue to be developed as strategic weaponsthe poor mans atomic bombby a small but growing number of countries.31 * * * 1 Biological warfare is the intentional use of living organisms or their toxic products, to cause death, disability or damage in man, animals, or plants. The target is man, either by causing his sickness or death, or through limitation of his food supplies or other agricultural resources. Biological weapons may be defined as living organisms that infect their victims, causing incapacitation and often death; some can spread to other living entities, even those not initially attacked. Barry Kellman, Bridging the International Trade of Catastrophic Weaponry, vol. 43, Am. U. L. Rev, 1994, pp. 762-63; The Rise of CB Weapons: The Problem of Chemical and Biological Warfare. 1971. Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SPIRI), New York: Humanities Press, p. 1.

2 Christopher George W., et. al., Historical Overview: From Poisoned Darts to Pan-Hazard Preparedness, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army Medical Department Centre and School, pp. 1-36.

3 Martin J.W., Christopher G.W., Eitzen E.M., History of biological weapons: from poisoned darts to intentional epidemics, in: Dembek Z.F., (ed.), 2007, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare, Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General, US Army, pp. 1-20.

4 There are a number of articles describing the history of biological warfare, but they should be used cautiously. None of this literature is complete and some contain serious inaccuracies. Carus W. Seth, The History of Biological Weapons Use: What we know and what we dont, Health Security, Volume 13, Number 4, 2015, pp. 219-255.

5 Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons and the effects of their use, UN Department of Political and Security Council Affairs, Report of the Secretary-General, UN Document A/7575/Rev1, No. E.69 I. 24, New York, 1969.

6 Viruses are unimaginably varied and ubiquitous and they have shaped the evolution of all organisms since the very beginnings of life. The world is teeming with viruses. For instance, single litre of seawater may contain more than 100bn virus particles belonging to 200,000 different viral species and a kilo of dried soil, ten times that number. Altogether, according to calculations, the world might contain 1031 of the viruses, i.e., ten followed by 31 zeros. The aliens among us: How viruses shape the world, The Economist, 20 August 2020.

7 On 4 December 1933, Amarendra Chandra Pandey died in Calcutta. It was alleged that he died of plague, the germs of which had been injected into his arm by someone at Howrah station on 26 November. The germ which was responsible for Amarendras death was obtained from Arthur Road Hospital in pursuance of a conspiracy to murder. AIR 1936 Cal 73.

8 Harbourt David E., et. al., Biosafety, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army Medical Department Centre and School, p. 869-894.

9 Ibid.

10 Cenciarelli Orlando, et. al., Bioweapons and Bioterrorism: A Review of History and Biological Agents, Defence S&T Tech Bull., Vol. 6(2), 2013, pp. 111-128.

11 NATO Handbook on the Medical Aspects of NBC Defensive Operations A Med P-6(B), Part II Biological, Annex A, February 1996, pp. 208-209.

12 Tian D, Zheng T, Comparison and Analysis of Biological Agent Category Lists Based On Biosafety and Biodefence, PLOS ONE, June 2014, Vol. 9(6), 2004, pp. 6.

13 The ability to modify microbial agents at a molecular (gene) level has existed since the 1960s, when new genetic engineering techniques were introduced, but the enterprise tended to be slow and unpredictable. With todays techniques, infectious organisms can be modified to become more infectious and resistant to current prophylaxis and treatment options or to exhibit novel disease characteristics. Based on advances in modern molecular biology and drug delivery technology, the current level of sophistication for many biological agents has enormous potential for making more sophisticated agents. Operations in Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Environments, Joint Publication (JP) 3-11, USA: Department of the Army, the Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard, 29 October 2018, Appendix B-1.

14 Operations in Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Environments, Joint Publication (JP) 3-11, USA: Department of the Army, the Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard, 29 October 2018, Appendix B-2.

15 Operations in Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Environments, Joint Publication (JP) 3-11, USA: Department of the Army, the Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard, 29 October 2018, Table B-3.

16 In an open letter to the WHO, published in the Clinical Infectious Diseases journal on 6 July 2020, 239 scientists in 32 countries claimed that air borne transmission of COVID-19 virus was possible. These scientists have claimed that there is evidence that floating virus particles of COVID-19 can infect people who breathe them; and appealed to the medical community and to the relevant national and international bodies to recognize the potential for airborne spread of COVID-19. The measures that should be taken to mitigate airborne transmission risk include: (i) Provide sufficient and effective ventilation (supply clean outdoor air, minimize recirculation of air) particularly in public buildings, workplace environments, schools, hospitals, and aged care homes; (ii) Supplement general ventilation with airborne infection controls such as local exhaust, high efficiency air filtration, and germicidal ultraviolet lights; and (iii) Avoid overcrowding, particularly in public transport and public buildings. Lidia Morawsak and Donald K. Milton, It is Time to Address Airborne Transmission of COVID-19, Clinical Infectious Diseases, 6 July 2020, pp. 9.

17 An arthropod is an invertebrate animal having an exoskeleton.

18 Murphy S., A. Hay, S. Rose, 1984, No Fire No Thunder: The Threat of Chemical and Biological Weapons, New York: Monthly Review Press, p. 145.

19 The term agricultural terrorism has been used recently for the threat of a biological attack against an agricultural target, including crops and livestock, in an effort to cause widespread damage to or destruction of the target. Corrie Brown, Agricultural terrorism: A cause for concern,, The Monitor, Vol. 5, No. 1-2, pp. 6-8.

20 B. Gripstad (ed.), Biological Warfare Agents, Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish National Defence Research Institute, 1986.

21 Anti-material agents are organisms that degrade some item of material. Most of the material damage done by micro-organisms is a result of natural contamination that grows only under special conditions of temperature and relative humidity. Fungi, for example, damage fabrics, rubber products, leather goods, and foodstuffs. Some bacteria produce highly acidic compounds that cause pitting in metals. These agents could create potential problems with stockpiled material. B. Roberts (ed.), Biological Weapons: Weapons of the Future? Washington, DC: The Centre for Strategic and International Studies, 1993.

22 Brooks Rosa, Can there be war without soldiers? Foreign Policy, 15 March 2016.

23 McLaughlin Kathryn, Biological Weapons as an Environmental Issue, in McLaughlin Kathryn and Nixdorff Kathryn (eds.), Biological Weapons Reader, The Bio-Weapons Prevention Project (BWPP), Geneva, 2009, pp. 59-66.

24 Ibid.

25 The 2001 Outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease, Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General HC Session 2001-2002, 21 June 2002, dated 18 June 2002, available at: https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2002/06/0102939.pdf, accessed 18 July 2020.

26 As on 30 September 2020.

27 Genome sequences are available for most recognized bioterrorism agents and countless numbers of bacterial and viral pathogens. Although this information has undoubtedly enhanced our ability to detect, prevent, and treat infections caused by bioterrorism agents, experts in the field of genomics recognize the possibility of tailoring classical bioterrorism agents to make them harder to detect, diagnose, and treat. Fraser, C. M., and Dando, M. R., Genomics and future biological weapons: the need for preventive action by the biomedical community, Nature Genetics, Vol. 29, 2001, pp.253256.

28 Greenfield, R. A., Lutz, B. D., Huycke, M. M., and Gilmore, M. S., Unconventional biological threats and the molecular biological response to biological threats, Am. J. Med. Sci. Vol.323, 2002, pp. 350357.

29 Edgar J DaSilva, Biological warfare, bioterrorism, bio-defence and the biological and toxin weapons convention, Vol. 2, No. 3, EJB Electronic Journal of Biotechnology, 15 December 1999.

30 John P. Heggers, Microbial InvasionThe Major Ally of War (Natural Biological Warfare), Vol. 143, No. 6, Military Medicine, June 1978, pp. 390-94.

31 In comparison to nuclear weapons, biological weapons have several advantages. Biological weapons are: (i) Made with basic equipment and materials that can be readily obtained on the open market; (ii)Less costly than nuclear weapons; (iii) Easier to make than nuclear weapons (biological agents reproduce quickly in fermenters); (iv) Easily transported and hidden; (v) Comprised of diseases that occur naturally, so the use of biological weapons can possibly be confused with a natural disease outbreak; and (iv) Manufactured with dual-use materials and equipment that also have legitimate peaceful and commercial uses. For these reasons, biological weapons have a reputation as the poor mans atomic bomb. Jessica Eve Stem, Will Terrorists Turn to Poison? Vol. 37, No. 3, Orbis, Summer 1993; see also: The US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Technology Against Terrorism: The Federal Efforts, OTA-ISC-481, Washington DC: US Government Printing Office, July 1991, pp. 21-22.

Chapter - II History of Biological Weapons The use of biological weapons as a tactical means of warfare has been noted as early as in the sixth century BC, when the Assyrians poisoned enemy wells with rye ergot and Solon of Athens used skunk cabbage to poison the water supply during his siege of Krissa. In the fourth century BC, Scythian archers dipped their arrows in blood and manure, attempting to cause illness among their enemies. The Greeks polluted their enemys wells and drinking water supplies with animal corpses in the third century BC, a strategy which, the Romans and Persians adopted later.1 Before World War I Before World War I, the use of biological agents in war was infrequent and scattered and there was no national policy on their use. Though it is not possible to know how effective these were, it is certain that they were used to weaken the enemy in the following instances: In 184 BCE, Hannibal, the Carthaginian leader, ordered earthen pots filled with serpents to be hurled onto the decks of the Pergamene ships. The pots shattered on impact, releasing live serpents among the enemy sailors. The Carthaginian victory can be attributed to the ensuing panic rather than the use of biological weapons.2 During the war between the Genoese and the Mongols in 1343 for the control of the caravan trade route from the Black Sea to the Orient, the Mongols laid siege to Caffa, a Genoese colony in Crimea. However, they were severely afflicted by the plague, which had spread from the Far East and were forced to lift their siege. Eventually, the Mongols hurled cadavers over the city wall, in the hope that the intolerable stench would kill everyone inside. Though that did not happen, contact with tissue and blood during the disposal of the cadavers that were smashed on impact, caused an outbreak of plague in the city.3 In 1422, during the Black Plague, which killed 25 million Europeans in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the bodies of dead soldiers and 2000 cartloads of excrement were hurled into the ranks of the enemy at Carolstein. In 1485, the Spanish supplied their French enemies with wine laced with the blood of leprosy patients. Polish artillery general Siemenowics filled hollow canister shells with the saliva of rabid dogs and fired them against his adversaries in 1650.

In 1710, Russian troops battling Swedish forces in Reval resorted to throwing plague victims over the city walls.4 Even Napoleon used biological weapons when he attempted to force surrender of the city of Mantua by infecting the citizens with swamp fever.

In 1763, at the conclusion of the French and Indian War (1754-1763), the Native Americans conducted a series of attacks on British forts along the western frontier during Pontiacs Rebellion. An outbreak of smallpox at Fort Pitt presented the British with an opportunity to take advantage of the Native Americans unique susceptibility to this disease. On 24 May, Captain Ecuyer, the Fort Pitt commander, gave two blankets and a handkerchief from the smallpox hospital to Native American emissaries, with the hope of spreading smallpox among neighbouring tribes. Several months later, there were large outbreaks of smallpox among various Indian tribes in the Ohio region. However, it is difficult to say whether this was a successful attempt at biological warfare because the disease may have been transmitted through contacts with the colonists, as had previously happened in New England and the South.

In 1775, the British attempted to spread smallpox among the Continental forces by intentionally introducing the variola virus into civilians fleeing Boston city. A similar strategy of deliberately infecting adversaries with smallpox was used during the Revolutionary War by smallpox-immune colonists, whose vaccinations against smallpox had been made mandatory by General George Washington.5 Smallpox proved a formidable foe for the combatants during the first years of the war. General Washington took extreme care to protect his army from smallpox during the lengthy Boston campaign. .6 From World War I to 1972 The birth of bacteriology during the 19th century provided the basis for modern biological weapons programmes.7 The 1899 and 1904 Hague Conventions banned the use of poison and poisoned weapons, thereby deeming biological warfare as illegal. However, the possible use of bacteriological weapons was not specifically identified or addressed in these Conventions. It has been contemplated that the General Staff of the German Army interpreted the Hague Convention as prohibiting anti-human biological warfare only.8 So when Germany was subjected to a British blockade during the First World War, it developed a broad programme of biological sabotage that was directed against neutral suppliers of the Allied Powers from 1915 to 1918. Most armies at the time depended on horses and mules to move supplies, and so the German biological warfare efforts focused primarily on incapacitating such animals. The Germans operated globally and are known to have attempted to spread diseases in Argentina, Finland (then a part of Russia), France, and the United States.9 The German sabotage efforts involved such acts as painting cultures of bacteria onto the nostrils of horses purchased by the Allied Forces for shipment overseas. These acts were carried out by agents in the supplying country. Operations in Norway involved the introduction of small capillary tubes filled with the bacterial agent into sugar cubes, presumably to be fed to the animals. These agents included the bacteria, Bacillus anthracis (causative agent of anthrax), and Pseudomonas mallei (causative agent of glanders in livestock).10 The German biological warfare programme during World War I was meant to target livestock; however, Germany did not wage bacterial warfare against humans.11 Offensive Biological Weapons Programme Some experts are of the view that biological weapons were banned under customary international law prior to 1925, while others have contended that it was prohibited under the 1907 Hague Convention. However, it was the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare (the Geneva Protocol)12 signed in June 1925 that first extended the prohibition of chemical agents in warfare to biological agents. The Protocol had a serious lacuna in that it did not prohibit the manufacturing of biological weapons. As a result, a number of States developed offensive biological weapons programmes in the years between the two world wars.

After World War I, there was widespread speculation in the military as well as media that the next major conflict would involve the extensive use of biological and chemical weapons. A number of States invested heavily in research and development to explore this possibility.13 These included Canada, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, the Soviet Union, the UK, and the US. However, with the exception of Japan, these countries did not use them during World War II.

Japan Japan, which had signed but not ratified the 1925 Geneva Protocol, pursued a huge offensive biological warfare programme, which ran from 1931 to 1945. The programme was developed under the leadership of Ishii Shiro, the director of biological warfare research and testing of the Imperial Japanese Army.14 There was very little literature on biological warfare in the 1930s. Ishii believed that if Japan could develop a biological weapons programme utilizing human experimental data, the country could gain an unbeatable lead. He started his research in 1930 at the Tokyo Army Medical School and at its height, the programme employed more than 5000 people, and killed 600 prisoners a year in human experiments in just one of its 26 centres.

Funded by the Japanese government, Ishii had more than 150 buildings constructed across a huge compound covering over 2 square miles and able to house up to 400 prisoners. This prison camp was known as Unit 731.15 Its operations were conducted under the guise of its official name: the Epidemic Prevention and Water Purification Department of the Kwantung Army of Japan, which was supposed to be researching contagious diseases and water supplies. The Unit 731 experiments involved infecting prisoners (primarily Chinese prisoners of war and civilians) deliberately with infectious agents and exposing them to bombs designed to penetrate the skin with infectious particles. There were no known survivors of these experiments;16 those who did not die from infection were killed to be studied at autopsy, and in the waning days of the war all remaining prisoners were killed to conceal evidence. One of the most notorious examples of vivisection performed by Japanese medical practitioners occurred at Kyushu Imperial University.17 The use of food to transmit diseases was an effective method used by Ishii, as the people in China were starving so they often would not question what they thought was an act of kindness. Ishii filled sweet cakes with typhoid and paratyphoid bacteria; Japanese soldiers were given 300400 such cakes and told to scatter them around fences and trees in Nanking. They hoped to trick the local population into thinking the soldiers had accidentally left their food behind. The people were starving and needed the food in order to survive. An outbreak of disease occurred shortly after the sweet cakes were distributed. After all the experiments conducted in Nanking, researchers concluded that paratyphoid was the most effective of the pathogens tested.18 The Japanese tested at least 25 different disease-causing agents on prisoners and unsuspecting civilians.19 During the war, the Japanese army poisoned more than 1,000 water wells in Chinese villages to study cholera and typhus outbreaks. In addition, Unit 731 bred plague-infested fleas in their laboratories and devised flea bombs and other devices to spread germs and parasites. These were then dropped on Chinese military personnel and civilians, and in rice fields and along roads. Some of the epidemics they caused persisted for years and more than 30,000 people had been killed by 1947, long after the Japanese had surrendered. Ishiis troops also used some of their agents against the Soviet army, but it is unclear as to whether the casualties were caused by the deliberate spread of disease or by natural infections. It has been estimated that as many as 400,000 Chinese died of bubonic plague, cholera, anthrax and other diseases planted by Unit 731.

After World War II, the Soviets convicted some of the Japanese biological warfare researchers for war crimes, but the US granted freedom to all researchers in exchange for information on their human experiments.20 Thus, criminals became respected citizens and a few established pharmaceutical companies. Ishiis successor, Masaji Kitano, even published post-war research articles on human experiments, replacing human with monkey when referring to the experiments in wartime China. In his book on the Japanese biological warfare programme, Harris (1994) comments:21 No one in 1948 was prepared to raise the issue of ethics, or morality, or traditional Western or Judeo-Christian human values in confronting those responsible for the Japanese biological weapons (BW) negotiations. The questions of ethics and morality as they affected scientists in Japan and in the United States never once entered into a single discussion that is recorded in any of the minutes, notes, records of meetings, etcIn all the considerable documentation that has survived over the more than four decades from the events described, not one individual is chronicled as having said BW human experiments were an abomination, and that their perpetrators should be prosecuted. The only concern voiced was that of the possibility that exposure would cause the United States some embarrassment, should word of the bargain become public knowledge.

Canada Canada never had independent biological weapons capability, but its scientists played an important supportive role in facilitating American and British offensive biological warfare programmes between 1939 and 1969. In 1937, Sir Frederick Banting, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1923 for the co-discovery of insulin, strongly advocated for a Canadian biological weapons programme. His proposal faced considerable opposition in Canada. However, the country continued to carry out research on biological weapons as a component of the larger British and US programmes.22 During World War II, Canada was actively involved in various British and American projects for the development of new biological/toxin warfare munitions and delivery systems. However, Canadas military had neither the capability, nor the responsibility of actually using these weapons in a retaliatory attack. This burden rested with its allies. By the end of World War II, Canadian scientists had made a number of significant contributions to the biological warfare programme of the Allies. Canadian facilities tested several biological weapons, including the British Mark I, a four-pound bomblet filled with agents causing brucellosis and tularaemia. The Canadians tested a cluster munition that dispensed darts coated with the poison.23 After World War II, Canada was actively involved in the military aspects of biological agents at Kingston and undertook field experiments at Suffield.24 It prioritized three projects: insect vectors, the problems of ground contamination, and field trials with biological warfare munitions. Canada, the UK and the US continued to cooperate closely in the research and development of biological weapons. An important dimension of Canadas biological warfare planning was its direct linkages with the scientists at the UK Microbiological Research Department. Between 1945 and 1950, Canada participated in a number of field tests in Suffield for both the four-pound bomb and the 500-pound cluster bomb. With the escalation of the Cold War, cooperation on biological warfare between Canada and the US increased substantially.25 During the Korean War in 1952, Canadas involvement in biological warfare came under intense public scrutiny at home and abroad, particularly after Soviet officials accused the US military of using biological weapons against Chinese and Korean soldiers and civilians. During his address to the World Union of Peace Organizations in September 1949, Dr Brock Chisholm, the Canadian-born Director-General of WHO, warned: Biological warfare is not a new kind of war, it is just the latest step  Some seven ounces of a certain biological agent, if it could be effectively distributed, would be sufficient to kill all the people of the world  Large armies, navies and air forces, including the atomic bomb, which have been regarded as the symbol and fact of power, are now obsolete.26 Canadas involvement ended abruptly in November 1969, when the US President, Richard Nixon, curtailed the offensive biological warfare programme. Nixons renunciation surprised the Canadian government. On 24 March 1970, the Canadian diplomat, George Ignatieff, declared in his speech at the United Nations Conference of the Committee on Disarmament meeting in Geneva, Canada never has had and does not now possess any biological weapon (or toxins) and does not intend to develop, produce, acquire, stockpile or use such weapons in the future. This statement was indeed technically correct, but untruthful. Notwithstanding President Nixons decision to abandon the biological weapons programme, there are allegations that the three former Allies continued to investigate these biological agents while vigorously denying it.27 France France conducted a research programme in biological weapons from 1921 to 1926 and again from 1935 to 1940.28 In 1921, the French War Ministry concluded that France should begin a biological weapons programme. Dr Auguste Trillat, director of the French Naval Chemical Research Laboratory, was tasked with conducting experiments on the airborne transmission of bacteria.29 During these periods, France weaponized the potato beetle and conducted research on the pathogens that cause anthrax, salmonella and cholera. French scientists also conducted research on the use of botulinum toxin and ricin.30 France had access to some of the worlds leading biological scientists31 as its programme drew on the expertise of the Pasteur Institute.32 The French effort had both defensive and offensive elements. They researched dissemination techniques and released microorganisms in the Paris subway to determine the degree to which they would disperse. The French researchers were of the view that botulinum toxin could survive the destructive forces of an exploding artillery shell. Before the start of World War II, the French explored several types of biological weapons, including an aircraft bomb, an artillery shell and a hand grenade. They tested some of these devices in early 1940. They destroyed most of their records as their biological weapons programme ended with their military defeat in 1940.33 According to Lepick (2006), France resumed it biological weapons programme in early 1947 after a memo from the government outlined the future biological warfare programme of the country. It recommended that France should undertake studies related to: (i) dispersal devices (bombs, aerosols, atomizers); (ii) diseases caused by exotoxins and diseases capable of being transmitted by insects; (iii) the detection of germs in the atmosphere; (iv) protection from biological weapons attacks; and (v) biological aggression (contamination of waterways and foodstuffs, livestock and crops, and investigations into the possibility of using insects as a vehicle of biological warfare).34 Simultaneously, military intelligence agencies were tasked with gathering information on biological warfare from their military attaches on the ground. In keeping with the countrys obligations under the 1925 Geneva Protocol, the French authorities intended to use biological warfare armament only in retaliation and remained committed to this position till 1972.35 During the initial phase, the biological agents under the French programme were botulinum toxin (produced by Clostridium botulinum), ricin toxin and Bacillus anthracis. In early 1948, the first trials of animal infection in enclosures, using microbial aerosols, were completed. Research carried out between 1948 and 1953 focused on infection of animals by microbial aerosols containing dried bacteria and liquid aerosols containing fresh cultures of Salmonella typhimurium. There were trials of infecting animals through the air and the dispersion of bacterial spray created from fresh cultures by aircraft. The direct contamination of an area with anthrax spores, dispersed by means of frangible devices without the need for explosive charge, was also tried. However, many of the areas explored did not yield conclusive data and the results were limited from a technical point of view.

On 26 August 1952, the Defence Minister of France and the Secretary of State for war approved the creation of a commission to coordinate the efforts of the armed forces with regard to chemical and biological weapons (CBW). The commission gave Frances biological warfare programme a dedicated administrative body that continued till 1956. Some of the tasks allocated to the research bodies involved in the biological weapons programme were: the selection and preparation of biological agents (studies of complex toxins), storage of biological agents, studies on the preservation of the vitality and virulence of lyophilized microorganisms, resistance of bacteria to explosion, potential to infect areas by primary and secondary aerosols, and improvement of explosive devices (dispersion by 150-millimeter self-propelled projectiles and cluster bombs). The research laboratories of the Army Veterinary Service were entrusted with the study of pathogenic animal viruses and the impact of freezing on the behaviour of viruses.

The increased budgetary allocation required for the development of nuclear weapons in France caused an immediate drain on the resources allocated to the biological and chemical programmes. From 1956 to 1962, the offensive biological weapons programme remained neglected. However, various agencies responsible for biological weapons continued their research for another few years, though their findings were not used. Since France signed the 1972 BTWC, it has been working to ensure the strengthening of the Convention and to promote its implementation.36 Hungary In 1936, the Hungarian Highest Defence Council authorized the headquarters of the Hungarian Royal Defence Forces to establish a biological weapons research and development project. This decision was in response to information that neighbouring States had already embarked on similar activities. A team consisting of a medical bacteriologist, a veterinary parasitologist, a chemical engineer and two laboratory technicians was constituted. It was led by a military bacteriologist/epidemiologist of the rank of colonel. All the employees were unmarried males who lived within the institute.

Known as the Health Control Station of the Hungarian Royal Defence Forces, the institution was based in a converted artillery warehouse in Budapest. The campus was heavily secured and housed eight microbiological laboratories and one chemical laboratory, a library, an animal house, and a storage place. The research, which started in August 1938, aimed at achieving offensive capabilities against military personnel, civilian populations, agricultural crops and livestock. The research team focused on three means by which types of biological weapons could be used in attack: by bombs and artillery shells, by secret agents working behind the front lines, and by contamination of territory before a strategic retreat.37 They also tested the viability of pathogens transmitted by infected projectiles from pistols and guns. Pathogens could survive the heat and mechanical shock of firing, causing infections through bullet wounds. They also invented a remarkably simple method of storing inactive bacteria under field conditions without any loss of viability or virulence. This breakthrough enabled them to develop ways of manufacturing chocolate, toothpaste and other domestic items that were contaminated with virulent pathogens. The offensive biological warfare project in Budapest had reached the highest scientific standards of those days,38 but before it could start large-scale manufacturing, the Allied bombers completely destroyed it on 4 April 1944.

After World War II, the military officer who was heading the former Health Control Station made an attempt to revive the project. The government did not accept his proposal that in the Cold War scenario, it would be most advisable for the Communist leadership to revitalize the biological weapons project.39 Italy Italy had started a small biological weapons programme in 1934. It was established in a military hospital in Rome. Mussolini reportedly suggested in February 1936 that Italy employ biological weapons against hostile forces during the invasion of Abyssinia. One of the commanders opposed the proposal, fearing that such attacks would undermine the support being received from Ethiopians who were sympathetic towards the Italians. Further, no possible operational benefits would accrue from the use of biological weapons and it may also invite international criticism. As reported, the biological weapons programme came to halt in 1940 after its director was assigned battlefield duties.40 Poland The Polish biological weapons programme was started in 1928 and operated from a dedicated military laboratory. It was controlled by the intelligence services and its main objective was the development of capacity for conducting biological sabotage operations against a military force occupying Polish territory. By 1938, the biological warfare programme had nearly 70 employees and extensive research was undertaken. Some of the key biological warfare scientists fled Poland ahead of the invading Germans in September 1939 after destroying their military laboratory.41 After World War II, certain research activities relating to biological warfare against animals were initiated in Poland, but there is no evidence in open literature.42 Germany The German military started the first known scientific, state-sponsored wartime use of biological agents during World War I. It used biological weapons to kill packhorses and mules being shipped to Britain and France from neutral nations, including the US, Norway, Spain and Romania, and from South American ports. German operatives infected these animals with glanders and anthrax while they were awaiting shipment overseas. Unsuccessful attempts were also made to cripple grain production in Spain with wheat fungus. It is difficult to determine the effectiveness of this programme; although the Germans thought it was a success, no evidence is available to support this claim.

Most of the belligerents entered World War II with some expertise in biological weapons and most, with the exception of Germany, increased their activities significantly during the war. Evidence suggests that it was Hitler himself who prohibited offensive biological warfare activities in Germany. The reason for this decision is not known, but it had the support of the German commanders and the scientific community as well. After World War II, Germany was subject to severe military restrictions, including bans on biological, chemical and nuclear arms. The origin of the 1972 BTWC can be traced to the Modified Brussels Treaty of 1954, in which treaty members placed an obligation on Germany not to produce biological weapons.43 The United Kingdom More than 250 years ago, the British military used pathogens to eliminate its adversaries. It has been reported that in 1763, the British army used a few infected blankets to start a smallpox epidemic among the members of an American Indian tribe. The UK ratified the Geneva Protocol in 1930, but with the reservations that it would be bound only in regard to other parties to the Protocol and that it would not be bound with respect to States and their allies who broke the prohibition. The biological warfare policy of the UK passed through a number of phases between the early 1930s and mid-1960s. In 1940, a Bacteriological Warfare Subcommittee was established by the Committee of Imperial Defence both for defensive and offensive studies. The UK reserved the right to retaliate with chemical and biological weapons. Concerned that Germany might also be pursuing the development of biological weapons, the UK adopted a policy whereby the means for retaliation would be kept in readiness in the event of a Nazi attack.44 The British biological warfare project was started in February 1934. The Biological Department, Porton (BDP) was formed in October 1940 at Porton Down for the development and testing of biological weapons.45 The British programme was focused on offensive research on anti-livestock microorganisms that could be aerosolized and disseminated from bursting munitions or sprays.46 In 1942, the BDP conducted field trials of anthrax in order to test the practicability of a biological bomb. Gruinard Island, about half a mile off the northwest Scottish coast, was selected for the first anthrax bomb tests.47 The Gruinard tests proved that germs could be produced, transported, loaded into munitions and exploded over target areas without destroying the fragile living organisms that spread the infection. The spores survived and the tests continued, but the environment suffered. The British also tested the agents which cause brucellosis and tularaemia on animals. They sprayed biological agents over animals in rubber dinghies out to sea. They also sprayed stimulants in the Caribbean, off the coast of Scotland and even in the London Underground to see how far they would spread. The British eventually abandoned the testing of germ agents on the island. However, they produced five million cattle cakes contaminated with anthrax for bomber delivery. These were to be dropped from planes over German farming land in order to wipe out cattle and thus strike an economic blow to the country. However, there is no evidence of the strategic utility of such a weapon.

After being informed that the US was still conducting biological warfare research, the UK continued to carry out some research on offensive biological warfare after World War II.48 The Defence Research Policy Committee (DRPC) recommended an increase in funding to make it possible to bring into service by 1957 biological weapons comparable in strategic effect with the atomic bomb. It was planned to develop a 1000-pound cluster bomb, a parent bomb that contained smaller bomblets, each housing a pathogenic load. The parent bomb would break up at a predetermined height and the cluster of bomblets would be released to cover an area as wide as possible. The potential use of biological bombing was expanded beyond industrial targets to include attacks on isolated strongholds, including economic targets.49 The BDP was later renamed the Microbiological Research Department.

The British tested the 1000-pound cluster bomb, under the code name Operation Harness, in the Caribbean Sea. The experiments (December 1948 to February 1949) involved some 450 personnel and a variety of experimental animals. The pathogens used in the Harness trials were Bacillus anthracis, Brucellasuis, Brucella abortus and Francisell atularensis. The main findings contained in the technical report of the trial remain closed.50 With the first British atomic bomb tested in October 1952, the importance of biological warfare in the UKs defence policy began to decline. Very soon, the UK had a new military strategy that down played the importance of biological weapons51and assigned greater importance to nuclear weapons. The requirement for a near-term biological weapons capability was eliminated. By 1957, all offensive development activity relating to biological weapons came to an end.

The United States The US did not ratify the 1925 Geneva Protocol until 1975. In 1942, after the attack on Pearl Harbor brought the country into World War II, it started an extensive offensive biological warfare programme.52 After the attack, research and development activities were continued at Maryland, Fort Detrick, where a large number of highly infectious microorganisms and extremely poisonous toxins were studied.53 Serious work in biological weapons began in the spring of 1943, when it came to be known that the Japanese were using biological agents in China. The research efforts were highly successful, demonstrating that it was possible to transmit certain pathogens through the air in aerosol clouds. At least 18 different biological agents were studied. These included some intended for use against crops and animals. The US scientists primarily focused on B. anthracis and botulinum toxin as antipersonnel agents. The Americans adopted a modified version of the British Mark I cluster munition. The establishment of a large-scale biological agent production facility intended to provide B. anthracis was started, but it could not be completed due to technical problems before the end of the war.54 The US did not use any biological weapons during World War II, but conducted research in close collaboration with the UK and Canada.55 At the end of World War II, the leaders of Japans Unit 731 were in US custody. The US government made a deal with the Unit 731 scientists, offering them immunity against prosecution for war crimes in exchange for the knowledge they had gained through their experiments. After World War II, the Americans followed an offensive biological weapons policy. A number of studies were undertaken in the US to study the effects of pathogens on human beings.56 The army also wished to study how to infect people with yellow fever using mosquitoes. So it released large numbers of uninfected female mosquitoes in the locality, then interviewed civilians about how many times they had been bitten. There was a theory that Soviet citizens would be very susceptible to yellow fever because it is not endemic in Asia. Fleas were also reared and dropped from planes onto animals below.57 During the 1950s, the US also created a large stockpile of bombs containing the pathogen of the disease brucellosis.58 During the Cold War,59 the advocates of biological weapons in the US argued that: (i) the USSR, with its large conventional forces, could overrun Europe and a large part of the Near and Middle East within six months; (ii) toxic weapons could be used to counter Soviet conventional military superiority; (iii) these weapon systems would not destroy property, and thereby freed the victor from the task of urban reconstruction; (iv) they would surprise the enemy; and (v) they could have a considerable psychological impact. They concluded that biological weapons would be more advantageous than chemical and radiological weapons.60 The US continued to develop its biological arsenal for many years after World War II and American interest in funding such research continued.61 However, it is difficult to state the exact details of the biological weapon systems developed during the era.62 The American biological weapons programme was expanded during the Korean War (19501953), when technological advances made large-scale fermentation, concentration, storage and weaponization of microorganisms possible. In addition, a programme to develop countermeasures, including vaccines, antisera, and therapeutic agents to protect troops from possible biological attack, was begun in 1953. During the Korean War, the Soviet Union, China and North Korea accused the US of waging biological warfare against North Korea and China. The Americans feared that the Communist powers were charging the US with germ warfare to justify their intended use of biological weapons.63 The 1962, the US Field Manual on Chemical and Biological Weapons Employment stated that one advantage of biological warfare was that discriminating target identification was not necessary. Biological weapons could cover large target areas, penetrate buildings and defensive fortifications, interdict communication lines, and kill or incapacitate personnel in cities, factories, ports, rail centres, oil fields and missile sites even when only limited intelligence was available.64 By the late 1960s, the US military had developed a biological arsenal that included numerous bacterial pathogens, toxins and fungal plant pathogens that could be directed against crops to induce crop failure and famine.65 In addition, biological weapons were developed for the Central Intelligence Agency using cobra venom and other toxins.66 With regard to the development of munitions, the US started with adaptations of the bombs developed by Britain during the war, but soon extended its programme to include sub-munitions, gas expulsion bombs, various types of line spray tanks and highly specialized projectiles and generators, as well as insect vectors.

The US Army weaponized several agents for use against crops prior to the 1969 decision to dismantle the US offensive biological weapons programme.67 Specifically, it weaponized and stockpiled rice blast, rye stem rust and wheat stem rust.68 Throughout this period, American research and development of biological weapons benefited greatly from a tripartite arrangement among the US, the UK and Canada. All the offensive biological weapons programmes were terminated after President Nixon announced in 1969 that the US was unilaterally renouncing the right to possess or use biological weapons. The US had a large stockpile of biological warfare agents as well as weapons in 1970.69 These were destroyed swiftly. The CIA, however, retained several agents in its refrigerating units, including cobra venom and saxitoxin. This cache was subsequently discovered and destroyed, but the organization expressed no regret for retaining it clandestinely.70 The Soviet Union Russia has a long history of research and development in biological science, going back to the time of Tsar Alexander II. During the early 1920s, the Russians knowledge in the spheres of biology and chemistry received international recognition.71 The Soviet Union had created one of the largest biological weapons complexes in the world.72 It had two main groups of facilities involved in research and development, production and testing of biological weapons  a military-controlled system from the 1920s and Biopreparat, a top-secret programme under civilian cover, which functioned from 1972 to 1992.73 Russia was hard hit by chemical weapons attacks in the First World War, suffering thousands of casualties. In order to be well prepared against chemical and biological weapons threats in the future, the Soviets started research on biological weapons in the late 1920s under the directions of the Red Army. The initial research was on cholera, anthrax, malaria and tetanus, and was reported to have been carried out on prisoners.74 The results of these experiments led the Soviet government to commit to the establishment of an organized offensive biological weapons programme by 1928. However, during the purges of the mid-1930s, large numbers of biological specialists were arrested and some were charged with sabotage, which had an adverse impact on the programme.75 However, in the next few years, the Soviets created a substantial infrastructure to support their biological weapons programme. This included 35 institutes controlled by the Ministry of Health. In addition, several dedicated biological weapons research centres, concentrated around Leningrad and Moscow, were established. The Soviets researched numerous pathogens for use as agents of biological warfare, including B. anthracis, C. botulinum, Francisellatularensis and Y. pestis.76 Testing facilities were established to conduct open-air testing of biological agents on Vozrozhdenia Island in the Aral Sea.77 When World War II started, the Soviet Union appears to have developed and tested a variety of biological weapons systems, including aerosol generators and frangible air bombs, but due to the limited scope of the weapons, the military did not use them in the war.78 However, there are allegations that during the Battle of Stalingrad in 1942, the Russians released F. tularensis among German troops.

After World War II, the Soviet biological warfare establishment was developed and expanded further. Secret laboratories were established and attached to most universities and technical institutes.79 In the 1950s, the possible use of new types of weapons was discussed under the project Problem No. 5 by the Soviet Communist Party Central Committee. This plan referred to the development of defences against biological weapons. In the early 1960s, the Anti-Plague Department was reorganized and integrated into the Problem No. 5 projects. Problem No. 5 had not only entire closed institutes dedicated to it, but also laboratories within otherwise open institutes.80 The Soviet biological sciences establishments were further strengthened in 1966.81 By the 1970s, an expanded and reliable civilianmilitary structure was created as a result of the 1973 Central Committee decision to expand the Soviet biological weapons programme. The Soviet Union signed the BTWC in 1972 and three years later, ratified the treaty. In 1972, the Politburo authorized the creation of the Ministry of Medico-Biological Industry, which became the Main Directorate for Biological Preparations. It was known as Biopreparat, the general name given to the civilian component of the Soviet biological weapons programme, though it was directed by the military.82 Biological Weapons: Post-1972 After World War II, a number of States developed biological weapons programmes and maintained secrecy about them. It is evident that the Soviet Union and the US made heavy investments in research and development of biological weapons. These two States are known to have developed operational capabilities to disseminate biological agents over large areas, using sophisticated aircraft and missile delivery systems.

The 1972 BTWC came in force in 1975. There are 183 State parties to the BTWC (including Palestine) and four signatories (Egypt, Haiti, Somalia and Syria). India has ratified the treaty on 15 July 1974. Ten states have neither signed, nor ratified the BTWC (Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Eritrea, Israel, Kiribati, Micronesia, Namibia, South Sudan and Tuvalu).

A number of countries with a record of supporting terrorist organizations are also believed to have biological weapons programmes. The US Department of State has listed seven countries as State supporters of terrorism: Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria.83 Published reports issued by the Department of Defence and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency suggest that five of these countries  Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea and Syria  have biological warfare programmes.84 Very limited information is available in the public domain on the biological warfare programmes of these countries, except for Iraq.

It is believed that a few States currently possess biological weapons, but there is no supporting evidence in many cases. The list includes China, Cuba, Egypt, Iran, North Korea, Russia, Syria and the US. This part of Chapter II discusses allegations that Iran, North Korea, China, South Africa, Syria, Iraq, Russia Pakistan, Israel are maintaining biological weapons programmes under layers of secrecy.

Iran Iran has a long tradition of adhering to international treaties governing the conduct of warfare. Irrespective of the type of regime in power, it has, since the late 19th century, been party to virtually all agreements restricting the use of poison weapons and the BTWC. Iran signed and ratified the BTWC in 1973 and has publicly denounced biological weapons. Western views of Irans attitude to security are still coloured by the events and aftermath of the 1979 Islamic revolution.85 Iran has an impressive dual-use biological research industry.90 Universities around the country have been conducting research in several pathogens, which could be used both for vaccines and offensive weapons.91 Most civil technology can also be used for building weapons. This creates an ambiguity that cannot be resolved by either the US claims or Iranian denials regarding the research and development of biological weapon capabilities. This makes it almost impossible to disprove a nations interest in biological weapons. Moreover, there is little meaningful distinction between a defensive and an offensive capability. Nations can claim to be conducting defensive research, acquiring key gear for defensive purposes and practising defensive training and manoeuvres, but in actuality, the same resources can be used for offensive purposes.92 Internationally, the threat of biological weapons has been over-hyped since the 2001 anthrax letter attack in the US. The US and its allies have been making allegations against Iran, particularly with regard to the development of biological weapons and bioterrorism.86 One view is that Iran, deprived of nuclear weapons, is likely to develop biological weapon systems.87 In 2006, the US Office of the Director of National Intelligence reported to Congress that Iran probably had the capability to produce large quantities of some biological warfare agents for offensive purposes, if it made the decision to do so. The International Institute for Strategic Studies is of the view that even if Iran has not actively pursued biological weapons in recent years, it is conducting advanced dual-use research in the area of biological warfare.88 In the 2019 State Department compliance report, the US alleged that Iran has not abandoned its intention to conduct research and development of biological agents and toxins for offensive purposes, and accused Iran of conducing biological weapons research under dual-use pharmaceutical laboratories.89 Historically, Iran has indicated some interest in the acquisition of biological warfare agents from foreign sources.93 The information available indicates that Iran is likely to have undertaken some activities related to biological weapons in the past. In 2002, in a submission to the BTWC, Iran declared that it had carried out some defensive studies on the identification and decontamination of and protection and treatment against some agents and toxins. In the same submission, it also denied having a national biological defensive programme.94 Irans official position on the acquisition of biological weapons and weapons of mass destruction (WMD) in general, is contained in its Security Council Resolution 1540 documents, which state that Iran considers the acquisition, development and use of WMD inhumane, immoral, illegal and against its very basic principles. In these reports, Iran also highlighted its efforts to combat the proliferation of biological weapons, naming the relevant Islamic Penal Code article (Article 688) and the provisions made by the Ministry of Health and Medical Treatment and Education in this context.95 In 2007, Iran presented to the BTWC State parties evidence of laws and regulations that it has enacted to counteract the proliferation of biological weapons. These include the Environment Protection and Improvement Act of 1974 and the Importation and Exportation of Noxious and Poisonous Substances through Customs Act of 1988.96 Iran has historically opposed international restrictions on its imports of dual-use biological materials. In April 2020, the US Congressional Research Service concluded that while Iran is likely to have the capability to produce some biological weapons, it is unlikely to use them or transfer them to regional proxies or allies97 for fear of retaliation by international powers.98 North Korea North Korea acceded to the BTWC on 13 March 1987, and has consistently denied that it has biological weapons ever since. It has accused the US of using biological weapons in the Korean War.99 Due to the lack of reliable public information, it is not possible to make a comprehensive assessment of the biological weapons capability of North Korea.

According to South Korean intelligence reports and revelations made by defectors, North Korea started its biological weapons programme as early as the 1960s. Its biological weapons programme is suspected to have been an entirely indigenous effort. It has been reported that North Korea has several laboratories where it can produce and weaponize biological agents, but its lead research facility is the Germ Research Institute of the Armed Forces Ministry.100 The other facilities include the Pyongyang Biotechnical Institute and the Academy of National Defence. There are unconfirmed reports suggesting that the inventory of the Korean Peoples Army (KPA) includes the causative agents Bacillus antrhacis, Clostridium botulinum, Vibrio cholera (cholera), Hantavirus (Korean haemorrhagicfever), Yersinia pestis (plague), Variola (smallpox), Salmonella typhi, and Coquillettida fuscopennata (yellow fever).101 Three of these diseases are included in the CDCs Category A pathogen list and the release of these pathogens would prove devastating.102 A joint working group of a US institute stated that North Korea is assumed to have 13 types of biological agents and it is possible that it would use them in bioterrorism or in an all-out war.103 North Koreas choice of delivery vehicle is unknown and is likely to be tailored according to the strategic and tactical objectives for each weapon. Missiles, drones, airplanes, sprayers and human vectors are potential means for the delivery of biological weapons. North Koreas 240-mm Multiple Rocket Launcher has also been identified as a potential delivery vehicle.104 The Washington Times has reported that the North Korean military has 300400 attack drones capable of carrying biological (as well as chemical) weapons canisters that could reach the South Korean capital of Seoul or major US military bases in Japan.105 A study conducted by the Middlebury Institute of International Studies in the US concluded that North Korea is accessing the work of foreign researchers to enhance its existing biotechnology skills. In 2015, the state media showed images of Kim Jong-un, the North Korean dictator, touring a biological plant that experts say could be engineered to produce weapons. A number of North Korean defectors, including former members of the military, have claimed during questioning that North Korea tests biological and chemical weapons on citizens who have been sentenced to death for crimes against the State. There is speculation that North Korea is far more likely to use biological agents than nuclear ones as an offensive weapon.106 According to Brenden Shull (2020), North Korea has the largest suspected biological weapons programme; however, no reliable details are available on the programme.107 It is a challenging task to make an accurate assessment of North Koreas biological warfare capability.

Since 2014, the US Intelligence Communitys unclassified assessments on biological weapons have dropped North Korea from the list of countries suspected to have such programmes.108 North Korea has justified its fear of other States biological capabilities by citing how in 2015, the US military acknowledged that it had mistakenly sent live anthrax cultures to an American military base in South Korea.109 It even called on the UN Security Council to investigate this act of the US.110 North Korea has publicly declared its wish to become a nuclear power many times, but it is less vocal about its intention or capability with respect to biological weapons. When challenged, it has stated that it is a member of the BTWC and asserted that it does not develop, produce and stockpile biological weapons. It is quite possible that North Korea has engaged in exploratory research on biological weapons, but it is unlikely that the country has been able to establish the conditions required to put together a working weapon system. If facilities are not properly powered and secured, any sort of failure could result in the loss or accidental release of a deadly pathogen.111 No leader or nation would risk using biological weapons whose spread cannot be controlled, and if the country lacks the capability to immunize its own population and possibly that of its allies.

China During the Second World War, China was the victim of biological attacks from Japan. Due to this horrifying experience, China has maintained that it does not have an offensive biological programme. However, it has developed a stronger biodefence infrastructure and a biotechnology industry with dual-use capabilities. The dual-use infrastructure is large enough to accommodate a shift in public policy.112 The US believes that Chinas biological weapons programme started in the 1950s and was still active after the Chinese acceded to the BTWC in 1984. Chinas dual-use infrastructure also gives outsiders an idea of the make-up of its offensive programme.113 After ratifying the BTWC, China has been assuring the world community that it supports the complete elimination of biological weapons globally. The following Joint Statement on Biological Weapons Convention was issued by the Chinese President, Jiang Zemin, and the US President, Bill Clinton, during the Sino-US summit meeting in China in June-July 1998:114 Recognizing the threat posed by biological and toxin weapons, the US and China reaffirm their strong support for the complete global elimination of biological weapons. As States Parties to the BTWC, the two sides stress the importance of the Convention to international peace and security, fully support the purposes and objectives of the Convention, and favour comprehensively strengthening the effectiveness and universality of the Convention.

The US and China each reaffirm that they are determined to strictly abide by the provisions of the Convention, . shall not develop, produce or stockpile biological weapons under any circumstances and shall oppose the proliferation of biological weapons and their technology and equipment.

Both the US and China support efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the Convention, including the establishment of a practical and effective compliance mechanism. The US and China agree that they shall strive to enhance bilateral cooperation and exchanges in the field of biotechnology and vigorously engage in and promote the peaceful use of biological technology.

In a white paper on Chinas national defence, issued in 2008 by the Chinese State Council, the chapter on arms control and disarmament emphasized adherence to the BTWC. It said: China observes in good faith its obligations under the BTWC, and supports the multilateral efforts aimed at strengthening the effectiveness of the Convention. China has already established a comprehensive legislation system for the implementation of the Convention, set up a national implementation focal point, and submitted its declarations regarding confidence-building measures to the Implementation Support Unit of the Convention in a timely fashion.

Although China has been submitting its voluntary annual data declarations on BTWC confidence-building measures (CBM) every year, according to the assessment of the US Department of State in 2005, the information submitted by China continued to be inaccurate and misleading. The 2005 State Department report also identified two facilities that had links to an offensive biological weapons programme. These were the Chinese Ministry of Defences Academy of Military Medical Sciences Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology in Beijing, and the Lanzhou Institute of Biological Produces.115 According to some reports, the Yanan bacteriological factories at Yanan and Xishan have four types of bacteriological bombs: (i) smoke-type bacteria bombs (may refer to aerosols); (ii) paper canister-type, bacteriological containers; (iii) malignant shayan bacteria grenades; and (iv) tetanus bacteria bombs. The products at the Dalian Biological Products Factory at Dalian (Liaoning province) include: (i) tetanus/cholera mix vaccine; (ii) diphtheria vaccine; (iii) rabies virus vaccine; (iv) tetanus vaccine (toxoid); and (v) typhus vaccine.116 In an article published in 2015, an Israeli scholar commented that Chinese scientists were upgrading their genetic engineering techniques to modify certain biological warfare pathogens so as to increase their impact against particular ethnic groups.117 After the spread of COVID-19 across the world, there has been speculation that Chinas biological warfare programme is in an advanced stage that includes research and development, production and weaponization capabilities.118In China, there are 12 facilities affiliated with the defence establishment, i.e. governmental defence facilities. In addition, 30 facilities involved in research on and the development, production, testing or storage of biological weapons are affiliated with the PLA.119 Chinas current inventory is believed to include a full range of biological agents and a wide variety of delivery systems, including artillery rockets, aerial bombs, sprayers and short-range ballistic missiles.120 US intelligence sources continue to maintain that Chinas biological weapons activity has been extensive. China states that it is in compliance with its BTWC obligations and that it has never had an active biological warfare programme.121 South Africa In 1978, P.W. Botha, the former minister of defence, was elected President of South Africa. He took steps to enhance national security and expand the military, police and special operations forces. He promoted a strategy against the total onslaught of terrorist attacks by the African National Congress and insurgents/guerrillas from the neighbouring States. Major General Nieuwoudt was tasked with developing a covert chemical and biological weapons (CBW) programme, and began to recruit university scientists and weapons specialists with the help of Major Basson.122 Basson travelled abroad to collect information about CBW. Among other things, he visited CBW facilities in Taiwan and attended a conference in the US. In 1981, South Africa initiated a combined CBW programme, code-named Project Coast. Basson was appointed the head.123 There is evidence suggesting that the US and the UK were aware of South Africas CBW adventures. The US probably knew of the countrys interest in CBW before the programme was actually started.124 Despite its ratification of the BTWC in 1975, South Africa actively pursued its offensive CBW programme. The decision-making process on CBW was secretive and controlled by the military, which enabled South Africa to develop a very sophisticated programme with little outside scrutiny. The precise scope and results of the programme remain unclear, but public hearings and court documents mention research on bacterial pathogens, viral pathogens and toxins.125 A specialized facility called Roodeplaat Research Laboratories (RRL) was established, and this facility carried out research on biological warfare agents and chemical agents produced at its sister company, Delta G. It also conducted testing using animal models. Both were front companies that appeared to be commercial entities and thus, distanced from the military. Basson recruited scientists to RRL, predominantly from the conservative University of Pretoria. Although most of the senior scientists and managers recruited to RRL were aware that they were employed in front companies, the primary purpose of which was to attend to the CBW needs of the military, this was not made clear to the junior staff members.

RRL was a large, highly sophisticated biological research, testing and production facility. It expanded in phases to include a restricted high-level biosafety compression laboratory and a subsidiary called Roodeplaat Breeding Enterprises, which bred security dogs. Despite being military-operated, RRL was organized as a private company that conducted industrial contract work. This facilitated the recruitment of top scientists and the acquisition of materials. RRL produced and tested all 45 local strains of anthrax bacteria, Brucella maletensis, four types of Clostridium botulinum, cholera bacteria, Yersinia enterocolitica and Y. pestis .126 In addition, it worked on Clostridium perfringens, Escherichia coli, plague, salmonella, HIV-infected blood and snake venom, as well as chemical warfare agents like mustard, sarin, tabun and VX.127 All this work was in violation of South Africas obligations as a BTWC signatory.

By 1985, South Africa had tested the military utility of a number of toxins. Military and police units used chemical and biological agents for counter-insurgency warfare, assassination and the execution of war prisoners. The government allegedly used anthrax and botulinum for assassinations and the military is said to have used cholera bacteria to contaminate water supplies. An unsuccessful project was undertaken for the development of an anti-fertility vaccine, with the express aim of administering it to black women without their knowledge. However, no clear evidence exists of either the weaponization or large-scale production of any pathogen or toxin.128 In the beginning of 1989, President Botha suffered a stroke and was replaced on an interim basis by F.W. de Klerk, who was later elected President. Klerk was not provided with all the details regarding Project Coast, especially the offensive aspects of the CBW programme and its use in assassination activities. In the beginning of 1990, the US, backed by Britain and Israel, issued a strongly worded hostile nation warning on rolling back the South African nuclear weapons programme. This programme was completely dismantled by 1993. However, no pressure was exerted during this period with respect to the CBW programme. In May 1990, a South African newspaper reported that a covert operations unit of the South African government, known as the Civilian Cooperation Bureau, employed biological agents against members of the South West African Peoples Organization. Finally, the UK, the US and other countries pressured the South African government to close its CBW programme.129 In 1993, de Klerk ordered the destruction of all lethal and incapacitating CBW agents, as well as an end to such research and operations.

However, lack of civilian control over military activities made the rollback difficult and concerns over proliferation remained.130 The programme ended after the installation of the new South African government in 1994.131 Since the BTWC lacks provisions for verification, no international inspections of biological weapons have ever been conducted in South Africa. As such, it is unclear whether any ongoing proliferation concerns exist.132 In a statement to the members of the Convention in 2007, South Africa emphasized the BTWCs importance and Pretorias belief in strengthening the implementation of the BTWC as a core element of international security.133 Syria Syria ratified the 1925 Geneva Protocol with reservations. It signed the 1972 BTWC treaty but did not ratify it. The US and its allies suspect that Syria has a well-developed biological weapons programme.134 In 1991, the US passed the Chemical and Biological Weapons Control Act, which provided that it would cease trade with any State that exported agents or equipment contributing to proliferation. This Act specifically banned such exports to Syria, Iran, Libya, North Korea and Cuba.

There are unconfirmed reports that Syria has one of the most significant biological weapons programmes known to the Middle East.135 Most of these reports have been made by officials from the US.136 It has also been alleged that Syria has hired Russian experts who are working to produce anthrax bacteria and load it onto warheads. A department of biology is active in the Scientific Studies and Research Centre, Damascus. In addition, a biological facility is actively functioning in Cerin.137 Despite these allegations, Syria has continued to deny the presence of any biological weapons programme. In November 2005, Syria submitted a report to the United Nations, stating, The Syrian Arab Republic is a State that neither possesses nor intends to acquire weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery, or related materials, as Syria has made it clear in a number of statements presented to the United Nations, the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, and the First Committee of the General Assembly in New York, which deals with disarmament issues.138 The document also explicitly mentioned Syrias lack of biological weapons.

It has been reported that in 2012, a spokesman for the Syrian Foreign Ministry confirmed that the country possessed biological warfare materials.139 In 2013, the US Director of National Intelligence confirmed Syrias biological warfare programme after the Syrian government sent the military to guard all biological stockpiles and testing sites.140 However, not much is known about Syrias biological weapons adventures.141 In the case of Syria, the main threat comes from the possibility of a terrorist organization gaining control of biological weapons. However, the threat of the use of biological weapons by the Assad regime cannot be ruled out.142 Iraq Iraq acceded to the 1925 Geneva Protocol on 7 April 1931 with a reservation: On condition that the Iraq government shall be bound by the provisions of the Protocol only towards those States which have both signed and ratified it or have acceded thereto, and that it shall not be bound by the Protocol towards any State at enmity with Iraq whose armed forces, or the forces of whose allies, do not respect the provisions of the Protocol. In 1974, Iraq stated that in response to a rising threat from Iran and Israel, a government decree had been issued to look at scientific, academic and applied researches in the fields of chemistry, physics and microorganisms.143 Iraq admitted to testing and stockpiling biological weapons in the mid-1990s.144 There is little independently available information about Iraq and its biological weapons programme, apart from that obtained by the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) on Iraq, by its successor, the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), and by the Iraq Survey Group (ISG).145 Iraq had signed the BTWC in 1972, but it did not ratify the Convention until it was forced to do so in 1991, after it was defeated following its invasion of Kuwait. Despite Iraqs efforts to hide its biological weapons programme, the UNSCOM discovered the presence of bioweapons in the country in 1995.146 According to the Iraqis, they had started their biological programme in 1985, during the war with Iran. The Iraqi government admitted that it had five primary production facilities for biological weapons at the time of the Gulf War, including the Sepp Institute at Muthanna, the Ghazi Research Institute at Amaria, the Daura Foot and Mouth Disease Institute, and facilities at Al-Hakam, Salman Pak and Taji. Iraq also admitted that it had manufactured a number of agents but had not weaponized them, although some were extensively tested.147 In 1990, Iraq deployed specially designed missiles with a 600-km range; 13 of these were filled with botulinum toxin, 10 with aflatoxin and two with anthrax spores. Iraq also deployed special 400-lb (180-kg) bombs for immediate use; 100 bombs contained botulinum toxin, 50 contained anthrax spores, and seven contained aflatoxin.148 Iraq has declared that a total of 19,000 litres of concentrated botulinum toxin and 8500 litres of concentrated anthrax spores were produced. Other agents were produced in smaller quantities, and research on viruses (haemorrhagic conjunctivitis viruses, rotavirus and camel pox virus) was carried out, as was genetic engineering of the anthrax bacillus. Work was also done on the drying of anthrax spores. In addition, testing of weaponized biological agents was carried out. Field tests of a crude dissemination device began in 1988 and this was followed by testing of more sophisticated biological bombs and spraying devices.149 As reported, Iraq had tested Bacillus anthracis, Clostridium botulinum and Clostridium perfringens to determine how much of the agent would be needed to kill 50% of those exposed.150 Iraq claimed that these agents were subsequently destroyed. There are unconfirmed reports that when Iraq went into the 1991 Gulf War, it had some biological weapons available for use.151 In mid-1996, UNSCOM destroyed Al Hakam, one of Iraqs principal facilities for the production of bioweapons. In 1998, Iraq refused to cooperate further with UNSCOM, forcing inspectors to pull out of Iraq. The inspectors claimed that due to Iraqs tactics of deception, underreporting, concealment and unilateral destruction of biological weapons during the eight years of inspections, it was difficult to estimate the true magnitude of biological weapons remaining in the country. It was suspected that the actual production of agents by the Iraqis was two-to-four times greater than what they declared.

Following UNSCOMs withdrawal from Iraq, the Security Council Resolution 1284 in December 1999 commissioned the UNMOVIC to continue UNSCOMs mandate of monitoring and dismantling Iraqs WMD proliferation activities, including activities related to biological weapons. The UNMOVIC inspected numerous sites and facilities between November 2002 and mid-March 2003, but were unable to discover any evidence that Iraq was pursuing an illicit biological warfare programme.152 The UNMOVIC described the Iraqi biological weapons programme thus: Of all its proscribed weapons programmes, Iraqs biological warfare programme was perhaps the most secretive. Iraqs programme was kept to a select few officials and that, to maintain secrecy, special measures were taken.153 In March 2003, the US invaded Iraq and overthrew President Saddam Husseins regime. The US government established the ISG to locate WMD stockpiles and equipment suspected to be hidden in Iraq. On 30 September 2004, the ISG released its final report on Iraqs WMD programme, confirming that it found no evidence that Iraq possessed or was developing biological warfare agents or production systems.

Iraq never employed its biological munitions; their effectiveness was dubious. Some senior Iraqi military officers were sceptical of the military effectiveness of their weapons, hoping instead that the psychological effect of a biological attack would have a strategic impact.154 At present, Iraq does not present a biological weapons threat. As reported, the present government has adopted a responsible international position with regard to biological weapons issues. Iraq actively participates in the BTWC review process meetings and supports the work of the UN 1540 Committee.155 Russia There are reports that Russia inherited nearly all its biological weapons capabilities from the former Soviet Union after its fall in 1991.156A few Russian scientists who defected to the UK and the US revealed that the Soviet Union had supported the worlds largest and most sophisticated offensive biological warfare programme, code-named Ferment (also known as Problem F). Ferment focused on solving problems related to the weaponization of pathogens for use against humans. The USSR Ministry of Agriculture ran a programme code-named Ekology, which aimed to develop biological weapons against animals and plants. The institutions which implemented the Ferment and Ekology programmes operated under the ministries of biotechnology industry, health and agriculture, while the 15th Directorate of the Ministry of Defence exercised overall control over Biopreparat.157 The Soviet military doctrine for the use of biological weapons:158 Under the Soviet military doctrine, biological weapons were divided into three main categories: strategic biological weapons, operational biological weapons and strategic-operational biological weapons. Contagious agents such as smallpox and plague were intended for long-range, strategic attacks against the territories of the US, the UK and some other European countries. Smallpox and plague were developed because of their high mortality rate, contagiousness and ability to cause epidemics or even pandemics. Operational biological weapons were intended for use against deep military targets about 100150 km behind the front lines, such as rear services and reinforcements. These agents, such as tularaemia, brucellosis, glanders and Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis, would not generally kill soldiers, but would incapacitate them and thereby make it easier to destroy an enemys defences. Finally, strategic-operational biological weapons using anthrax and the rickettsial Q fever could be used to strike both strategic and operational targets.

The Soviet military had very capable storage facilities. Two types of refrigerated storage tanks were used. The TR-50 stored 50 kg of agent and the TR- 250 stored 250 kg. In the case of smallpox and plague, ongoing production was required because it was not possible to store the agent in a liquid form for a long timethe liquid smallpox had a shelf life ranging from only half a year to a year. The delivery systems for operational biological weapons were mostly medium-range bombers, like the Ilyushin-28, which was fitted with a two-tonne capacity spray tank and had the capability to cover 30004000 sq km of territory using just one plane. A squadron of medium-range bombers was located in the Volga region. These bombers carried 500-kg cluster bombs, each containing about 110 bomblets. In 1988, it was decided to use multiple warhead missiles for biological weapons. Later, heavy cruise missiles were developed for the precise application of biological weapons.

The biological weapons programme of the former Soviet Union was heralded as the most extensive covert biological weapons programme ever in existence. In 1979, an outbreak of anthrax was reported in the Soviet city of Sverdlovsk (now Ekaterinburg). It was alleged that more than 60 residents had died in AprilMay of 1979. The Soviet authorities claimed that these were cases of gastro-intestinal anthrax, resulting from the consumption of animals which had died from naturally acquired anthrax. People outside the Soviet Union, however, suspected that these deaths had been caused by an accidental release of anthrax from a laboratory. This suggested that the Soviet Union was developing biological weapons despite having signed the BTWC. In 1992, the Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, publicly acknowledged that the Sverdlovsk anthrax outbreak was the result of an accidental release of anthrax from a military research facility.159 A few years later, Vladimir Putin, the new president, stated that the Soviet Unions programme had been completely defensive in nature. Putting it differently, the world community cannot ask Russia to dismantle its offensive biological weapons programme, if there is any. In 2012, the-then Prime Minister, Vladimir Putin, and Minister of Defence, Anatoly Serdyukov, spoke publicly about developing weapons based on new physical principles, such as genetics.160 Genetic weapons are an advanced version of biological weapons that cause death and destruction by affecting the internal structure. Given these conditions, it is not unreasonable to conclude that Russia, and other States, may have an interest in and incentive for exploring the utility of genome editing for the development of new and improved biological weapons.161 In December 2014, President Putin announced that under Russias military doctrine, it reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response to the use of nuclear and other types of weapons of mass destruction against it or its allies, as well as in response to aggression against the Russian Federation that utilizes conventional weapons that threaten the very existence of the State.162 The US has repeatedly voiced concern over the status of the biological warfare programme that Russia has inherited from the Soviet era. However, Russia maintains that it is in compliance with the BTWC.163 The secrecy surrounding the research and development of biological organisms prevents anyone from reaching any concrete conclusions. The US has been making assertions on a regular basis that Russia has not dismantled all the components of its biological weapons programme.

Pakistan Pakistan signed and ratified the BTWC in 1972. Pakistans conduct within the various forums of the BTWC allays any suspicion about the country having an active biological weapons programme. Pakistan is of the opinion that a reliable biosafety/biosecurity system should be capable of responding in the event of deliberate or accidental releases. It is also of the view that appropriate safeguards should be included in the biological weapons verification regime itself, and that an emphasis on the verification regime should not eclipse other important issues dealt with in the BTWC. In 2011, Pakistan announced that it had drafted a single law that would comprehensively prohibit designing, development, manufacturing, stockpiling, transport, import, export, sale, acquisition and possession of biological agents and toxins, including their means of delivery.164 However, this law has not yet been approved by the Pakistan federal government.165 Since the 1990s, assessments by the US Department of Defence have claimed that Pakistan has the resources and capabilities appropriate for conducting research and development relating to biological warfare; however, the US has not alleged that Pakistan has any intention of using dual-use capabilities to develop biological weapons.166 According to the Federation of American Scientists, Pakistan is believed to have the resources and capabilities necessary to support a limited research and development effort on offensive biological warfare.167 Since Pakistan has been peddling terrorist activities in India for decades, there is an apprehension that the Pakistan-sponsored terrorists or drones could be used to disseminate biological warfare agents in Indian territory.168 Israel Israel has been accused of using biological weapons in 1948. The charges related to the alleged use of biological weapons include the poisoning of wells in Arab villages to prevent the inhabitants from returning, and inducing a typhoid epidemic in the Arab town of Acre (known to locals as Akko or Akka). The 1925 Geneva Protocol, to which Israel acceded in 1969, does not prohibit the development, stockpiling and production of biological weapons, though it does prohibit their use in warfare.169 Israel has not signed/ratified the 1972 BTWC. It was recently reported that Israel has been working on biological weapons. The US government has never included Israel in its public list of States that allegedly possess offensive biological weapon capability.

In keeping with its policy of maintaining secrecy regarding its WMD, Israel has never made a public statement on biological weapons. It has always been reluctant to participate in regional and international forums on disarmament of WMD. It has taken steps to strengthen export control regulations on dual-use biotechnologies and maintains high security at sensitive laboratories.170 A report by a Swedish defence agency in 2005 alleged that Israel had developed offensive chemical and biological warfare capabilities, though it was not clear whether the country possessed actual weapons stocks at that time. The report stated, Israeli scientists are frequently publishing research papers on both biological warfare relevant organisms and chemical weapons relevant substances. These publications are purely of defensive and protective nature. It is possible to conclude from scientific publications that Israel today possesses an advanced general knowledge of modern chemical and biological warfare agents.171 The authors of this paper were of the view that some of Israels advanced chemical and biotechnical industries could be used for producing warfare agents, if so would be desired.172 However, this is possible in every other industrial State. Besides this, there is no further evidence that Israel has developed offensive chemical and biological warfare capabilities.

There are allegations that certain countries possibly possess a biological weapons programme, but there is no publicly available information to support such a conclusion. The list includes: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Chile, Cuba, Georgia, India, Laos, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Sudan, Taiwan and Vietnam.173 Today, biotechnological research is being carried out in almost every country in the world. Some of the Western States, including the US, have a habit of looking upon all such research with suspicion, particularly in the case of the developing States, with the exception of Israel. This lopsided approach needs to be rectified. In 2001, after the anthrax letters terrorized the US, hundreds of researchers tried to establish that the country was under the threat of biological weapons. In early 2002, the US President, George Bush, announced that he would be requesting some $11 billion over the next two years to further protect the nation from bioterrorism. However, in its investigations into the source of the anthrax attack, the FBI zeroed in on Dr Bruce E. Ivins, a US scientist who had worked at the Armys Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) at Fort Detrick, Maryland. After eight years of investigation, the FBI concluded that Ivins, who had committed suicide in July 2008, had carried out the attacks entirely on his own.

The issue which concerns us today is the military use of the biological sciences. One can observe a pattern of military-funded projects in biotechnology in the US, the UK and a number of European countries. In addition, the US has been sponsoring research in the biological sciences in several other countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Britain, China, Israel, Liberia, South Korea and West Germany. A further problem is the secrecy that usually envelops the biological research programmes. Every State undertaking defensive biological warfare programmes prefers to keep them in a web of the utmost secrecy. What governments acknowledge about security-related activities does not necessarily reflect what they actually do; an honest disclosure is rare when it comes to weapons innovations.174 Recently, the COVID-19 pandemic and lax control over dangerous pathogens in high-profile research laboratories have once again raised the issues of accountability and safeguarding of dangerous pathogens. Renewed calls are being made for greater transparency regarding the oversight of these materials. The emerging field of synthetic biology, coupled with doit-yourself biologists, is also raising concerns about the current and future impact of pathogens on human health and the environment. Advances in the life sciences are creating new challenges with respect to ethics, safety, regulatory matters and security. Under the BTWC, which lacks any verification regime, prohibitions are not absolute. They apply only to types and quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes. Retention, production or acquisition of certain quantities of biological agents and toxins may thus continue, and they may be tested in laboratories and even in the fields.175 States have, therefore, continued to use biological agents for medical purposes, such as therapy, diagnosis and immunization, as well as for the development of protective masks, PPE kits, clothing, warming, and decontamination systems. There are no fixed standards, parameters or international limitations regarding the quantities of biological agent or toxin that may be retained. These permitted uses and undefined limits leave room for the proliferation of biological agents.176 There is thus a serious danger that terrorists may resort to the use of microorganisms as biological weapons in the future. Biological agents provide terrorist groups with a low-cost and relatively easy way to make a weapon that has the potential to affect the world. Biological weapons are inexpensive, can be easily transported and stockpiled, and have the potential to cause destruction worldwide. Today, an individual infected with the COVID-19 virus is a crude biological weapon in the real sense. More dangerous would be those who are asymptomatic carriers of such a virus.177 Given the present environment, the statement made by India on the 45th anniversary of the entry into force of the BTWC is of relevance:178 War, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 766.

As we approach the 9th Review Conference of the Convention in 2021, we reiterate our call for institutional strengthening of the Convention, including negotiation of a comprehensive and legally binding protocol, providing for an effective, universal and non-discriminatory verification mechanism to strengthen the implementation of the Convention by States Parties, ensuring full compliance and deterring non-compliance with it. India strongly believes that the BTWC must respond effectively to the challenges posed by the new and emerging scientific and technological developments of relevance to the Convention. India has been submitting an annual resolution at the UN General Assembly on the Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament, which has been adopted by consensus. The global economic and social implications of the pandemic, caused by COVID-19, have underlined the need for international cooperation, including institutional strengthening of the WHO. There is a need for strengthening cooperation amongst the States Parties to the BTWC aimed at full and effective implementation of the Convention in all its aspects.

The next chapter consists of a detailed discussion of the biological agents which are considered the most dangerous and which could be used as biological weapons.

* * * 1 Kathtyn McLaughlin and Kathryn Nixdorff, eds., Biological Weapons Reader, The Bio-Weapons Prevention Project (BWPP), Geneva, 2009, available at: http://www.bwpp.org, accessed October 16, 2012.

2 The Rise of CB Weapons, vol. I, 1971, in: The Problem of Chemical and Biological Warfare, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), New York: Humanities Press.

3 Bubonic plague is typically transmitted through the bites of infected fleas. But fleas quickly leave a dead body as it cools down, so it is uncertain that the catapulted bodies would have exposed the residents of Caffa through that route. Therefore, it is difficult to consider as an example of biological warfare. CarusWS, The history of biological weapons use: what we know and what we dont, Health Security, Vol. 13, No. 4, 2015, pp. 219255.

4 The use of corpses of men and animals to pollute wells and other sources of water of the opposing forces was a common strategy. The fouling of water supplies continued to be used through the many European wars, the American Civil War, and into the twentieth century. In his Memoirs, General W. T. Sherman expressed discontent with Confederate troops, who were deliberately shooting farm animals in ponds so that their stinking carcasses would compromise the water supplies of the Union forces. Not only did such actions have a demoralising impact on the enemy, but the consumption of contaminated water probably also accounted for many undocumented epidemics of gastrointestinal disease.

5 For more details on this part see Dando M., 2006, Bioterror and Biowarfare, A Beginners Guide, Oxford: One World Publications; K. Nixdorff, M. Hotz, D. Schilling, and M. Dando, 2003, Biotechnology and the Biological Weapons Convention, Munster: Agenda Verlag; E. Geissler, J. E. van Courtland Moon, (eds.), 1999, Biological and Toxin Weapons: Research, Development and Use from the Middle Ages to 1945, Oxford: Oxford University Press; and M. Wheelis, M., Rozsa L. and M. Dando M. (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures. Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

6 Becker Ann M., Smallpox at the Siege of Boston: Vigilance against this most dangerous enemy, Historical Journal of Massachusetts, Winter 2007, pp. 43-75.

7 The formulation of Kochs postulates and the development of modern microbiology during the nineteenth century afforded the capability to isolate and produce stocks of specific pathogens. Substantial evidence suggests that Germany developed an ambitious biological warfare programme during World War I, featuring covert operations in neutral trading partners of the Allies to infect livestock and contaminate animal feed to be exported to Allied forces. George W. Christopher, Theodore J. Cieslak, Julie A. Pavlin, and Edward M. Eitzen, Biological Warfare: A Historical Perspective, Vol. 278, No. 5, JAMA, 6 August 1997, pp. 412-17.

8 The 1902 German General Staff handbook contained a prohibition against the use of poisoned weapons and deliberate propagation of infectious disease. Geissler Erhard, John Ellis van Courtland Moon and Grahams S. Person, Lessons from the History of Biological and Toxin Weapons, in Geissler Erhard, John Ellis van Courtland Moon (ed), 1999, Biological and Toxin Weapons: Research, Development and Use from Middle Ages to 1945, SIPRI Chemical and Biological Warfare Series 18, Oxford University Press, p. 256.

9 Carus W. Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare, Occasional Paper No. 12, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, August 2017, p. 12-13.

10 Kathryn McLaughlin and Kathryn Nixdorff, eds., Biological Weapons Reader, The Bio-Weapons Prevention Project (BWPP), Geneva, 2009.

11 Christopher George W., et. al., Historical Overview: From Poisoned Darts to Pan-Hazard Preparedness, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army Medical Department Centre and School, pp. 1-36.

12 On 17 June 1925, the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, commonly called the Geneva Protocol of 1925, was signed. The scope of the Protocol was limited. It only applied to conflicts between countries adhering to the agreement, meaning it posed no binding constraints on employment in internal conflicts or for use against countries that were not signatories. Nor did it prohibit possession of biological weapons. Many nations added reservations to their adherence asserting a continued right to retaliate in kind should they be attacked by chemical or biological agents, which transformed the protocol into a no first use agreement. Most of the major powers ratified the Geneva Protocol, including France, Germany, Italy, and the Soviet Union, but China did not do so until 1952, Japan until 1970, and the US until 1971. Carus W. Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare, Occasional Paper No. 12, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, August 2017, p. 14.

13 Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, p. 2.

14 Dr. Ishii studied medicine at Kyoto Imperial University in Japan and was a microbiologist. He spent his professional career as a medical officer in the Imperial Japanese Army, beginning as a surgeon in 1921, and by 1945, reaching the position of surgeon general. Ishii committed horrifyingly inhumane acts to reach the top echelon of military medicine in Japan. Early in his career, Ishii extensively researched the effects of biological and chemical warfare that took place during World War I. He was obsessed with building upon this base of knowledge, and the Japanese army obliged. Pure Evil: Wartime Japanese Doctor Had No Regard for Human Suffering, available at: https://www.medicalbag.com/despicable-doctors/pure-evil-wartime-japanese-doctor-hadno-regard-for-human-suffering/article/472462/.

15 While Japanese biological warfare experiments were conducted at several locations, the best known was Unit 731, located near Harbin in Japanese-occupied Manchuria and commanded by Shiro Ishii. Thousands of human beings were experimented on and killed at Unit 731 alone. Additional thousands were killed in other branches of Japans extensive biological and chemical warfare program. It is unlikely that accurate totals will ever become available. Brody Howard, et.al., United States Responses to Japanese Wartime Inhuman Experimentation after World War II: National Security and Wartime Exigency, Camb Q Healthc Ethics, Vol. 23(2), April 2014, pp. 220-230.

16 Some experiments were done to test human responses to freezing temperatures and other extreme conditions. Hands and arms were frozen to create frostbite; some frozen limbs were thawed to study the rotting of human flesh. Some victims were dehydrated to the point of death and others were shot in the stomach so that Japanese surgeons could practise removing bullets. In camps for prisoners of war, legs and arms were amputated without administering anesthesia. People were injected with seawater to determine if it could be used as a substitute for saline solution. Parts of the liver were removed to determine how long someone could live with only a partial organ. To study blood loss, some had their limbs amputated. Sometimes researchers would reattach body parts in novel ways. For example, a stomach would be surgically removed, and then the esophagus would be attached directly to the intestines. To determine the length of time until death, subjects were placed into high-pressure chambers, placed into centrifuges and spun to death, deprived of food and water, or exposed to lethal doses of x-rays. To determine the relationship between temperature, burns, and length of survival, prisoners were torched with flame throwers or exposed to phosphorus or chloride gas. Some were injected with animal blood. Some were buried alive. The Japanese would bury victims while they were still alive; they also castrated the males, removed internal organs to practice surgical procedures, and set some of the people on fire. These actions became routine in Japanese occupied areas of China. Byrd, Gregory Dean, General Ishii Shiro: His Legacy is That of Genius and Madman, Unpublished Thesis, East Tennessee State University, May 2005, pp. 80.

17 This case involved 14 physicians and a nurse. Eight captured American airmen had been placed in a detention barrack. On learning of the airmens capture, one of the universitys doctors cajoled the prison commander to turn the fliers over to the universitys medical school for experimentation. Operations on the men were performed on four separate days in May and June 1945. In one operation, a lung was removed from each of two prisoners. On a second occasion, doctors removed the stomach, heart, and liver from two other prisoners of war. The third experiment led to the death of an airman whose brain was damaged in the course of surgery to examine the function of the trigeminal nerve. Three American fliers were used in the fourth and final test. The doctors operated on stomachs, gall bladders, livers, and hearts. All eight men used in the experiments died on the operating table since dissecting room in the anatomy department was poorly equipped. Roland C.G., Human vivisection: The intoxication of limitless power in wartime, in: Moore B. and Fedorowich K., (eds.) 1996, Prisoners of War and Their Captors in World War II. Oxford: Berg, p. 158. A US tribunal in Yokohama in 1948 indicted nine Japanese physicianprofessors and medical students for conducting vivisection upon captured American fliers. Two professors were sentenced to death and others to 1520 years imprisonment. Williams P, and Wallace D., 1989, Unit 731: Japans Secret Biological Warfare in World War II, New York: Free Press, pp. 178179.

18 Harris Sheldon H. 1994, Factories of Death: Japanese biological warfare, 193245, and the American cover-up, New York: Routledge, p. 77-78.

19 For this purpose, human susceptibility to a staggering array of diseases and pathogens was tested. These including anthrax, plague, typhoid, paratyphoid A and B, typhus, smallpox, tularaemia, infectious jaundice, gas gangrene, tetanus, cholera, dysentry, glanders, scarlet fever, epidemic haemorrhagic fever, diphtheria, pneumonia, cerebrospinal meningitis, venereal diseases and tuberculosis. Harris Sheldon H. 1994, Factories of Death: Japanese biological warfare, 193245, and the American cover-up, New York: Routledge, p. 59.

20 On 15 August 1945, Japan surrendered unconditionally, which ended Japans involvement in World War II. Japanese also demolished Unit 731 in order to erase all evidence and memory of the atrocities committed at the death camp. Ishii ordered the remaining 150 subjects to be executed. Bodies and body parts were buried. Realizing he would be prosecuted for war crimes, Dr Ishii faked his own death and went into hiding to evade justice. He was found in 1946 and turned over to American occupation forces for interrogation. The US was desperate not to have Ishiis knowledge of biological weapons fall into the hands of Russia, including the results of his medical experiments on humans. The US also wanted to supplement its own germ warfare programme knowledge base with the results of the biological warfare experiments conducted at Unit 731. After his capture, Dr Ishii offered to reveal details of the experiments conducted at Unit 731 in exchange for immunity from all the war crimes he had committed. The US agreed to the plea bargain, which also included immunity for top-level members of Ishiis medical research team. In addition to promising immunity from prosecution for war crimes, the US enticed these researchers with money and other gifts so that they would share what had been learnt at Unit 731. Shiro Ishii was never punished for his crimes and died in 1960 at the age of 67.

21 Harris SH., 1994, Factories of Death: Japanese Biological Warfare, 1932-1945, and the American Cover-up, New York: Routledge, pp. 221-222.

22 The Canadian involvement with biological weapon was based on four factors: (i) Canada, unlike its two allies, did not have an independent nuclear deterrent; instead, it was dependent upon the protection of the US nuclear umbrella; (ii) Biological weapons were considered uncontrollable and unpredictable weapons of mass destruction, with only minimal strategic potential; (iii) Successive governments between 1945 and 1969 were unwilling to acknowledge that Canadas armed forces were involved with the offensive biological warfare research of its two allies, either as a deterrent or for retaliatory purposes; and (iv) In Canada, most of the crucial decisions were made by bureaucrats rather than by elected officials and the issue was rarely discussed in the Cabinet. This was particularly the case during the offensive phase (19451969), when the hierarchy of the Defence Research Board (DRB) had virtually a free hand in the operation of Canadas four biological weapons research facilities (at Suffield, Ottawa, Kingston, and Grosse Isle) as well as their interaction with US and British defence facilities. Avery Donald, The Canadian Biological Weapons Program and the Tripartite Alliance, in Wheelis Mark, Lajos Rozsa and Malcolm Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Harvard University Press, pp. 86-87.

23 Although the biological and toxin munitions tested at Suffield in Canada were not used during World War II, Canadas military and political leaders were so impressed with their potential that they decided to retain most of the Canadian biological weapons wartime facilities, and the services of key university and military biological weapons scientists, under the auspices of the newly created Defence Research Board. Avery Donald, 1999, The Science of War: Canadian Scientists and Allied Military Technology during the Second World War, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, pp. 151175, 235255.

24 Avery Donald, 2013, Pathogens for War: Biological Weapons, Canadian Life Scientists, and North American Biodefence, University of Toronto Press, pp. 448.

25 A Canadian report submitted to the Tripartite meetings in 1958, highlighted four major trends that promised to transform a biological weapon into a powerful strategic weapon: (i) The feasibility of large area coverage with inert particles has been demonstrated both in the UK and US, even under random weather conditions; (ii) Success in developing spray devices in the US for producing the fine aerosols necessary to penetrate the lungs; (iii) Significant success in decreasing the death rate of airborne bacteria; and (iv) Canadian work established the feasibility of developing new diseases by adaptation of viruses from one species to another. Avery Donald, The Canadian Biological Weapons Program and the Tripartite Alliance, in Wheelis Mark, Lajos Rozsa and Malcolm Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Harvard University Press, p. 94 26 NAC, Brock Chisholm Papers, Vol. 1, (1949), Address to the World Union of Peace Organizations, Switzerland, 9 September 1949; Ottawa Journal, 10 September 1949.

27 Avery Donald, 2013, Pathogens for War: Biological Weapons, Canadian Life Scientists, and North American Biodefence, University of Toronto Press, pp. 448.

28 Most of the major parties to the 1925 Geneva Protocol submitted formal reservations asserting no first use policy, but retaining the right to counterattack in case of the use of chemical or biological weapons against them. Thus, the reservations allowed States to make broader claims for exempting themselves, in self-defence, from the treatys ban on the use of such weapons. Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, p.5.

29 Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, p. 24.

30 Olivier Lepick, French activities related to biological warfare, 1919-45, in Geissler Erhad and John Ellis van Courtland Mood, 1999, Biological and Toxin Weapons: Research, Development and Use from the Middle Ages to 1945, New York: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, p. 70.

31 Cromartie W.J., BW Intelligence ReportParis Area, European Theater of Operations, United States Army, ALSOS Mission, 18 September 1944, RG 112, Entry 295A, Records of the Office of the Surgeon General (Army), Records of the Preventive Medicine Division, Biological Warfare.

32 Pasteurs institutional legacy gave France a strong system of national and international biological research institutes, which, along with scientific training in its universities and medical schools, provided a decided advantage in exploring biological weapons. In addition to research at the Central Naval Artillery Laboratory, aerosol and bomb trials were conducted at Le Bouchet National Explosives Plant, and animal experiments were conducted at the armys Veterinary Research Laboratory in Paris. Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, p. 25.

33 Carus W. Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare, Occasional Paper No. 12, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, August 2017, p. 21.

34 Lepick Olivier, The French Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark, Lajos Rozsa and Malcolm Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Harvard University Press, p. 109.

35 Ibid, p. 108-131.

36 Lepick Olivier, The French Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark, Lajos Rozsa and Malcolm Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Harvard University Press, p. 108-131.

37 The Hungarians developed and field-tested a number of technologies to be applied in such situations. Glass bombs ranging from 1 to 50 kg were used to produce wet and dry aerosols. Studies were focused on the influence of meteorological conditions and on the effective number of germs per unit area. Bacillus anthracis (anthrax), Clostridium perfringens (gangrene), Salmonella paratyphi (diarrhoeal disease), and Shigella dysenteriae (dysentery) were cultured as biological agents. Attempts were made to increase the virulence of Salmonella paratyphi by serial passage in laboratory animals. Rozsa Lajos and Kathryn Nixdorff, Biological Weapons in Non-Soviet Pact Countries, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 158160.

38 The Hungarians thought that these weapons were highly effective, but that claim is questionable. Their munitions probably could not generate effective aerosols. Carus W. Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare, Occasional Paper No. 12, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, August 2017, p. 21.

39 Ibid.

40 Carus W. Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare, Occasional Paper No. 12, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, August 2017, p. 21-22.

41 Ibid at p. 22.

42 The Central Sanitary Epidemiological Laboratory and Ninth Sanitary Epidemiological Laboratory of the Front were established under Captain Professor Edmund. The laboratory was transferred on 10 February 1960 to the General Karol Military Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology (MIHE). Rozsa Lajos and Kathryn Nixdorff, Biological Weapons in Non-Soviet Pact Countries, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 164.

43 Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 258.

44 British dread of Germanys destructive power motivated the decision to prepare retaliatory biological warfare capacity. Earlier suspicion of Germanys capacity and intent had already aroused British concerns about the threat of biological weapons. Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 40-56.

45 In late 1940, a team of scientists headed by Paul Fildes, a renowned bacteriologist, arrived at the BDP to commence covert research. They established close links with the Canadian and US biological warfare efforts, and their research soon resulted in trials of prototype weapons. Balmer Brian, The UK Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 48.

46 The British programme focused primarily on research designed to understand the character of aerosol transmission of pathogens. The British explored several biological weapons options, but developed only a few. The focus was the Mark-I, a modification of the Type F cluster munition originally intended for use with high explosives and chemical agents. Field tests demonstrated that it could disseminate B. anthracis from a liquid slurry, although it was highly inefficient in generating aerosols. The British were unable to produce the bulk agent required to fill these munitions and intended to rely on the US to do so. The planned US facility was not completed before the war ended and the munitions were never fielded. Carus W. Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare, Occasional Paper No. 12, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, August 2017, p. 24.

47 The Gruinard tests suggested that, weight for weight, anthrax could be 1001000 times more potent than any chemical weapon of the time, to a distance of 500 yards. Further, an efficient electrically fired four-pound bomb was developed; 106 of these could be packed into a cluster bomb derived from models used for incendiaries in the First World War. Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, p. 55.

48 In October 1945, the Defence Committee issued a directive that approved the continuation of biological weapons research in peacetime. Offensive research, according to a statement of biological warfare policy written five years later, was implicit in this general directive. An advisory committee was established in the immediate post-war period to oversee biological warfare research and policy. The three key committees were: (1) the Biological Research Advisory Board, which consisted of independent scientists who provided technical advice to the BPD and also passed on technical advice and information to other committees; (2) Chiefs of Staff Biological Warfare Sub-Committee, for discussing and formulating offensive and defensive policy on biological warfare; (3) the DRPC, which consisted of scientists and services representatives responsible for balancing priorities across the board in defence research. Agar J. and Balmer B., British Scientists and the Cold-War: The Defence Policy Research Committee and Information Networks, 19471963, Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences, Vol. 28, 1998, pp. 209252.

49 Balmer Brian, The UK Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 51.

50 In each trial, experimenters floated a trot of up to 35 inflatable rubber dinghies, each mounted with an aluminium animal crate and glass sampler, out to sea. Each crate could accommodate a sheep in the main body and a monkey in a separate box on top. In addition, side arms that could slide onto the main body could contain three guinea pigs each. The entire apparatus was then towed into position by two motorboats. For each test, a bomb was mounted on a float and fired by remote control, thus releasing an infectious cloud over the trot. Two parent ships were used for entry and exit into the test. HMS Narvik acted as the clean ship from which the animals and equipment were floated out to sea, and the dirty ship, HMS Ben Lomond, received the infected animals and contaminated equipment after they had been exposed to agents. The dirty ship also had accommodation for the scientific staff, an enlarged sick bay and a laboratory space. Balmer Brian, The UK Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 5455.

51 The Planning Committee of the Chiefs of Staff was of the view that: (i) the strategic value of biological weapons in the present known forms is insignificant; (ii) there is negligible risk of biological or chemical weapons being used against the UK; (iii) the West must continue to possess an offensive capability in biological or chemical weapons, but this does not require the UK to possess such a capability; and (iv) the degree of risk does not justify defensive measures against biological or chemical weapons being taken by units of the armed services based in the UK, or by ships at sea. PRO, DEFE 41/156, JP(58) 65 (final), Chiefs of Staff Committee, Joint Planning Staff, Biological and Chemical Warfare, Report by the Joint Planning Staff, 30 July 1958. The report is cited as DRP/P(58)29.

52 In February 1942, a special committee appointed by the National Academy of Science submitted a report to the Secretary of War on a future biological programme. The committee, composed of eminent biologists such as Edwin B. Fred of the University of Wisconsin and Stanhope Bayne-Jones of Yale University, concluded that an enemy attacking with biological weapons could gravely harm human beings, crops and livestock. Although the report stressed defensive measures and called for work on vaccines and the protection of the water supply, the committee also recommended that the US conduct research on the offensive potentials of bacteriological weapons. Bernstein Barton J., The Birth of the US Biological-Warfare Programme, Scientific American, Vol. 256, No. 6, June 1987, pp. 116-121.

53 US Army Activity in the US Biological Warfare Programmes, US Dept of the Army, Washington, DC: US Dept of the Army, 24 February 1977. Tests were carried out in the anti-personnel programme both with simulant microbes and with pathogens. The programme included a research and development facility at Camp Detrick, Maryland (renamed Fort Detrick in 1956), testing sites in Mississippi and Utah, and a production facility in Terre Haute, Indiana. While the US did fill about 5000 bombs with anthrax spores at a pilot plant at Camp Detrick, none were ever used. R. Harris, and J. A. Paxman, 1982, A Higher Form of Killing, New York: Hill and Wang.

54 John Ellis van Courtland Moon, US Biological Warfare Planning and Preparedness: The Dilemmas of Policy, in Geissler Erhard and John van Courtland Moon (ed.),1999, Biological and Toxin Weapons: Research, Development, and Use from the Middle Ages to 1945, SIPRI/OUP, pp. 215-254.

55 Carus W. Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare, Occasional Paper No. 12, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, August 2017, p. 25.

56 The US Defence Departments Committee on Biological Warfare conducted field tests in over 200 populated areas across the nation. Field tests were conducted using nonlethal forms of bacteria in order to test their dispersion properties as weapons. Field tests were conducted in San Francisco (1950), Norfolk, Virginia (1951), Minneapolis, Minnesota (1953), the Gulf coast of Florida (1955), Savannah, Georgia (195658), and New York City (1966). Further, animal and human volunteer studies were conducted at the Dugway Proving Ground, Utah (1955), South Dakota and Minnesota (1957). In 1955, the US biological warfare programme reportedly performed experiments on military and civilian volunteers in which volunteers were exposed to agents such as Francisella tularensis and Coxiella burnetti, as well as non-lethal stimulants. See: Cole Leonard, 1988, Clouds of Secrecy: The Armys Germ Warfare Tests over Populated Areas, Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield; Endicott Stephen, and Edward Hagerman, 1999, The United States and Biological Warfare: Secrets from the Early Cold War and Korea, Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

57 Leeson Kate, Biological Weapons: Bioterrorism and the Public Health, Medical Association for Prevention of War, 2000, p. 22-23.

58 Brucellosis causes fever, drenching sweats, and highly incapacitating headache and back pain, usually lasting for weeks or longer, and in natural outbreaks, the estimated fatality rate is about 2%. Thus in a large city, tens of thousands would die, so the weapon was actually lethal in its effect. If the target population included high numbers of people already at risk (those suffering from wartime deprivations, such as malnourishment, loss of housing and poor medical care, and the elderly, children, pregnant women and the sick), the fatality rate would be much higher than predicted. For each offensive programme that was planned, military defencesprotective masks, vaccines and drugswere included to reduce the impact of surprise attacks. Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 7-8 59 The US, believing that the USSR was developing a biological warfare capability, also prepared itself to wage biological warfare if it became necessary or militarily desirable to do so. The biological weapon effort was bolstered by the deterrence theory and by the conviction that the US must be prepared to retaliate. The Cold War conditioned the US to see the USSR as a formidable and determined enemy. This led to the development of every possible weapon to secure world domination. Advocates of biological weapons were of the view that it was a flexible weapon system, relatively cheap to develop and maintain, and easy to hide. Moon John Ellis van Courtland, The US Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 9.

60 Dorothy L. Miller, Military Biology and Biological Warfare, Historical Office, Office of the Executive, Air Materiel Command, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, September 1958, Vol. 1, pp. 15, 13; Vol. 2, p. 184.

61 Bernstein Barton J., The Birth of the U.S. Biological-Warfare Programme, Scientific American, Vol. 256, No. 6, June 1987, pp. 116-121.

62 Although several dozen countries have been accused of having a biological weapons programme since 1945, the supporting evidence is weak or even nonexistent in many cases. Collecting information on biological weapons programmes is difficult, even for intelligence organizations, and there is limited information available on the extent and character of past programmes. A review of the open-source literature supports claims that there were possibly as many as eight countries continuing biological weapons development in 1990s. Carus W. Seth, A Century of Biological-Weapons Programs (19152015): Reviewing the Evidence, The Nonproliferation Review, Vol. 24 (12), 2017, pp. 12953.

63 Moon John Ellis van Courtland, The US Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 12.

64 Headquarters, Department of the Army, FM 3-10: Chemical and Biological Weapons Employment, February 1962, p. 51.

65 Ed Regis, The Biology of Doom: The History of Americas Secret Germ Warfare Project (London: Henry Holt & Co., 1999); Judith Miller, Stephen Engelberg, and William J. Broad, Germs: Biological Weapons and Americas Secret War (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001).

66 US Senate, Unauthorised Storage of Toxic Agents: Hearings before US Senate Intelligence Committee, 94th Cong, 1st Sess. Washington, DC: US Senate; 16-18 September 1975.

67 Several facilities were dedicated to biological warfare preparedness after World War II: Camp (later Fort) Detrick, Maryland; Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland; the X-201 Plant, Pine Bluff, Arkansas; Dugway Proving Ground, Utah; Plum Island, New York; and the Chemical Corps School, Army Chemical Center (which later became Fort McClellan), Alabama. Moon John Ellis van Courtland, The US Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 19.

68 Table 1: George W. Christopher, et al., Biological Warfare: A Historical Perspective, JAMA, Vol. 278, No. 5, 6 August 1997, p. 412.

69 Listed by the Defence Secretary Laird in July 1970, available at: Moon John Ellis van Courtland, The US Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 37-39.

70 Moon John Ellis van Courtland, The US Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 36.

71 Roffer Roger, 2010, Biotechnology in Russia: Why it is not a success story? Swedish Defence Research Agency, p. 17.

72 There is no authoritative and comprehensive account of the Soviet biological warfare programme. The discussion of Soviet or Russian activities is almost always confined to the defensive aspects, usually vaccine development. Articles have been published in Soviet scientific journals on basic and applied research that has potential offensive biological weapons applications. However, no firm conclusions may be drawn in the absence of information that reveals intent. A few Soviet scientists (Kanatjan Baizakovich Alibekov  who later changed his name to Ken Alibek, Igor Valeryanovich Domaradsky, Vladimir Artemovich Pasechnik and V.S. Koshcheev) who defected to the UK and the US have published their account of work related to biological weapons in Russia (Soviet Union?).

73 Choffnes Eileen, Germs on the Loose, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Vol. 57, No. 2, March/April 2001, pp. 57-61.

74 As reported, the Soviets initially focused on weaponizing Bacillus anthracis and Clostridium botulinum and developing efficient methods of disinfecting persons and equipment contaminated with pathogens. The laboratories also studied Vibrio cholerae and Yersinia pestis to ascertain whether they would be useful as biological warfare agents; the latter was eventually weaponized. Zilinskas Raymond, The Soviet Biological Weapons Program and its Legacy in Todays Russia, Washington DC: National Defence University Press, 2016, pp. 60, at p. 6.

75 Bojtzov Valentin and Geissler, Eehard, Military biology in the USSR, 1920-45, in: Geissler E. and J. E. van Courtland Moon, (eds.), 1999, Biological and Toxin Weapons: Research, Development and Use from the Middle Ages to 1945, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 153-67.

76 Carus, Op cit at p.22-23.

77 Valentin Bojtzov and Erhard Geissler, Military Biology in the USSR, 192045, in Geissler and Moon, 153167; Walker.

78 Hart John, The Soviet Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 134.

79 Popovsky M., 1979, Manipulated Science: The Crisis of Science and Scientists in the Soviet Union Today, New York: Doubleday, p. 72.

80 Zilinskas Raymond A., The Anti-Plague System and the Soviet Biological Warfare Programme, Critical Reviews in Microbiology, Vol. 32, 2006, p. 53.

81 The institutes involved in work related to biological weapons (offensive or defensive) included the Institute of Physical Chemistry (Chernogolovka), the Institute of Bio-Organic Chemistry (Pushchino), the Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Microorganisms, the Scientific Research Institute of Biological Experiments in Chemical Compounds, the Institute of Highly Pure Biological Preparations (Leningrad), the Institute of Immunology (Soviet Ministry of Health), the N.F. Gamaleya Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, the D.I. Ivanovsky Institute of Microbiology, and various other Academy of Medical Sciences and Ministry of Health facilities. Hart John, The Soviet Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 135.

82 Biopreparat initially consisted of at least six scientific production organizations: Biomash, Biosyntez, Enzym, Farm Pribor, Progress and Vector. As a rule, the Soviet military occupied the leadership positions in Biopreparat and most of the Biopreparat personnel were initially military personnel. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Kalinin became chairman of the newly established joint-stock company Biopreparat, a position he held until at least the late 1990s. Hart John, The Soviet Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark L., Rozsa Lajos and Malcolm R. Dando (eds.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, p. 140.

83 US Department of State, 1996 Patterns of Global Terrorism Report, available at: http://www.state.gov.

84 Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Adherence To and Compliance With Arms Control Agreements, 1996, available at: http://www.acda.gov, and Office of the Secretary of Defence, Proliferation: Threat and Response, November 1997.

85 Bucht Goran, et. al., Irans Disarmament and Arms Control Policies for Biological and Chemical Weapons, and Biological Capabilities, Swedish Defence Research Agency, December 2003, pp. 137.

86 The UK, the US and Germany have expressed concerns over biological weapons activities in Iran. These allegations cannot be confirmed and, therefore, words such as likely, capable of, could, technically capable of and dual-use have been used to support their assessment. Bansak Kirk C., Managing networks of risk: A tailored approach to Irans biological warfare threat potential, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Vol. 67(5), 2011, pp. 6676.

87 According to an Israeli researcher, Irans efforts to equip itself with biological weapons are concentrated efforts, assisted by Russia and a few other States. This contributes to an operational offensive capability whose effect will be comparable to that of nuclear weapons. Shoham Dany, Chemical and Biological Weapons in the Arab Countries and Iran: An Existential Threat to Israel, The Ariel Centre for Policy Research (ACPR) Publishers, July 2001, pp. 119, at p. 55. Dr. Dany is a senior researcher at the Begin-Sadat Centre for Strategic Studies, Bar Ilan University, Israel.

88 Irans Nuclear, Chemical and Biological Capabilities: A Net Assessment, International Institute for Strategic Studies, London, 2011.

89 Although the US and others have asserted that Iran initiated a biological weapons programme in the 1980s, possibly in response to Iraqi activities during their 19811988 war, almost nothing is known about it. Most of the open-source reporting refers to dual-use items not necessarily associated with biological warfare activities. Carus W Seth, A Short History of Biological Warfare: From Pre-History to the 21st Century, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Occasional Paper No. 12, National Defence University Press Washington, D.C., August 2017, p. 12.

90 Iran has a growing biotechnology sector that is one of the most advanced in the developing world. The country has long been recognized as a leader in Southwest Asia in several fields, including pharmaceuticals, vaccine research and development, and agricultural biotechnology. The dominant Iranian research interests in agricultural biotechnology are improving crop resistance to pests and disease using genetically conferred anti-insect toxin production, the discovery and development of new pesticides, anti-insect pheromone and hormone treatment, mycotoxin inhibition pesticide dissemination techniques, and mechanisms of plant damage and disease. Behzad Ghareyazie, Iran: Hopes, Achievements, and Constraints in Agricultural Biotechnology, in Gabrielle J. Persley and M.M. Lantin, (eds.), Agricultural Biotechnology and the Poor: Proceedings of an International Conference, 21-22 October 1999, Washington, D.C., USA, pp. 100-104.

91 These allegations were made by Alireza Jafarzadeh and Ms Soona Samsami of the US office of the National Council of Resistance of Iran, at a press briefing on 15 May 2013. However, these cannot be substantiated. It was stated that the Armed Forces Command headquarters, the Ministry of Defence, the Revolutionary Guard Joint Command headquarters, the Revolutionary Guard Imam Hussein University and the Ministry of Intelligence and Security were involved in acquiring and stockpiling microbial weaponry. A special organization, dubbed Special Chemical, Biological and Nuclear Industries, has been set up in the Ministry of Defence. This entity is also involved in chemical and biological activity. (This could be mentioned elsewhere, in context.) Available at: https://www.iranwatch.org/library/ncri-iranian-regimes-programsbiological-weapons-5-15-03, accessed 15 July 2020.

92 Development and proliferation is made much easier because of the dual-use nature of many of the components necessary for a biological weapons programme. According to several reports, companies based in China, Russia, North Korea, Switzerland, India, Germany, Italy, Cuba and Spain have provided Iran with biotechnological components and dual-use biological agents that may be incorporated into its biological weapons programme. Cordesman Anthony H. and Seitz Adam C., Iranian Weapons of Mass Destruction: Biological Weapons Programme, Centre for Strategic and International Studies, 2008, p.15 93 In 1988, Hashemi Rafsanjani, the speaker of the Iranian parliament who was later elected President of Iran, publicly stated, ...we should fully equip ourselves in defensive and offensive use of bacteriological (as well as chemical and radiological) weapons. Gregory F. Giles, The Islamic Republic of Iran and Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Weapons, in Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, and James J. Wirtz, eds.,2000, Planning The Unthinkable: How New Powers Will Use Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Weapons, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, p. 84.

94 Iranian CBM Submission to the BTWC, 2002, as quoted in Milton Leitenberg, Assessing the Biological Weapons and Bioterrorism Threat, Strategic Studies Institute, December 2005, available at: www.strategicstudiesinstitute.army.mil.

95 For more details see: Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI) available at: https://www.nti.org/learn/countries/iran/biological/, accessed 15 July 2020.

96 National Laws and Regulations on Handling and Application of Biological Agents and Toxins, Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, 23 August 2007, available at: www.brad.ac.uk.

97 As for the terrorist organizations that have close working ties with Iran, both groups  Hamas and Hezbollah  may be willing to use biological weapons, especially against Israel and its allies, including the US. But the likelihood of Iran equipping either group with biological weapons is remote. Pfluke, Courtney Anne, An Examination of the Potential Threat of a State-Sponsored Biological Attack Against the United States: A Study of Policy Implications, Missouri State University Graduate Thesis, 2019, p. 52-53.

98 Kenneth Katzman, Irans Foreign and Defence Policies, Congressional Research Service, 29 April 2020, p. 12, available at: https://fas.org/sgp/crs/mideast/R44017.pdf.

99 During the Korean War (19501953), North Koreas population experienced outbreaks of cholera, typhus, typhoid and smallpox, which North Korea attributed to biological weapons attacks by the US.

100 Ju-Hwal Choi, Testimony of Colonel Ju-Hwal Choi, Colonel of KPA, before 105th Congress, Sess. 1, North Korean Missile Proliferation, 1997, p.8.

101 Strategic Weapon System: North Korea, Janes Sentinel Security Assessment, 5 July 2010.

102 Defence White Paper, Republic of Korea, Ministry of National Defence, 2012, p. 36.

103 Hyun-Kyung Kim, Elizabeth Philipp, and Hattie Chung, North Koreas Biological Weapons Program, The Known and Unknown, Belfer Center at Harvard October 2017, p. 6.

104 Kim Hyun-Kyung, Elizabeth Philipp and Hattie Chung, The Known and Unknown: North Koreas Biological Weapons Programme, Harvard Kennedy School: Belfer Centre for Science and International Affairs, October 2017, pp. 36.

105 Taylor Guy, North Korea Attack Drones Carrying Biological, Chemical Weapons can Strike Seoul within 1 Hour, The Washington Times, 22 May 2017, available at: www.thewashingtontimes.com.

106 Ryall Julian, North Koreas Bioweapons More of a Threat than Nuclear Arsenal, The Telegraph, 18 January 2019, available at: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2019/01/18/north-koreas-bio-weapons-threat-nuclear-arsenal/.

107 Brenden Shull, Strengthening the Biological Weapons Convention: Preventing the Use and Proliferation of BW, ODUMUNC 2020 Issue Brief for General Assembly, First Committee (Disarmament and International Security), pp. 16.

108 John Parachini, Why We Should be Skeptical About, Recent Reports on North Koreas Biological Weapons Programs, 30 January 2019, available at: https://www.38north.org/2019/01/jparachini013019/.

109 Sara Reardon, US military accidently ships live anthrax to labs, Nature, 28 May 2015.

110 North Korea accuses US of targeting it with anthrax and asks UN for help, The Guardian, 12 June 2015.

111 Loria Kevin, Everything We Know About North Koreas Bioweapons Programme, Asia-Pacific, Business Insider (New York, NY), 25 July 2017.

112 Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, U.S. Department of State, August 2012, www.state.gov.

113 Pfluke, Courtney Anne, An Examination of the Potential Threat of a State-Sponsored Biological Attack Against the United States: A Study of Policy Implications, Unpublished Thesis, The Graduate College of Missouri State University, 2019, pp. 154.

114 Available at: http://www.acronym.org.uk/old/archive/dd/dd27/27china.htm.

115 Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Non-proliferation and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, US Department of State, August 2005.

116 Chansoria Monika, Is China Producing Biological Weapons? Look At Its Capabilities and International Compliance, Japan Forward, 5 March 2020.

117 Dany Shoham, Chinas Biological Warfare Programme: An Integrative Study with Special Reference to Biological Weapons Capabilities, Journal of Defence Studies, Vol. 9, No. 2, April-June 2015, pp. 131-156. Dany Shoham works with the Begin-Sadat Centre for Strategic Studies, Bar Ilan University, Israel.

118 As the Covid-19 pandemic continues its destructive course, two theories are being widely aired. First, that the pandemic may have been the result of an accident at a biosafety level 4 laboratory in Chinas Wuhan city. Second, and this is more fanciful but not impossible, that China deliberately launched a biological attack in order to position itself as the greatest superpower, while flattening its rivals industrial and economic capacity. Both theories have strong supporters armed with a battery of facts, but without any supporting data. Tara Kartha, The Print, 3 April 2020, available at: https://theprint.in/opinion/covid-19-a-chinese-weapon-or-an-accident-world-muststop-playing-in-bio-labs/394160/.

119 For list of facilities see: Dany Shoham, Chinas Biological Warfare Programme: An Integrative Study with Special Reference to Biological Weapons Capabilities, Journal of Defence Studies, Vol. 9, No. 2, April-June 2015, p. 143-144.

120 Rise of Chinas Biological Warfare Programme, 22 March 2020, available at: https://greatgameindia.com/chinas-biological-warfare-program/.

121 In 2011, the Chinese Foreign Ministry stated that China continues to support the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction, including biological weapons. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Peoples Republic of China, The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, 7 April 2011.

122 Meek Sarah and Chandre Goulg, Motivations and Means: Scientists in Apartheid South Africas Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Weapons Programs and Relevance for UNSCR 1540, in Bosch Olivia and Peter van Ham (ed.), 2007, Global Non-Proliferation and Counter-Terrorism: The Impact of UNSCR 1540, Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 54-69.

123 Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programmes to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, p. 155-156.

124 Gould Chandre and Alastair Hay, The South African Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark, Lajos Rozsa, and Malcolm Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Harvard University Press, pp. 201-202.

125 The South African programme, code-named Project Coast, was highly secret and operated through front companies. There are no publicly available documents providing a clear picture of the nature and extent of the projects activities. Most of what is known about the programme has come from material presented to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the trial of Basson (who was head of the programme), and the personal recollections of some of the scientists who participated. The main biological weapons development facility was located north of Pretoria at RRL, built in 1986. Scientists who worked there have claimed that the main aim was to provide the military and police with covert assassination weapons for use against individuals perceived to be a threat to the apartheid government.

126 Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), Hearings on South Africas Chemical and Biological Warfare Programme, testimony of Jan Lourens, DaanGoosen, Mike Odendaal, and Schalk van Rensburg; and Centre for Conflict Resolution, Basson Trial: Weekly Summaries of Court Proceedings, October 1999-April 2002, testimony of Andre Immelman and James Davies.

127 Available at: https://www.nti.org/learn/countries/south-africa/biological/, accessed 15 July 2020.

128 Stephen Burgess and Helen Purkitt, The Rollback of South Africas Biological Warfare Programme, US Air Force Counterproliferation Centre, 2001, pp. 118.

129 Ibid, p. 53-54.

130 On 31 March 1993, Basson was retired by President de Klerk from the SADF Medical Service and became a reservist. Basson had also been ordered to destroy all documentation of Project Coast. However, Basson did not follow the orders of his superiors to the letter and kept the documentation of the Project Coast research alive. Stephen Burgess and Helen Purkitt, The Rollback of South Africas Biological Warfare Programme, US Air Force Counter-proliferation Centre, 2001, p. 54.

131 In April 1994, South Africa held its first multiracial elections, installing its first democratically elected government. A year later, Project Coast was officially shut down, although the public knew nothing about it until Bassons arrest in early 1997. Singh Jerome Amir, Project Coast: Eugenics in apartheid South Africa, Endeavour, Vol.32, No.1, 2008, pp. 5-9.

132 The South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) was established at the end of 1995. The mandate of the Commission required full disclosure of and transparency about the past actions of current and former government officials. The TRCs investigation into Project Coast was limited by restrictions imposed by the Ministry of Defence that were designed to ensure that the investigation did not become a fishing expedition. Basson was arrested in January 1997. When his car was searched, four trunks containing hundreds of secret documents on the CBW programmes covert operations were recovered. These included lists of some of Project Coasts murder weapons and dubious contacts from around the world. Gould, C. and Folb, P., Project Coast: Apartheids Chemical and Biological Warfare Programme, UNIDIR, 2002, pp. 4; In August 1998, Basson was charged on 17 counts including murder, conspiracy to commit murder, fraud, and the possession of and dealing in, illegal substances. His criminal trial started in 1999 in the Pretoria High Court. On 22 April 2002, a judge dismissed all the charges against Basson and granted him amnesty.

133 Statement by South Africa to the Meeting of States Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention, Geneva, 10-14 December 2007.

134 The biological warfare agents that are believed to have been developed by Syria include virulent pathogens, such as anthrax germs, and the lethal biological toxins, botulinum and ricin. Western estimates suggest that Syria has significant quantities of these biological warfare agents, although the evidence for this is inconclusive. Biological Warfare in Syria: The Silent Weapon, News Activist, 12 March 2017, available at: http://newsactivist.com/en/news-summary/contemporary-issues-winter-2017-centennialcollege/biological-warfare-syria-silent.

135 Pfluke, Courtney Anne, An Examination of the Potential Threat of a State-Sponsored Biological Attack Against the United States: A Study of Policy Implications, unpublished thesis, The Graduate College of Missouri State University, 2019, pp. 154, at pp. 40-48.

136 In February 1974, the US Army Chief of Staff, General Creighton Abrams, mentioned the sophistication, completeness, and extensiveness of Syrias biological weapons programme as seen during the Arab-Israeli war of October 1973. Nearly 20 years later, the Director of US Naval Intelligence, Rear Admiral Thomas A. Brooks, made a statement confirming Syrias offensive biological weapons capability. Pfluke, Courtney Anne, An Examination of the Potential Threat of a State-Sponsored Biological Attack Against the United States: A Study of Policy Implications, Unpublished Thesis, The Graduate College of Missouri State University, 2019, pp. 154, at pp. 40-48.

137 ShohamDany, Chemical and Biological Weapons in the Arab Countries and IranAn Existential Threat to Israel, The Ariel Centre for Policy Research, July 2001, p.35-36.

138 Amended National Report of the Syrian Arab Republic, Permanent Mission of the Syrian Republic to the United Nations, United Nations Security Council, 10 November 2005.

139 In July 2012, the Syrian Foreign Minister, Jihad Makdissi, stated that Syria would never use chemical or biological weapons and that the Syrian military was guarding all stockpiles and sites, confirming the existence of a Syrian biological weapons programme and putting to rest years of speculation by the international community. As a result, James Clapper, the US Director of National Intelligence, confirmed Syrias long-standing biological warfare programme in March 2013. Syria primary biological weapon programmes are run out of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) in Damascus, with government laboratories in Aleppo and Homs. The SSRC is a huge complex, with wings and units designated for research on specific pathogens. The laboratories are state-of-the-art and, unlike chemical weapons, stockpiling biological weapons is obsolete. The infrastructure to support both clandestine and legitimate research is identical, making the identification of the development of biological weapons exceptionally difficult. As with vaccine development, it is only at the very end that the process becomes offensive. Aalst Jill Bellamy van and Olivier Guitta, Syrias Real Threat: Biological Weapons, The National Interest, 19 September 2013, available at: https://nationalinterest.org/commentary/syrias-real-threat-biological-weapons-9093. Also see: Chemical and Biological Weapons Status at a Glance, Arms Control Association, 22 June 2018, available at: https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/cbwprolif.

140 Jill Bellamy Van Aalst and Olivier Guitta, Syrias Real Threat: Biological Weapons, 19 September 2013, available at: http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/syrias-realthreat-biological-weapons-9093.

141 A researcher states, Syria runs its suspected primary biological weapon programmes out of the SSRC in Damascus, with additional laboratories in Aleppo and Homs. It is difficult to confirm biological weapon development because the infrastructure needed for creating weaponized viruses and vaccines is typically the same. Unlike chemical weapons, which can be counted and stockpiled, biological weapons are living organisms that are not generally stockpiled so it is hard to know exactly where, what, and how much the government may be researching and for what purposes. Pfluke, Courtney Anne, An Examination of the Potential Threat of a State-Sponsored Biological Attack Against the United States: A Study of Policy Implications, unpublished thesis, The Graduate College of Missouri State University, 2019, pp. 154, at pp. 40-48.

142 Syria has one of the largest biological warfare programmes known in the Middle East. The biological warfare agents that are believed to have been developed by Syria include virulent pathogens, such as anthrax germs, and the lethal biological toxins botulinum and ricin. Western estimates suggest that Syria has significant quantities of these biological warfare agents, although the evidence for this is inconclusive. Biological Warfare in Syria: The Silent Weapon, News Activist, 12 March 2017, available at: http://newsactivist.com/en/news-summary/contemporary-issues-winter-2017-centennialcollege/biological-warfare-syria-silent.

143 Pearson Graham S., 2005, The Search for Iraqs Weapons of Mass Destruction: Inspection, Verification and Non-Proliferation, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 338, at p. 209.

144 During the Gulf War in 1991, Saddam Hussein publicly announced Iraqs possession of biological weapons, which he regarded as an integral element of his arsenal. He personally authorized the useof biological warfare against the nations of Israel and Saudi Arabia, and the military forces of the US. However, the extent of Iraqs programmedid not match Saddams public claims. Chemical and Biological Weapons Status at a Glance, Arms Control Association, April 2020, available at: https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/cbwprolif.

145 Pearson Graham S., The Iraqi Biological Weapons Programme, in Wheelis Mark, Lajos Rozsa, and Malcolm Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Harvard University Press, pp. 479, at p. 169.

146 In 1991, United Nations Security Council Resolution 687 required Iraq to reaffirm its commitment to the 1925 Geneva Protocol, to ratify the BTWC and to accept, under international supervision, the destruction, removal or rendering harmless of: (a) all chemical and biological weapons and all stocks of agents and all related sub-systems and components and all research, development, support and manufacturing facilities related thereto; (b) all ballistic missiles with a range greater than 150 kilometers and related major parts and repair and production facilities. Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programs to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 258, at 160-172.

147 Cordesman Anthony H., Iraqis Past and Future Biological Weapons Capabilities, Centre for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, February 1998, pp. 26.

148 Zilinskas R.A., Iraqs biological weapons: the past as future? JAMA, Vol. 278, 1997, pp. 418-424.

149 In August 1991, the first UN inspection of Iraqs biological warfare capabilities was carried out in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf War. The representatives of the Iraqi government informed the UN Special Commission that the country had conducted research into the offensive use of biological warfare agents. Iraq admitted to having loaded botulinum toxin (which causes muscular paralysis, resulting in death) into 16 warheads, anthrax (which causes high fever and is usually fatal within two weeks) into five warheads, and aflotoxin (which causes liver cancer) into four warheads. It also admitted to having filled 157 bombs with the same biological warfare agents and having conducted research on tricothecenemicotoxin (which causes nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea); wheat cover smut (which ruins food grains); haemorrhagic conjunctivitis (which causes extreme pain and temporary blindness); rotavirus (which causes acute diarrhoea that can lead to death); and camel pox (a version of smallpox). Jeffrey McNeely, Environmental Impacts of Arms and War, in Lakshman D. Guruswamy (ed.), Arms Control and the Environment, New York: Transnational Publishers, Inc, pp. 47-48.

150 Smithson Amy E., Ugly Truths: Saddam Hussein and Other Insiders on Iraqs Covert Bioweapons Programme, James Martin Centre for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey Institute of International Studies, 2013, p.5.

151 Iraq is believed to have maintained a substantial stock of biological warfare agents and was researching different ways of weaponizing them. Following revelations made by Lieutenant-General Hussein Kamel, a son-in-law of the Iraqi leader who defected to the US in 1995, Baghdad admitted for the first time that it had produced biological agents. Guy B. Roberts, Arms Control without Arms Control: The Failure of the Biological Weapons Convention Protocol and a New Paradigm for Fighting the Threat of Biological Weapons, INSS Occasional Paper 49, March 2003, Colorado: USAF Institute for National Security Studies, pp. 20-21.

152 For more details, see: United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) during the period from 1 June to 31 August 2005, Appendix: Biological Weapons Programme of Iraq, Summary, UN Doc S/2005/545 dated 30 August 2005. Also see: S/1995/864, Report of the Secretary General dated 11 October 1995.

153 Pearson Graham S., 2005, The Search for Iraqs Weapons of Mass Destruction: Inspection, Verification and Non-Proliferation, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 338, at p. 209.

154 Carus W. Seth, 2017, A Short History of Biological Warfare: From Pre-History to the 21st Century, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Washington DC: National Defence University, pp. 68, at p. 31.

155 The Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), available at: https://www.nti.org/learn/countries/iraq/biological/ 156 Pfluke Courtney Anne, An Examination of the Potential Threat of a State-Sponsored Biological Attack Against the United States: A Study of Policy Implications, unpublished thesis, The Graduate College of Missouri State University, 2019, pp. 154, at pp. 4073.

157 Zilinskas Raymond A., The Anti-Plague System and the Soviet Biological Warfare Programme, Critical Reviews in Microbiology, Vol. 32, 2006, pp. 4764.

158 Biological Weapons in the Former Soviet Union: An Interview with Dr Kenneth Alibek, conducted by Jonathan B. Tucker, The Nonproliferation Review, Spring-Summer 1999, p. 1-10.

159 Cole Leonard, 1997, The eleventh plague: the politics of biological and chemical warfare, New York: W H Freeman, p. 178.

160 The Russian Ministry of Defence defines genetic weapons as a type of weapon able to damage the genetic (hereditary) apparatus of people. It is assumed/expected that some viruses can/may serve as the active principle. These viruses are in possession of mutagenic activity (with the capability to cause hereditary changes) and can introduce into chromosome cells that contain deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and even chemical mutations, taken from natural sources by chemical synthesis or biotechnological methods. The primary result of the use of genetic weapons is damage/injury and changes to the basic/primary structure of DNA, which can lead to serious diseases and their hereditary transmission. Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, Encyclopedia: Weapons on New Physical Principles; see Zilinskas Raymond, 2016, The Soviet Biological Weapons Programme and its Legacy in Todays Russia, Washington DC: National Defence University Press, p. 45.

161 Kirkpatrick Jesse, et.al., Editing Biosecurity: Needs and Strategies for Governing Genome Editing, Institute for Philosophy and Public Policy, December 2018, pp. 110, at p. 9.

162 Arms Control and Proliferation Profile: Russia, Arms Control Association, October 2018, available at: https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/russiaprofile.

163 There are allegations that the Soviet Unions extensive offensive germ programme included weaponized tularaemia, typhus, Q fever, smallpox, plague, anthrax, Venezuelan equine encephalitis, glanders, brucellosis and Marburg. The Soviet Union also researched numerous other agents and toxins that can attack humans, plants and livestock. The Russian government has repeatedly clarified that after ratifying the BTWC in 1992, it has been committed to the destruction of its biological weapons. Chemical and Biological Weapons Status at a Glance, Arms Control Association, April 2020, available at: https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/cbwprolif.

164 Shoham Dany, Pakistan and Biological Weapons, Journal of Defence Studies, Vol. 8, No. 2, AprilJune 2014, pp. 85-108.

165 The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention Implementation Bill is yet to be approved by Pakistans Federal Cabinet. Ghumman Mushtaq, Cabinet to approve Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention Implementation Bill, Business Recorder, 29 April 2019.

166 NTI, available at: https://www.nti.org/learn/countries/pakistan/biological/, accessed 17 July 2020.

167 Federation of American Scientists, available at: https://fas.org/nuke/guide/pakistan/bw/index.html.

168 Dozens of weapons and communication devices have been seized in Punjab since the beginning of 2019, after several Pakistan-origin Chinese drones were caught dropping the consignments along the Punjab border in India. At least eight drone sorties, dropping 80 kg of weapons, have been carried out by Pakistan-based terror groups in Punjab over the last couple of months. Available at: https://www.timesnownews.com/india/article/pakistan-could-smuggle-biological-weapons-into-india-via-dronesnear-punjab-fear-security-agencies/552761.

169 Israels quest for biological weapons is reported to have begun as early as 1948, when a unit dedicated to biological warfare was set up within the HEMED, the science department of the Israel Defence Forces, called the HEMED BEIT. The unit later moved to its permanent location at Ness Ziona, outside Tel Aviv, where the Israel Institute of Biological Research (IIBR) was established in 1952. The IIBR has been at the forefront of conducting research into various aspects of biological (and chemical) warfare. It has been pointed out that its capabilities and expertise are consistent with a full array of activities associated with a sophisticated biological weapons programme. S. Samuel C. Rajiv, Israel and Biological Weapons, vol. 1 no. 4, Journal on Chemical and Biological Weapons, July-September 2008, pp. 13-15.

170 Available at: https://www.nti.org/learn/countries/israel/biological/, accessed 16 July 2020.

171 Norman Magnus, et. al., Israel and WMD: Incentives and Capabilities, Swedish Defence Research Agency, December 2005, pp. 55, at p. 37.

172 Ibid at p.38.

173 Carus W. Seth, 2017, A Short History of Biological Warfare: From Pre-History to the 21st Century, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Washington DC: National Defence University, pp. 68, at p.59.

174 Falk Richard and Wright Susan, Preventing a Biological Arms Race: New Initiative, in Wright Susan (ed.), 1990, Preventing a Biological Arms Race, Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 334-335.

175 Article 1, the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, 1972.

176 Solis Gary G, 2016, The Law of Armed Conflict: International Humanitarian Law in 177 According to the UN chief, Antonio Guterres, the COVID-19 pandemic has provided a window into how a bio-terrorist attack might unfold across the world, issuing a strong warning that non-State groups could gain access to virulent strains that could cause similar devastation around the globe. COVID-19 pandemic provides window into how bio-terrorist attack might unfold in world: Guterres, The Economic Times, 10 April 2020.

178 Press Release, Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, dated 27 March 2020.

Chapter - III The Biological Weapons: Threat from Pathogens Many biological agents like viruses, bacteria, protozoa, parasites, fungi, and biological toxins can cause illness in humans, but not all are capable of affecting public health and medical infrastructures on a large scale. As discussed in the previous chapter, the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has divided biological agents and toxins into three categories, out of which Category A pathogens have high pathogenicity and poses high security threat and risk to use as a weapon against militaries and civilian population. In this chapter, causative agent of the diseases such as Anthrax, Ebola, Merburg, Smallpox, Plague, Tularemia and botulotoxin have been covered.

I. Anthrax Anthrax is the name of a disease caused by the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus anthracis, which is commonly found in soil of endemic areas. If the seed-like spores of the bacteria enter a cut in a persons skin (a form of the disease known as cutaneous anthrax), the result is a serious infection whose most distinctive feature is a coal-black scab. Thats how anthrax got its name from anthrakis, the Greek word for coal. Owing to its high pathogenicity and spore forming capability, B. anthracis is considered as one of the most important biological warfare agents. Anthrax is a zoonotic disease which is mainly associated with herbivores and domestic animals. The disease occurs regularly in countries where widespread vaccination of animals is not practiced. Human anthrax is less common and usually spreads to human populations through close occupational proximity to infected livestock by handling infected domestic animals including cattle and goats or their products like skin, meat, hides and bones.

There are three forms of naturally occurring human anthrax infection: (a) Cutaneous anthrax is the result of spores entering the body through small breaks in the skin which is characterized by a sore at the point of infection that develops into a painless ulcer covered by a black scab (eschar). It accounts for approximately 95% of all reported human anthrax cases and could also occur as a result of an aerosol attack. (b) Gastrointestinal anthrax typically occurs as a result of eating the meat of animals infected with B. anthracis. The intestinal tract, mouth, or throat (oropharyngeal anthrax) may be infected. Gastrointestinal anthrax is normally thought to occur as a result of ingestion of vegetative bacteria rather than spores; therefore, gastrointestinal anthrax is not expected to result from exposure to aerosolized spores. (c) Inhalational anthrax is the result of breathing B. anthracis spores into the lungs. Inhalational infection is the form of anthrax that would be of most concern following an intentional aerosol attack with B. anthracis. In addition, injection related anthrax is a newly recognized entity. A number of cases have occurred in Europe in intravenous drug users. This is believed to be caused by injecting heroin that is contaminated with material containing B. anthracis spores. Among the three clinical forms of anthrax, cutaneous anthrax is most frequent but can be easily cured. The other two forms, gastrointestinal and inhalational anthrax are less common but difficult to cure and have high mortality rate.

Bacillus anthracis exists in two forms, vegetative cells (inside the host) and spores for persistence in the soil or environment. In the soil, B. anthracis is generally found in endospore form where it can remain viable for decades in this form. After ingestion or coming in contact with skin lesions, bacteria multiply and within a few days or weeks cause the death of human or animal host.1 Cutaneous anthrax, when left untreated, is deadly in about 20 percent of the cases. When the spores are eaten or inhaled, the danger is far greater: gastrointestinal anthrax kills animals or people in about 20 percent of the cases and inhalational anthrax could kills about 95 percent of the victims.2 However, modern medical treatments have reduced the mortality rates considerably. When anthrax spores are eaten by grazing livestock, even if the infected animals dont die, their meat cannot be eaten because it will spread the disease to anyone or anything that consumes it.

Historical: Throughout history, from biblical times to modern day, many illnesses have been described with symptoms that resemble anthrax.3 Anthrax is thought to have originated in Egypt and Mesopotamia. A number of scholars are of the view that in Moses time, anthrax may have caused what was known as the fifth plague, described as a sickness affecting horses, cattle, sheep, camels and oxen. Ancient Greece and Rome were also well acquainted with anthrax, and this is illustrated in many of the ancient writings of the most famous scholars from those times. Epizootics are believed to have killed 40,000 horses and 100,000 cattle herded by the Huns during their movement across Eurasia. Major outbreaks occurred in Germany in the 14th century and in Russia in the 17th Century. During the 1600s, large-scale epizootics, known collectively as the Black Bane, killed 60,000 cattle in Europe. The economic loss created by the Black Bane was significant and the scientific community of the time recognized the need for the investigation of its cause. The worlds largest recorded anthrax epidemic in humans occurred during the civil war in Zimbabwe (1979 to 1980). Over 9,400 cases, including 182 fatalities, were reported in a two-year period. Anthrax had been endemic in Zimbabwe (formerly called Rhodesia) before the war. However, fewer than 500 cases had been reported from the years 1926 to 1977. The dramatic increase in the number of anthrax cases in 1978 has been attributed to the effects of war in the country, including lack of food, which forced people to handle and eat diseased animals. During this epidemic, anthrax among cattle preceded human anthrax in almost all affected areas.

Anthrax as a biological weapon Anthrax is classified by the US Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as a Category A agent, posing a significant risk to national security. Anthrax has been used as a bio-weapon for about a century mixed with powders, sprays, food and water. The invisible, infectious, odourless and tasteless spores make Anthrax a flexible bio-weapon. Research on anthrax as a biological weapon began more than 80 years ago. Today, a few nations are believed to have offensive biological weapons programs.

Germany developed an ambitious biological warfare program during World War I, including covert operations in neutral countries to infect livestock and contaminate animal feed to be exported to the Allied forces. B. anthracis was used to infect Romanian sheep for export to Russia. Argentinean livestock intended for export to the Allied forces were infected with B. anthracis, resulting in the death of more than 200 mules from 1917 to 1918. German sympathizers in the United States attempted to contaminate animal feed and to infect horses intended for United States troops. Japan conducted biological weapons research in occupied Manchuria from 1932 until the end of World War II. Unit 731, a biological warfare research located near the town of Pingfan, was the centre of the Japanese biological weapons development program. Prisoners of war were infected with B. anthracis and other pathogens. At least 10,000 prisoners died as a result of experimental infection or execution following experimentation during the Japanese program between 1932 and 1945. At least 11 Chinese cities were attacked with biological agents, including anthrax.

Military interest in the use of anthrax as a weapon began in the First World War. The Germans used it to contaminate animal feed and livestock but, unlike chemical gases, it was not employed directly against enemy troops. The first mass use of anthrax spores as a weapon is said to have taken place during the Japanese occupation of China from 1932 to 1945. The Japanese allegedly experimented with the use of anthrax and other biological weapons in Manchuria, and some 10,000 deliberately infected prisoners are thought to have died as a result. In 1919, government officials in Bradford, England, passed the Anthrax Prevention Act, which stipulated that imports from certain countries must be decontaminated.

In the Second World War, the Germans did not launch the much-feared biological attack, although they and the Allied forces experimented with the possibilities of using anthrax or other agents. During World War II, the British started their biological weapons programme to counter suspected Japanese and German biological threats. The UK military tested spore delivery systems of anthrax on the tiny island of Gruinard off the Scottish coast. These spores persisted and remained theoretically capable of infection for decades afterwards.4 In 1942, the US began an offensive biological program in a research and development facility at Camp Detrick, Maryland, where 5,000 bombs filled with B. anthracis spores were produced. After the Second World War, the US continued its biological weapon research into the 1950s, when Iowa State University produced the virulent Ames strain of anthrax which was later sold to many parts of the world. The basic research and development activities continued at Camp Detrick. The US programme was expanded during the Korean War (1950-1953). In 1953, the US began developing countermeasures, such as vaccines and antisera, to protect troops from biological attacks. In 1954, a new production facility was built at Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Technical advances by this time allowed large-scale fermentation, concentration, storage, and weaponization of microorganisms. During the summer 1968, the US conducted open-air biological tests over the Pacific Ocean, 1,000 miles southwest of Hawaii. These tests further increased international pressure for biological disarmament. On 25 November 1969, President Nixon renounced the development, production, stockpiling, and use of biological warfare agents. The Department of Defence was required to dispose of existing biological weapons and scale down the program to include research only for defensive measures.5 In the wake of the announcement, the US Army Medical Unit changed its name to the US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) and shifted its focus to the development of vaccines, protective measures, and detection systems.

Despite the widespread ratification of the BTWC6 in 1972 banning offensive bioweapons, experts believe that several signatory countries may be violating the conventions terms and developing offensive biological weapons. It has been alleged that at least 17 nations continue to engage in such weapons programmes.7 However, it is unclear who has access to weapon grade anthrax and where biowarfare research is still under progress.8 It has been reported that anthrax in Saddam Husseins biological armoury came from the British governments centre at Porton Down in Wiltshire.9 The Soviet Union activities were exposed in the years following the 1979 Sverdlovsk anthrax epidemic.10 The Soviet government publicly blamed contaminated meat, but US intelligence sources suspected the outbreak was linked to anthrax spores at an army laboratory.11 Use of Anthrax by Terrorists In July 1993, a liquid suspension of Bacillus anthracis was aerosolized from the roof of an eight-story building in Kameido, Tokyo, Japan, by the religious group Aum Shinrikyo. However, it failed to cause any harm mainly due to the use of an attenuated B. anthracis strain, low spore concentrations, ineffective dispersal, a clogged spray device, and inactivation of the spores by sunlight. Producing large amounts of anthrax in powder form for its use as an effective large-scale weapon, is a complicated and expensive process. It requires the use of large centrifuges for repeated washings, and then intensive drying to produce the military-grade powder. This incident affected the law enforcement, scientific, and medical communities within the United States.

In 1998, New York Times reported that the Russian scientists have genetically engineered a new form of anthrax that may defeat the vaccine developed for protection of the American troops against such biological agents.12 As reported, the new germ contained two non-anthrax genes that may alter the way in which it causes disease. Anthrax normally afflicts animals like cattle and sheep, but it can cause severe illness and death in humans who inhale large doses, making the anthrax bacillus a weapon of potentially horrifying dimensions.

In September 2001, immediately after attack on the World Trade Centre towers in New York, at least five anthrax-contaminated letters were mailed through the US Postal Service resulting in five fatalities and making 17 others sick.13 Beyond the toll in human lives, the attacks also carried a significant cost in terms of disruption and decontamination. Select congressional office buildings were closed for periods of up to several months. Postal facilities in Washington, DC, New Jersey, and Connecticut, and the AMI building in Florida remained closed for more than a year.14 According to the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, all anthrax spores in the letter belonged to the Ames strain and responded to antibiotic treatment, leading to the conclusion that all the spores had the same origin and were not genetically modified to alter resistance to antibiotics.15 The characteristics of the spore preparation suggested that the source was to be found in the US Army Medical Research Institute for the Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID). The actual perpetrator, supplier, and other vital questions remain questionable till date; although it is widely believed the attack was undertaken by Dr. Bruce Ivins, American military anthrax expert at the USAMRIID in Fort Detrick, Maryland.16 The anthrax bioterrorist attack of 2001 cost the US millions of dollars in containment, treatment, decontamination, and associated expenses.17 Anthrax as a Biological Warfare Agent The North Atlantic Treaty Organization lists 31 agents as potential bioweapons and anthrax is one of the top four agents listed in it.18 In the past, anthrax was considered a veterinarian problem of minor significance, with most cases attributed to occupational exposure. However, this attitude toward anthrax has changed following the 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States. There is a possibility for the use of anthrax as bioweapon by terrorist groups.19 For use as bioweapon or in terrorism, the spores of B. anthracis may be manipulated and concentrated in an unnatural way to represent a direct threat to human health through respiratory, gastrointestinal or cutaneous exposure.20 The following attributes of Bacillus anthracis make anthrax as the number-one biological threat to the military.21 High lethality: Virtually 100 percent of exposed personnel could die from one breath of air with a lethal concentration of anthrax spores. A lethal concentration has been estimated to be eight thousand spores to 50,000 spores. Antibiotic-resistant strains of B. anthracis exist in nature and could be used in an intentional release. Untreated inhalational anthrax has a high fatality rate.

Noncontagious: This allows a military to use it against another military without concern of secondary spread from person to person. It also allows anthrax to be targeted at specific populations.

Easy to protect with advance preparation: An enemy could vaccinate his troops prior to an attack and know they were protected. Likewise, antibiotics can be given in advance to mitigate the effects. This would give an advantage physically and psychologically for invading forces to know that they were protected when entering a contaminated zone.

Easy storage for long periods: Anthrax spores can remain viable for years. Climate control is not as critical as with other microbes because the spores have been known to live for decades in arduous environments.

Stable in multiple weapon systems: while most biological agents cannot withstand the turbulence experienced from being sprayed or detonated over a target, the hardiness of anthrax allows enough of it to survive to retain its lethality. They can be used in a missile warhead, artillery or mortar shell, or can be disseminated by a sprayer.

Ultraviolet resistant: The ultraviolet rays from sunlight may degrade most potential biological warfare agents, two agents, Bacillus anthracis and Coxiella burnetii, are considered resistant to degradation from sunlight.

Short incubation period: If a weapon were to be used against military forces, being able to predict its time of effect is important. Since the incubation period of anthrax is one to six days, prediction of the timing of the effect would be much easier than for an agent such as brucellosis that has an incubation period ranging from five to sixty days.

Easily available: Since anthrax is an animal disease that occurs around the world, soil samples from many different locations make anthrax readily available at numerous locations around the globe. Bacillus anthracis is widely available in microbe banks around the world.

Easy to produce: Bacillus anthracis can be produced in equipment common to almost any biologic production laboratory. It is easier to produce than almost any other biological warfare agent.

Mass production and dissemination: There is evidence that techniques for mass production and aerosol dissemination of anthrax have been developed. The hardiness of anthrax spores in the environment may make anthrax aerosol dissemination more effective than many other potential agents.

Can be used as a powder or liquid: This flexibility allows anthrax to be used in various delivery systems, thereby enhancing a perpetrators options.22 B. anthracis has always been high on the list of potential agents with respect to biological warfare and bioterrorism. When anthrax spores enter the body, particularly when inhaled or ingested, they immediately become active, multiply, and release a three-part protein toxin, of which one part is deadly to humans and is referred to as the lethal factor. The lethal factor interferes with the bodys ability to mount an immune response. Cutaneous (skin) infection with anthrax is rarely fatal if treated. Initial symptoms of cutaneous anthrax infection appear within days of exposure, beginning with an itchy bump that develops into a black sore, sometimes accompanied by flulike symptoms. Anthrax infection via ingestion (e.g., via contaminated food) causes food poisoning-like symptoms and may be fatal if untreated. Inhalational exposure to anthrax is the most serious form and is characterized by mild respiratory symptoms that develop into severe symptoms, breathing difficulties, shock, and eventually death if not treated. Typically, symptoms appear within a week of exposure to infective B. anthracis but may not appear for 2 months.23 A report in 1993 by the Office of Technology Assessment of the US Congress estimated that 130,000 to 3 million deaths could occur following the release of 100 kilograms of aerosolized B. anthracis over Washington, DC, making such an attack as lethal as a hydrogen bomb.24 Anthrax is also a major issue of health in developing countries like India whose economy is mainly agriculture dependent. Cutaneous anthrax is a major concern of health as India ranks first in having the worlds largest livestock population. Proper cremation or burial of humans and animals that have died because of anthrax infection is important in preventing further transmission of the disease. In case autopsies are performed, all related instruments and materials should be autoclaved or incinerated. Animal transmission might occur if infected animal remains are not properly buried or cremated.25 II. Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers Viral hemorrhagic fevers (VHFs) are a group of illnesses caused by several distinct families of viruses. In general, the term VHF describes severe problems affecting several organ systems in the body. Typically, the entire system of blood vessels is damaged, and the body has problems regulating itself. Symptoms often include bleeding associated with other life-threatening illness. VHFs are caused by viruses of four families: Arenavirus including Lassa fever and Argentine, Bolivian, Brazilian and Venezuelan hemorrhagic fevers; Filovirus including Ebola and Marburg; Bunyavirus including Hantavirus and Rift Valley Fever; and Flavivirus including yellow fever and dengue fever. VHFs can be very infectious, and outbreaks of VHF can result in high death rates. Ebola and Marburg viruses are the most likely of VHFs to be used as biological weapons. Attempts have been made to use these viruses as weapons by aerosolizing infected body fluids or rodent excrement.26 In this chapter Ebola, Marburg and Lassa are discussed in detail.

Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses The VHF agents are part of four families: Filoviridae, Arenaviridae, Bunyaviridae and Flaviviridae. Viruses belonging to these families are shown in the following table.

Filoviruses are probably zoonotic, but the natural reservoir is still unknown. They will replicate in some bat species, suggesting that bats native to areas where a filovirus is endemic may carry the infection. Ebola and Marburg hemorrhagic fevers are filovirus infections. In 1976, the first recognized outbreaks of Ebola Hemorrhagic fever (Ebola HF) involving two different species of the virus occurred in northern Zaire (now Congo) and southern Sudan. Reuse of unsterilized needles and syringes and nosocomial contact caused secondary transmission. Both viruses were highly lethal, causing a mortality rate of 92 percent in the Zaire outbreak and 53 percent mortality in the Sudan outbreak (148 deaths among 280 cases). Since then, the Ebola virus has appeared sporadically in Africa, with small outbreaks between 1976 and 1979.

Each arenavirus has a rodent reservoir, and a particular rodent species is responsible for transmitting each specific virus to humans. In any of the host species, the virus infects only a portion of the rodent population, frequently within a limited area of the hosts geographic range. The arenaviruses do not cause clinical disease in their rodent hosts. Mother rodents can spread arenaviruses to their offspring during pregnancy, resulting in maintenance of the virus in the rodent population for multiple generations. Adult rodents can spread arenaviruses to other adult rodents by fighting and biting. Rodents shed the virus into the environment through their urine or droppings. Natural outbreaks usually follow some sort of perturbation in the ecosystem that brings humans in contact with materials contaminated by rodent excretions, such as ingesting contaminated food, by catching and consuming infected rodents as a food source, or by contacting rodent excrement with abraded or broken skin. Inhalation of tiny particles contaminated with urine or saliva can also cause human infection. Some of the arenaviruses, such as Lassa and Machupo, can cause secondary human person-to-person transmission, including nosocomial transmission. Humans can transmit the infection to other humans through direct contact with blood or other excretions. Airborne transmission or transmission through contact with contaminated objects, such as medical equipment, can also cause disease. By an estimate, Lassa virus infects 100,000 - 300,000 people annually, with approximately 5,000 deaths.

The Bunyaviridae are a family of viruses that are found in and transmitted by arthropods (e.g. mosquitoes, ticks, sand flies) and rodents, and can occasionally infect humans. Viruses in this group can cause mild to severe illnesses and include the following: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome (HFRS), Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome (HPS), Rift Valley fever (RVF), etc. In Africa, insect vectors are responsible for transmitting RVF infection. RVF outbreaks in humans generally follow epizootics in domestic animals such as cattle, buffalo, sheep, goats, and camels. During heavy rainfall years, Aedes mosquito eggs, naturally infected with the RVF virus, a bunyavirus, hatch, and the resulting mosquitoes transfer the infection to domestic livestock. Once livestock are infected, they can transmit the disease to other mosquito species, which can further spread the infection. Insects, other than mosquitoes, which feed on warm blooded animals can also transmit the infection. Humans become infected following bites from mosquitoes or other blood sucking insect vectors. In addition, exposure to either the blood or body fluids of infected animals can cause infection in humans. This happens during slaughter or handling of infected animals or while touching contaminated meat during food preparation. RVF aerosols have also caused disease in laboratory workers. Ticks carry CCHF virus, which has caused sporadic, but severe disease in Europe, Africa, and Asia. The CCHF virus is highly infective through aerosols, and hemorrhage associated with the infection has led to hospital-centered outbreaks. Hantavirus infections result from direct contact with infected rodents and their excretions. HPS infection occurs in Korea, Japan, China and the US. During the period 1993 - 2002, HPS was responsible for 318 reported cases in 31 states, with a case fatality rate of 37 percent.

The flaviviruses are responsible for yellow fever, occurring throughout tropical Africa and South America, and dengue, found throughout North and South America, Asia and Africa. Mosquitoes transmit both infections. Ticks transmit the flaviviruses responsible for Kyasanur Forest Disease in India and Omsk hemorrhagic fever in the old Soviet Union.

All four VHF virus families discussed above, share the following characteristics: (i) They are all relatively simple RNA viruses, covered or enveloped in a lipid coating; (ii) Their lipid envelope renders them relatively susceptible to detergents, as well as to low-pH environments and household bleach; (iii) They are all stable at neutral pH, especially when protein is present, therefore these viruses can survive in human blood for weeks after refrigeration or room temperature storage; (iv) They all depend on animal or insect hosts for survival; (v) Humans are not a natural host for any of the VHF viruses. Contact with infected animal hosts causes transmission to humans; with some of the viruses, once infected, humans can also transmit the infection person to person; (vi) Natural human cases and outbreaks occur sporadically irregularly and unpredictably; and (vi) With few exceptions, there is no cure or effective drug treatment.

The former Soviet Union, the US and few other countries have previously weaponized VHF agents. The Soviet bioweapons programme concentrated on the study of Marburg virus (MARV), Ebola virus (EBOV), Lassa virus (LASV), and the Arenavirus Junin (Argentinean Hemorrhagic fever) and Machupo (Bolivian Hemorrhagic fever) (MACV). In particular, Soviet researchers investigated and quantified the aerosol infectivity and stability of freeze-dried MARV. The American offensive bioweapons programs were primarily based on Yellow Fever and Rift Valley Fever viruses (RVFV) until their termination in 1969. Research by US biodefence programmes now focuses on the detection, identification, and treatment of these agents.27 A number of the VHF agents could be obtained from infected humans or animals in endemic areas or during outbreak situations. It is believed that the Japanese cult Aum Shinrikyo tried to obtain EBOV during the 1995 outbreak in Zaire. In addition to natural sources, it may also be possible to obtain these agents from laboratories by a variety of means. These viruses may be held at institutions other than those that are officially recognized and may sell them to the non-state agents or terrorists organizations. It is also possible that samples of virus might be obtained from a facility recognized to hold these agents by legal means. Based on the properties of these agents, some of them present a greater risk of being used as bioweapons than others.

Ebola and Marburg viruses Ebola and Marburg have been a major cause of suffering and mortality in humans. Human infection with Marburg virus disease initially results from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus bat colonies. Once an individual is infected with the virus, Marburg can spread through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids.

Marburg: In 1967, a mysterious infection hit laboratory workers in Marburg (Germany) and Belgrade (now Serbia). Twenty-five workers, associated in research on the polio virus, have shown similar set of symptoms: fever, diarrhea, vomiting, shock, and eventually circulatory system collapse. The individuals who had contact with these scientists also became ill. Two doctors and a nurse who took care of the workers came down with the same infection. In addition, an autopsy attendant and the wife of a veterinarian who worked at the initial facility were also infected. Doctors initially thought that it may have been typhoid fever, caused by a bacterial infection Salmonella typhi. However, no bacteria could be isolated from the sick workers. These patients were experiencing severe bleeding and it became difficult for the doctors and nurses treating them to even draw blood, as needle puncture sites simply started to bleed. In all, 31 people were infected and 7 of them died from the disease.28 With the help of powerful microscope, scientists were able to discover a new type of virus in the tissues of animals infected with blood from human patients. This new virus was confirmed and named Marburg, after the city where most of the cases had originated. The virus was found to exhibit a shape unlike any previously known virus. Because of this, it was placed into a new group, termed the Filoviridae. It was discovered that all the primary infected individuals had direct contact with blood, organs, and cell cultures from Cercopithecus aethiops monkeys (African green monkeys) which had been imported from Uganda. These monkeys were used mainly for the production of kidney cell cultures, which were used to grow the polio virus in order to produce vaccine. This outbreak was the worlds first introduction to the filovirus family. Subsequently, outbreaks and sporadic cases have been reported in Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, South Africa and Uganda.

A new larger outbreak of Marburg was reported in Angola in the spring of 2005. This outbreak had actually started in November 2004 but was not brought to the attention of international authorities until March 2005 due to the lack of medical personnel and facilities in the area. This outbreak was not only the largest, it was also one of the deadliest infectious disease outbreaks known. Of 252 confirmed infections, 227 deaths were recorded. Many of the deaths were among children and health care workers, who were exposed to high concentrations of the virus due to participation in funeral rituals or patient care. Marburg reappeared in 2007 in Uganda, beginning in individuals employed in gold mining.29 Marburg reappeared one more time in Europe in 2008. A 40-year-old woman from the Netherlands had traveled to Uganda for a three-week vacation in May 2008. On 19 June, she visited two caves in the forest, which were known to be populated with fruit bats. A few days after she returned home, she became ill, and was admitted to a Dutch hospital on 5 July, where she later died.30 In 2008, two independent cases were reported in travelers who visited a cave inhabited by Rousettus bat colonies in Uganda.

Ebola: Ebola virus belongs to the Filoviridae family and comprises five different species: Bundibugyo,31 Tai Forest, Reston,32 Sudan, and Zaire, responsible for causing an infectious disease Ebola hemorrhagic fever with a high mortality rate. In 1976, almost a decade after the initial outbreak, both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sudan were experiencing devastating outbreaks of a deadly hemorrhagic (bleeding) fever. Because travel was difficult in and around the areas of Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, outsiders were still unaware of the outbreaks weeks after they began. A team of experts from the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) arrived and examined the outbreaks by piecing together data from survivors. Scientists determined that the causative agent for these outbreaks was a virus similar to Marburg, another filovirus. This virus was named Ebola, for the Ebola River that crosses the village of Yambuku in Congo. Since the 1976 Ebola outbreak, the virus has occasionally resurfaced in human populations. The exact source of these outbreaks and where the virus hides between epidemics are unknown. After the discovery of the virus, a large variety of organisms were screened as possible Ebola reservoirs. Bats both efficiently replicate the virus and survive infection, which made them standout as reservoir candidate for the virus.33 In 2014, a major outbreak of the virus occurred in western Africa. The World Health Organization (WHO) on 23 March 2014, confirmed cases of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in the forested rural region of south-eastern Guinea. The identification of these early cases marked the beginning of the West Africa Ebola epidemic, the largest in history. Two and a half years after the first case was discovered, the outbreak ended with more than 28,650 cases and 11,325 deaths34 (Guinea-2,544; Liberia-4,810; Sierra Leone-3,956; Mali-6; Nigeria-8; and the United States-1).35 Prior to 2014, there have been number of recorded outbreak of Ebola in Congo and Uganda from 2000-2007, with over 1000 cases and 605 deaths.36 Large epidemics of Ebola HF occurred in Kikwit, Zaire in 1995. Ebola surfaced within the US in 1989, in a primate research facility in Reston, Virginia. The subtype of Ebola virus in this outbreak was different from those that had been isolated in human outbreaks in Africa, and was named Ebola-Reston. No humans died in the Reston outbreak, although the virus was fatal to monkeys.

The 2018 Ebola outbreaks in Congo: The first outbreak of Ebola virus in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of 2018 was reported in early May after two cases caused by the Ebola Zaire virus were confirmed in laboratory tests. This was the ninth EVD outbreak in the DRC in the last four decades. The outbreak was declared ended by the WHO in July after contacts of confirmed cases who had been vaccinated did not display Ebola virus symptoms within 42 days double the maximum incubation period for infection). In total, there were 54 confirmed or probable cases, including 32 deaths, as a result of this outbreak, which was confined to regions within the northwestern part of the country. As of 1 June 2019, a total of 1994 EVD cases in two neighboring northeastern provinces (North Kivu and Ituri) have been reported in this ongoing outbreak according to the World Health Organization. Of these cases, 1339 people have died, although the true number of cases and deaths is thought to be higher.37 Ebola virus is composed of single-stranded negative-sense enveloped RNA. Marburg and Ebola viruses have been a major cause of mortality in humans. In view of the Ebola outbreaks of 2014-16, Ebola virus has emerged as a potent bioweapon in recent years.38 Ebola enters humans through nose, mouth, eyes, ears, open cuts and wounds, after direct or indirect contact with the body fluids of a person who has developed the symptoms of Ebola virus disease or has died from it. Ebola is present on the skin of Ebola virus patients or their cadavers and touching them can result in infection. Contaminated needles and medical equipment if reused without sterilization can cause Ebola infection. Ebola can survive for up to several weeks on utensils, bedding, clothing, furniture, door knobs, electrical switches and such materials that may get contaminated by the body fluids and also in water into which body fluids may have been washed into, from the EVD patients.39 Ebola virus remains in the body of survivors for many months after disease has subsided, especially in protected organs such as eyes and testicles.40 According to the WHO, Ebola in West Africa is an example of an old virus in a new context, which created some of the unique challenges during the Ebola response in West Africa.41 Certain characteristics of the affected populations may have led to the rapid geographic dissemination of infection. The populations of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone are highly interconnected, with much cross-border traffic at the epicentre and relatively easy connections by road between rural towns and villages and between densely populated national capitals. It is believed that the large intermixing population facilitated the spread of infection.42 The Ebola epidemic highlighted major deficiencies in the ability of the international public health and scientific communities to respond to infectious disease emergencies.

The ease with which Ebola can spread is frightening, particularly considering the restrictive manner in which the virus moves from individual to individual. Ebola is recognized by the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as a high priority agent that can be easily disseminated or transmitted from person to person, resulting in high mortality rates. There is currently no approved cure for Ebola Virus disease. With such a high risk of contagion, Ebola could be the preferred choice of terrorist organizations to use it as a biological weapon. Ebola virus is capable of being a successful bio-agent, analogous to smallpox and anthrax. In certain factors such as infectiousness and prophylaxis, Ebola is a more suitable bioterror agent than smallpox or anthrax.43 While Ebolas actual effectiveness as a weapon may be limited by the mechanism of infection, the fear and panic likely to result from its deployment could cause major disruption to day-to-day life.44 The Marburg virus causes severe viral haemorrhagic fever in humans. Fruit bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus ), are considered to be natural hosts of Marburg virus. The Marburg virus is transmitted to people from fruit bats and spreads among humans through human-to-human transmission. The average Marburg virus disease (MVD) case fatality rates have varied from 24 to 88 percent in past outbreaks depending on virus strain and case management. There is, as yet, no licensed treatment proven to neutralize the virus but a range of blood products, immune therapies and drug therapies are currently under development.45 Illness caused by Marburg virus begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache and severe malaise. Muscle aches and pains are a common feature. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea and vomiting can begin on the third day. Diarrhoea can persist for a week. The appearance of patients at this phase has been described as showing ghost-like drawn features, deep-set eyes, expressionless faces, and extreme lethargy. The incubation period (interval from infection to onset of symptoms) varies from 2 to 21 days. In fatal cases, death occurs most often between 8 and 9 days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock. Marburg virus transmission via infected semen has been documented up to seven weeks after clinical recovery.

Ebola or Marburg haemorrhagic fever outbreaks constitute a major public health issue in Sub-Saharan Africa. The two diseases caused by Marburg and Ebola viruses are clinically similar. Both diseases are rare and have the capacity to cause dramatic outbreaks with high fatality rates. Since the death rate of this highly contagious infectious disease, Ebola hemorrhagic fever is 2590% for those who contract Ebola virus, and because of its easy transmittance from person to person, this virus possess the potential to be used as bioweapon.46 There remains a serious danger from weaponized Ebola-related biohazardous material, especially given the large volume of it produced by a single infected patient.47 By an estimate, one Ebola patient is likely to generate eight 55-gallon barrels of medical waste per day, making storage, transportation, and disposal of the waste a major challenge for hospitals.48 Lassa Lassa fever is increasingly recognized by global health institutions as an important rodent borne disease with severe impacts on some of West Africas poorest communities.49 Lassa fever is an acute and potentially fatal viral haemorrhagic illness. The virus is named after the town of Lassa, Nigeria, where the first cases occurred in 1969, when two missionary nurses died. The virus, a member of the virus family Arenaviridae, is a single-stranded RNA virus. Humans usually become infected with Lassa virus through exposure to food or household items contaminated with urine or faeces of infected Mastomys rats (Mastomys natalensis ).

The disease is endemic in the rodent population in parts of West Africa. Lassa fever is known to be endemic in Benin, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone, Togo and Nigeria, but probably exists in other West African countries as well. Person-to-person infections and laboratory transmission can also occur, particularly in health care settings in the absence of adequate infection prevention and control measures. An estimated 100,000 to 300,000 infections of Lassa fever occur annually, with approximately 5,000 deaths. Surveillance for Lassa fever is not standardized; therefore, these estimates are crude. In some areas of Sierra Leone and Liberia, it is known that 10-16% of people admitted to hospitals annually have Lassa fever, demonstrating the serious impact the disease has in the region. Lassa fever is occasionally imported to other countries through travel.

Mastomys rats are the natural hosts for the virus, commonly found in rural environment where over 70% of the population resides, they breed frequently and are widely distributed throughout central, west and east Africa. These rats shed the virus in their excreta and humans are infected by contact with the excreta of the rats or by eating them (they are considered as a delicacy in some areas of the endemic region) or food stuff that has been contaminated with the urine of the rodent.50 The virus has the capacity of person to person spread or secondary human spread through contact with body fluids especially if the body fluid contains blood. This occurs during care of sick relatives or among health care personnel in health care setting. In infants, Lassa fever can appear as swollen baby syndrome, which is characterized by generalized edema, abdominal distention and bleeding. Many affected infants die.51 Signs and symptoms of Lassa fever typically occur 1-3 weeks after the patient comes into contact with the virus. For the majority of Lassa fever virus infections (approximately 80%), symptoms are mild and are undiagnosed. Mild symptoms include slight fever, general malaise and weakness, and headache. In 20% of infected individuals, however, disease may progress to more serious symptoms including hemorrhaging (in gums, eyes, or nose, as examples), respiratory distress, repeated vomiting, facial swelling, pain in the chest, back, and abdomen, and shock. Neurological problems have also been described, including hearing loss, tremors, and encephalitis. Death may occur within two weeks after symptom onset due to multi-organ failure.52 The most common complication of Lassa fever is deafness. Various degrees of deafness occur in approximately one-third of infections, and in many cases hearing loss is permanent. As far as is known, severity of the disease does not affect this complication: deafness may develop in mild as well as in severe cases. Approximately 15%-20% of patients hospitalized for Lassa fever die from the illness.

Lassa fever presents initially with symptoms and signs that are common with other viral and bacterial infections and indistinguishable from those of febrile illnesses such as typhoid, malaria and other viral haemorrhagic diseases such as Ebola. All age groups are susceptible and it has an incubation period of 6-21days. Multiple organ damage and sensorineural hearing loss are part of the complications associated with Lassa fever. Secondary transmission between humans occurs through direct contact with infected blood and bodily fluids, usually in the process of caring for a sick family member or in the nosocomial setting. Lassa fever is a highly contagious disease which can result in death. However, recent research supports the long-held hypothesis that a majority of LF cases are acquired from rodents rather than people.53 In recent years, official incidence reports have seen a substantial increase in the number and geographical extent of Lassa cases, which suggests that the true incidence and spatial distribution of the disease may be underestimated.54 Rodent consumption is quite common in the Lassa endemic regions. It is difficult to stop the consumption of rodent because it is considered as a cheap source of meat as well as a delicacy.55 Risk factors for Lassa infection include hunting, cooking and eating rats, and having ones house infested by rodents. Houses offering a supply of water, food, and shelter afford an ideal environment for rodents, where they can deposit virus-laden urine on surfaces, such as eating utensils, beds, floors, and tables.56 The risk of Lassa fever in refugee camps depends on individual housing quality and the hygiene of the immediate surrounding environment.57 The principal strategies for preventing primary cases of Lassa fever are through surveillance and vector control. Currently there is no vaccine against Lassa fever.

Naturally occurring VHF is found in Africa (Ebola, Marburg, Lassa, Rift Valley fever and Yellow fever), Asia (Omsk hemorrhagic fever) and Saudi Arabia and Yemen (Rift Valley fever). The potential use of hemorrhagic fever viruses as agents of bioterror is a real threat. Medical practitioners must maintain a high degree of suspicion whenever confronted with a patient exhibiting unusual or severe multisystem illness characterized by hemorrhagic diathesis.58 All suspected cases of infection with VHF should be reported immediately to local and the government health departments and specimens submitted to the laboratory should be labelled as biohazardous material.

Several factors make hemorrhagic fever viruses discussed above, attractive as biological weapons. Contact with infected animal hosts causes transmission to humans; with some of the viruses, once infected, humans can also transmit the infection person to person. They cause human disease with horrendous morbidity and mortality, they are all highly infectious through inhalation and most are quite stable as respiratory aerosols. In addition, most of the agents replicate in cell culture in concentrations sufficient to produce a weapon capable of introducing lethal doses into the air intake of an office building or airplane. Some of the agents replicate in higher concentrations, making them suitable for exposing even larger populations to lethal aerosolized doses.59 Naturally occurring disease is associated with risk factors including travel to these areas, handling of animal carcasses, contact with sick people or animals, or arthropod bites, within 21 days of the onset of illness. The detection of VHF, in the absence of travel combined with these risks specifically suggests bioterrorism.60 III. Smallpox Smallpox, before its eradication, was one of the most dreadful diseases ever to have afflicted humanity. Caused by variola virus61, smallpox was highly contagious, horrible, frequently fatal and often disfiguring and/or blinding those who did not die. A surviving patient was marked for life with depigmented skin and scars in places where rash of pustules had formed. Every corner of the world has felt its grip and known its devastation. Historians speculate that smallpox first appeared around 10,000 B.C. in the agricultural settlements in northeastern Africa. From there, it probably spread to India via Egyptian merchants over 3000 years ago62. Smallpoxs horrible impact was recorded in Japan between the years 735 and 737, where thirty to sixty percent of the population was killed in a smallpox epidemic. In the sixteenth century, when smallpox began to spread in North and South America, mortality rates of 50 to 80 percent were common.63 By an estimate, during the 20th century, smallpox has caused more than 500 million human deaths. As recent as 1974, the disease remained endemic in India. India reported 61,482 cases of smallpox to WHO between January to May 1974, of which over 15,000 people died, mostly in the states of Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal. The disease and the naturally circulating virus itself were eradicated under the global eradication campaign of the World Health Organization (WHO), which was declared a success in 1980.64 Origin The origin of the variola virus and the time since when it infected humans are uncertain. The WHO considers two theories for its origin: either, humans were infected by a variola-like virus from rodents or by a protovariola mutated into the disease we now know as smallpox. The fact that the variola virus has remained distinct from the other members of its orthopoxvirus family makes the former hypothesis more likely than the latter.

Smallpox is a DNA virus (Deoxiribo -Nucleic-Acid- its hereditary material) and a member of the orthopoxvirus genus of viruses.65 There are two principal forms of the smallpox virusVariola major and, a milder form, Variola minor . Variola major historically  resulted in case fatality rates of 10 to 50 percent among the unvaccinated, whereas Variola minor case---fatality rates were around 1 percent.66 Contracting minor variant was beneficial to the victim who usually escaped with a slight illness and trivial scarring and was then left with lifelong immunity against major as well.

How does Smallpox Spread?

Smallpox is a viral disease unique to humans. Before smallpox was eradicated, it was mainly spread by direct and fairly prolonged face-to-face contact between people. Smallpox patients became contagious once the first sores appeared in their mouth and throat. They spread the virus when they coughed or sneezed and droplets from their nose or mouth spread to other people. They remained contagious until their last smallpox scab fell off. These scabs and the fluid found in the patients sores also contained the variola virus. The virus can spread through these materials or through the objects contaminated by them, such as bedding or clothing. People who cared for smallpox patients and washed their bedding or clothing had to wear gloves and take care to not get infected. Smallpox can be spread by humans only. Scientists have no evidence that smallpox can be spread by insects or animals. Rarely, smallpox has spread through the air in enclosed settings, such as a building. The virus is not known to enter a body directly through the skin.

People with smallpox were most infectious from the onset of their papular rash through the first 7 to 10 days of the rash. Approximately 30 percent of susceptible contacts came down with the disease. As scabs formed, respiratory infectivity waned, but patients were considered infectious until all scabs separated. The first symptoms of natural infection occurred usually 10 to 14 days after exposure with severe aching, malaise, prostration, headache, backache, and fever. Two to three days later, a macropapular rash appeared on the mucosa of the mouth and pharynx, face, and forearms. The rash then spread to the trunk and legs. Lesions quickly progressed to pustular vesicles. Fever remained throughout the course of the disease and pain was common as the pustules evolved. About 8 to 14 days after onset, scabs formed and later separated, leaving a pitted complexion. Death usually occurred during the second week.67 The only way to prevent the spread of smallpox was patient isolation and vaccination.

Many survivors of smallpox had to live with permanent pockmarks, especially of their face. Some unlucky cases were also left with permanent damage to the eyes. During a severe attack, many patients were spared the agony of seeing what was happening to them because their eyelids were pressed shut as the surrounding skin swelled and then glued together by pus as the blisters burst. Though most were left with clear vision when the eruption settled but some also suffered permanent blindness. During the eighteenth century, smallpox was one of the commonest causes of blindness, responsible for over a third of cases in Europeans.

Last Cases of Smallpox In late 1975, Rahima Banu, a three-year-old girl from Bangladesh, was the last person in the world to have naturally acquired Variola major and the last person in Asia to have active smallpox. Rahima was isolated at home with house guards posted round the clock until she was no longer infectious. A house-to-house vaccination campaign within a 1.5 mile radius of her home began immediately, and every house, public meeting area, school, and healer within 5 miles was visited by a member of the Smallpox Eradication Programme team to ensure the illness did not spread.

Ali Maow Maalin was the last person to have naturally acquired smallpox caused by Variola minor . Maalin was a hospital cook in Merca, Somalia. On 12 October 1977, he accompanied two smallpox patients in a vehicle from the hospital to the local smallpox office. Ten days later, he developed fever. At first, he was diagnosed with malaria, and then chickenpox. He was correctly diagnosed with smallpox by the smallpox eradication staff on 30 October. Maalin was isolated and made a full recovery.

Janet Parker was the last person to die of smallpox in 1978. Parker was a medical photographer at the Birmingham University Medical School in England and worked one floor above the Medical Microbiology Department where smallpox research was being conducted. She became ill on 11 August 1978 and developed a rash on 15 August but was not diagnosed with smallpox until 9 days later. She died on 11 September 1978. Her mother, who was providing care for her, developed smallpox on 7 September, despite having been vaccinated on 24 August. An investigation performed afterward suggested that Janet Parker had been infected either via an airborne route through the medical school buildings duct system or by direct contact while visiting the microbiology corridor one floor above.

Eradication of Smallpox: Variolation: One of the first methods for controlling the spread of smallpox was the use of variolation. Named after the virus that causes smallpox (variola virus), variolation is the process by which material from smallpox sores (pustules) was given to people who had never had smallpox. This was done either by scratching the material into the arm or inhaling it through the nose. With both types of variolation, people usually went on to develop the symptoms associated with smallpox, such as fever and a rash. However, fewer people died from variolation than if they had acquired smallpox naturally.68 Vaccination became widely accepted and gradually replaced the practice of variolation. Later, the virus used to make the smallpox vaccine changed from cowpox to vaccinia virus.

Global Smallpox Eradication Programme: In 1959, the WHO initiated a plan to rid the world of smallpox. Unfortunately, this global eradication campaign was unsuccessful as it suffered from lack of funds, personnel, and commitment from countries. Despite their best efforts, smallpox was still widespread in 1966, causing regular outbreaks in multiple countries across South America, Africa, and Asia. The Intensified Eradication Programme began in 1967.69 By the time the Intensified Eradication Programme began, smallpox had already been eliminated in North America (1952) and Europe (1953), leaving South America, Asia, and Africa. Smallpox was never widespread in Australia. This time, laboratories in many endemic countries, where smallpox occurred regularly, were able to produce higher quality freeze-dried vaccine in large numbers. A number of other factors also played an important role in the success of the intensified efforts, including the development of the bifurcated needle, establishment of a surveillance system to detect and investigate cases, and mass vaccination campaigns. The Programme made steady progress toward ridding the world of this disease, and by 1971 smallpox was eradicated from South America, followed by Asia (1975),70 and finally Africa (1977). On 8 May 1980, WHO declared smallpox eradicated.

On 9 December 1979, a group of 20 international experts assembled in Geneva to sign a 20-word declaration on the parchment in six languages that span the planet, certified that smallpox had been eradicated from the world. Five months later, on 8 May 1980, the World Health Organization ratified that declaration and, apart from some samples locked away in half a dozen research laboratories, the scourge of smallpox was officially extinct. Almost two centuries after Jenner published his hope that vaccination could annihilate smallpox, on 8 May 1980, the 33rd World Health Assembly officially declared the world free of this disease. Eradication of smallpox is considered the biggest achievement in international public health.

Stocks of Variola Virus Following the eradication of smallpox, scientists and public health officials determined there was still a need to perform research using the variola virus. They agreed to reduce the number of laboratories holding stocks of variola virus to only four locations. Japan sent its stocks to the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta, Georgia in 1979, and in 1981 the Netherlands did the same. Brazil, Botswana, India, Indonesia, and Pakistan sent theirs to Moscow. In 1981, the four countries that either served as a WHO collaborating centre or were actively working with variola virus were the United States, England, Russia, and South Africa. In 1983, South Africa destroyed its remnants of smallpox virus. By 1984, England transferred its stock to the United States. There are now only two locations where variola virus is officially stored and handled under WHO supervision: the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia, and the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology (VECTOR Institute) in Koltsovo, Russia.71 In January 2014, the cloned variola virus DNA fragments that had been stored in South Africa were destroyed in the presence of WHO biosafety personnel.

2014 Discovery: In June 2014, a set of decades-old vials (total 16) labelled variola or suspected to contain variola and containing lyophilized material, were found in a facility in the US. After secure transfer to the authorized WHO repository and testing, six specimens were found to contain variola virus DNA, all of which were also found to contain viable virus, and were subjected to full genomic sequencing. The sequenced specimens belonged to three known strains of variola virus and one previously unknown strain. Following completion of laboratory analysis, all specimens were destroyed in the presence of WHO biosafety personnel, a member of the Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research and other witnesses.

WHO Action: Every two years, WHO biosafety inspection teams visit the variola virus repositories and inspect the containment facilities in the Russian Federation and the United States of America. In the recent biennial biosafety inspections of the repository sites, the team visited VECTOR and CDC during February and May 2019. Successive biosafety inspections of the two repository facilities have found that the repositories meet international levels of biosafety and biosecurity, and concluded that variola virus stocks remain in secure safekeeping and recommended for ongoing improvement in biosafety in line with evolving knowledge and best practices.72 Who Owns Variola stocks In 1977, the WHO urged the governments and laboratories to cooperate in preparing the international register of laboratories retaining stocks of variola virus or specimens from smallpox cases. The World Health Assembly (WHA) also recommended that laboratories either destroy their variola virus stocks, or send them to WHO-designated collaborating centres. While many laboratories destroyed their variola viruses and a register of the remaining stocks was compiled, there was no way of confirming whether this noncompulsory survey contained accurate or complete information. After the declaration of smallpox eradication in 1980, the WHA again urged countries to either destroy their variola stocks or transfer them to one of four WHO-approved laboratories. The approved laboratories were located in South Africa, the United Kingdom, the United States and the USSR. Later, South Africa destroyed its stock of variola, whereas the UK transferred them to the US.73 The variola samples held at the two ex situ repositories (CDC, in Atlanta, and VECTOR in Koltsovo, Novosibirsk) are a collection of genetically diverse samples.

For more than four decades, the WHO has resolved to destroy the virus isolates and every time the deadline has been deferred. As genetic resources, all viruses, including samples of smallpox stored in two WHO-accredited repositories, one in the United States and the other in the Russian Federation, fall within the scope of the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) that provides for the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. However, the legal status of the ownership of variola stocks remains uncertain.

Proponents of incineration of variola samples argue that only by destroying the virus can we be assured that it will never escape its current confinement and again ravage humankind; that we no longer require access to live, intact variola for scientific research purposes; and that destruction provides a necessary symbolic coda to the eradication of the disease, a human triumph that remains incomplete as long as any residue of the virus lingers. Advocates of destruction maintained that destroying the stocks would send the clear signal that working with intact smallpox virus was considered illegal. Those in favour of retention of variola samples, on the other hand, argue that there is possible future value in additional scientific research on variola; that it is unwise to destroy the two stockpiles we know about, so long as there may remain other secret stashes possibly accessible by hostile or rogue regimes; and that it is ethically problematic for human beings to deliberately destroy another life form.74 In the last four decades, the ownership status of variola stocks has not been addressed. As genetic resources, the smallpox viruses fall under the purview of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), 1993.75 The CBD, which applies by default to all viruses as genetic resources. The application of this international treaty to the stores of variola virus results in a number of legal implications that ultimately support the retention of these potentially valuable genetic resources. Russia and the US do not have the authority to destroy any samples that have been claimed as sovereign by other states. As caretakers of the worlds variola viruses, they can only legally destroy those samples which are known to have originated in their own sovereign territories or that they now hold as the legal owners.76 The variola samples held at the two ex situ repositories are a collection of genetically diverse samples and in accordance with the biodiversity conservation principles of the CBD, cannot be wantonly destroyed, particularly as they represent the last of their type.77 Smallpox virus could be further modified by specialized genetic engineering to display greater lethality; quicker communicability; resistance to existing vaccines; and greater persistence in soil, air, and water. In the view of the US Department of Defence (DOD) in 1997, advances in biotechnology and genetic engineering could confer the ability to modify current agents and tailor them in various ways. A recombinant biological warfare agent could be made ethnically selective in targeting only those populations possessing certain racially unique attributes, while leaving the attackers home civilization intact.78 Smallpox as a Biological Weapon Smallpox is a potential biological weapon.79 It can be put into stable aerosol form in particles 5 m or smaller (the ideal size to be inhaled), bypass the oropharynx, and reach the alveoli. It has small infective doses and the dose for smallpox may be as few as 10 to 100 particles. Smallpox virus can be aerosolized and can survive for 24 hours, if not exposed to UV light.80 It is inexpensive to develop, has a long shelf-life, and could cause widespread panic that could compound the terror of the disease itself.81 Smallpox has a long incubation period of between 7 to 17 days, thus allowing for those not showing signs of disease to easily bypass security and land in the intended target country, bypass its security, and integrate themselves into densely populated areas. The threat of a smallpox-based attack is very real.82 The remaining known stock of smallpox virus is contained in high security laboratories in the USA and Russia, and their storage is monitored by the WHO. Arguments for their destruction have been raised during many World Health Assemblies, but the issue has been deferred for further consideration. There is strong opinion amongst scientists that we would need the virus to develop the drug and vaccine to deal with any future contingency. At the same time concern has been expressed that the virus might be held clandestinely and less securely elsewhere and could be used as weapon by the terrorists.83 The New York Times on 13 June 1999 carried a report citing a US government intelligence analysis which concluded that North Korea, Iraq and Russia were probably keeping secret of smallpox virus intended for military use.84 According to Henderson, If used as a biological weapon, smallpox represents a serious threat to civilian populations because of its case-fatality rate of 30 percent or more among unvaccinated persons and the absence of specific therapy. Although smallpox has long been feared as the most devastating of all infectious diseases, its potential for devastation today is far greater than at any previous time.85 Smallpox was used as a biological weapon during the French and Indian Wars, (1754 to 1767) when British soldiers distributed smallpox-infected blankets to American Indians. Even today, smallpox is considered one of the most serious bioterrorist threats. There are a number of factors which contribute to the concern about the use of smallpox as a biological weapon: (i) It is highly contagious and Variola can spread from person to person; (ii) There is no widely available treatment for the disease; (iii) It has a high fatality rate; (iv) Since routine smallpox immunization ceased in the countries by 1983, the global population is extremely vulnerable to the disease; (v) Most of the worlds population has never been vaccinated or was vaccinated so long ago that immunity to smallpox has waned; (vi) Variola is relatively stable as an aerosol; (vii) The infectious dose is small; and (viii) It is considered likely that secret stockpiles of smallpox virus exist outside of the official WHO repositories; however, the extent and locations of these stockpiles are unknown. In addition, low temperatures and humidity support longer virus survival.86 These attributes make Variola the most feared biological terrorist or warfare weapon.

At the same time, there are sources who argue the likelihood of a targeted release of smallpox is relatively small. Terrorists may be able to obtain the virus with state sponsorship and release it covertly, but there has been little interest in biological terrorist weapons historically. The reasons are: (i) Only a few terrorists have attempted to acquire biological agents and fewer have attempted to use them; (ii) The number of incidents involving use or attempted use of biological agents is extremely small; and (iii) Few terrorist groups that have attempted to use biological weapons have used crude dispensing technology (with the exception of the 2001 anthrax attacks in the US). According to Roberts (1997), the possibility of the use of biological agents by terrorists is relatively low due to the following reasons: (i) Dependence on meteorological conditions makes agent delivery unpredictable; (ii) Terrorists may fear for their own safety due to the potential for infecting themselves; (iii) Terrorists may prefer a more precise weapon for their selected targets; (iv) Terrorists may have moral qualms about using biological weapons; (v) Conventional weapons are easier to obtain and employ and may be considered adequate; (vi) State sponsors may understand the implication of bioterrorism and promote restraint; (vii) There is little precedence for the use of biological agents as terrorist weapons; and (ix) The technological constraints of obtaining, producing, and dispensing non-contagious agent are significant.87 Biotechnological Advancement: Advances in life sciences research have rapidly diffused the knowledge, equipment, and materials needed to produce sophisticated biological weapons around the world, potentially placing them in the hands of state and non-state actors. The intersection of jihadist terrorism with this increasing revolution in life sciences only makes the threat of bioweapons more prevalent. Because most biological weapons consist of living organisms, symptoms will occur only after an incubation period that may last days to weeks. If the agent used can translate as a communicable disease, the infection could spread rapidly across a large population before health preventative measures are effectively put in place. Rapid growth in international travel further complicates the issue, allowing sick persons incubating disease to move around the globe, spreading the infection across multiple transit pathways and borders. For instance, an outbreak of smallpox could spread through a population quickly and might not be in a position to patently identify as a terrorist incident until several weeks after an attack. During roughly two-week span between when a person has been infected until becoming contagious, infected individuals could have traveled anywhere in the world from the point of origin of attack. By the time an attack with smallpox is recognized by health authorities, the individuals initially infected through the terror attack could have traveled to multiple locations, thus precipitating outbreaks of disease worldwide. Their ability to cause widespread death and disease, their indiscriminate nature, the shortage or complete lack of vaccines and therapeutics to treat many of the diseases caused by biological agents, their capability to invoke images of suffering and horror, and their similarity to apocalyptic biblical diseases and plagues, make them appealing to jihadist and other terrorist groups.88 If the smallpox virus is present outside the known controlled environments, or if it is being studied in ways that violate international agreements, it is possible that terrorists could use it to cause widespread harm.89 Smallpoxs initial symptoms and incubation periods are relevant for choosing the virus as a bioterror agent. Because one who becomes infected with smallpox does not immediately display any outward symptoms. A terrorist who has conducted an attack would get enough time to escape the scene of the smallpox release. It has been suggested that variola has several virologic attributes that make it attractive as a terrorist weapon. It is easy to grow. It can be lyophilized to protect it from heat. It can be aerosolized. Its genome is large and theoretically amendable to modification.90 The threat of an aerosol release of smallpox is real and the potential for catastrophic scenario is great.91 Other members of the Orthopoxvirus genus share many of variolas properties and are potential agents of a deliberate bioterrorist attack. Camel-pox virus is a close relative of variola virus but does not cause disease in humans. However, it has potential and could be used as a biological weapon. The major difference between camelpox virus and variola major virus strain, Bangladesh-1975, genomes is four additional insertions, elongated inverted terminal repeats, and a small area of gene rearrangement present in camelpox virus. Slight modifications in the camel-pox virus genome may dramatically change its pathogenicity in humans. Genetic modification of camel-pox is possible to make it lethal to human.92 Future Outbreak and Vaccination After smallpox was eradicated, the WHO in 1980 recommended that all countries cease smallpox vaccination. Accordingly routine vaccination has ceased in all countries of the world in 1986, with Israel being the only country that routinely continues to vaccinate its military personnel to the present.93 There are serious concerns that the variola virus, which caused smallpox still exists in some laboratories, and might be deliberately released as a biological weapon or accidentally released from a laboratory.94 Since the smallpox vaccination has been stopped, nearly 80 percent of the world population remains susceptible to smallpox infection.95 Currently, a few countries have the capacity to conduct surveillance, immunization and control campaigns, if smallpox were to reappear.96 However, most countries do not have their own vaccine stocks or the other resources needed to respond to an outbreak.

In the case of a smallpox event, the WHO will assume a major role, coordinating the global response and facilitating access to emergency supplies of vaccines, expertise and other technical, logistical, and human resources, consistent with its role under the revised International Health Regulations, 2005, known as IHR (2005). Under the IHR (2005) which entered into force in 2007 as a legally binding framework for 195 States Parties, WHO is mandated to coordinate and manage the international assessment of, and public health response to, serious international public health events, whether or not they constitute a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) including a release of the smallpox virus. The WHO maintains an emergency reserve of Smallpox Vaccine Emergency Stockpile (SVES). To ensure that vaccine could be rapidly deployed and administered in response to any future outbreaks, the SVES was further developed as a mechanism to store, maintain and distribute smallpox vaccine internationally during an emergency. The SVES currently consists of two components: A physical stockpile of vaccine held by WHO headquarters in Switzerland. This is composed of calf lymph smallpox vaccines from a variety of sources dating from the final years of the eradication programme. These are regularly tested for potency. It is estimated that this stockpile will provide approximately 2.4 million doses when reconstituted and delivered by bifurcated needle.

A pledged stockpile held by donor countries in their respective national stockpiles for use in time of international need upon request by WHO, which currently consists of 31.01 million doses of smallpox vaccine held by France, Germany, New Zealand, the UK and the US. Smallpox vaccine manufacturers, and other member states and donors may augment this with donations in the future.97 As the world faces the challenges of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases and the threat of bioterrorism, vaccine development will play an important role in protection against likely future cases of smallpox.

Smallpox, a DNA virus, is a member of the genus orthopoxvirusthe largest and most complex of all viruses. Over the centuries, smallpox has been one of mankinds most feared and deadly diseases with a history dating back at least 3500 years. Historically, it spread across the world, killing rich and poor alike. The pain and suffering were extraordinary, and survival from the disease was uncertain. Smallpox has been in existence for hundreds of years and can incite epidemics with high mortality rates in unprepared populations. One third or more of infected people died, as little could be done for them. Today, the high fevers, deep rashes and oozing pustules that characterize smallpox no longer exist. This banishment is so complete that recent medical textbooks often skip the disease or give few details of its wrath. Despite this triumph of modern medicine, the US and key allies now fear the scourge could strike anew sometime in the future, unleashed by war or terrorism.

The possibility of a future bio-engineered attack using smallpox should not be arbitrarily rejected.98 Even though the world has eradicated smallpox, the fact that it still exists in at least two known laboratories and a prime contender for being used as bioweapon, cannot be ignored. The means of transporting smallpox to its destination from anywhere in the world is possible.99 If variola somehow escapes from its current frozen storage and invade the biosphere today, the consequences could be monumental. There is no certainty that a case of smallpox today would be quickly diagnosed and treated as such.100 The former WHO director of smallpox eradication, Dr Henderson, summarized the threat in 1999: One can only speculate on the probable rapidity of spread of the smallpox virus in a population where no one younger than 25 years of age has ever been vaccinated and older persons have little remaining residual immunity.101 Experts are of the opinion that if smallpox returns it could be more deadly than ever.102 Shitala Mata103 Many early civilizations, in India, China, Africa, and Latin America, designated a god or goddess of smallpox and offered sacrifices to honor or appease the deity. Over the centuries during which smallpox struck Indian villages year after year, diverse and widespread legends, beliefs, and practices developed, reflecting the varied religious traditions.104 Smallpox was incorporated into the very fabric of Indian society and was attributed to spiritual as well as physical forces. The Hindu deities reflects a variety of divine attributes, and smallpox is traditionally regarded as the manifestation of the goddess Shitala, or Shitala-Ma, whose name means the cool one, or cooling mother. In southern India, her name is Mariamma, in Maharashtra, it is Mata-May; in rural Bihar, she is Bhagwati; in Madhya Pradesh, she is Maharani; and in areas of eastern India, she is Ai.

In conventional Hindu theology, Shitala is one of seven (sometimes nine) sisters (sometimes mothers), each of whom is associated with a different disease. These diseases commonly include chickenpox, measles, mumps, and cholera. Smallpox is attributed to the wrath of the goddess, which is especially likely to occur should rituals in her honor be neglected. At the same time, however, the goddess is regarded as having the power to mitigate the severity of the illness. The most common traditional prophylaxis for the disease was regular fulfillment of spiritual obligations to Shitala. Religious ceremonies were periodically performed in her honour at temples dedicated to her throughout the country, in the village environs, or in the home.

Traditional curative practices for smallpox were varied, reflecting the absence of any clearly effective intervention. When the disease appeared in a family, the households regular habits of cooking and cleaning were often changed. A special worship of Shitala was often made at a nearby temple. The patient was given a special diet and kept isolated, and herbs were applied. The most commonly used herb was the neem plant (Azadirachta indica ), which was considered to have intrinsic cooling properties. Branches of neem were often hung outside the house of a smallpox patient. For fear of offending Shitala, her devotees refused vaccination for themselves and their children and threw the corpses of smallpox victims into rivers, rather than defile her with the traditional cremation.105 During the early mass vaccination phase of the eradication program, the phrase worship the Goddess and also take a vaccination was used to accommodate both spiritual and epidemiological concepts of the disease. Muslims did not worship Shitala, but some of them felt vaccination interfered with surrender to Gods will.

IV. Plague Plague is an infectious disease caused by the bacteria Yersinia pestis,106 usually found in wild rodents such as ground squirrels and prairie dogs and their fleas. Cycles of infection between fleas and rodents occur without human awareness, until a sporadic human case occurs following a bite from an infected flea. The disease is transmitted between animals via their fleas and, as it is a zoonotic bacterium, it can also be transmitted from animals to humans. Humans can be contaminated by the bite of infected fleas, through direct contact with infected materials, or by inhalation. Plague exists naturally in cycles involving in specific regions of Asia, Africa, North and South America and the extreme southeastern Europe near the Caspian Sea. In North America, the organism persists in rodents and other small mammals from the Pacific Coast to the Great Plains, and from southwestern Canada to Mexico. Occasionally, an epidemic occurs when the disease spreads from wild rodents to populations of rats (genus Rattus ) living close to large human populations. Plague can be a very severe disease in people, particularly in its septicaemic and pneumonic forms, with a case-fatality ratio of 30 to 100 percent, if left untreated.

Historical In the 6th, 14th, and 20th centuries, Y pestis was the cause of three great pandemics of human disease. Procopius, the Byzantine historian of the 6th century, provides the first description of epidemic plague during the reign of Justinian 541-542 CE. At the height of the epidemic, more than 10,000 people died each day and plague eventually killed nearly one hundred million in Asia, Africa and Europe.107 The second plague pandemic is a major series of epidemics of the plague that started with the Black Death,108 which reached mainland Europe in 1348, probably killed 24 million people between the years 1346 and 1352 and perhaps another 20 million, by the end of the 14th century. Put another way, between the earliest deaths in Mongolia in 1328 and the last fatalities in Moscow in 1352, around 50 million people, one third people in world perished.109 During the 15th through the 18th centuries, 30 to 60 percent of the populations of major cities, such as Genoa, Milan, Padua, Lyons, and Venice, died of plague.110 The third or modern plague pandemic arose in 1894 in China111 and spread throughout the world as rats and their fleas traveled via modern transportation. This episode of bubonic plague spread to all inhabited continents, and ultimately led to more than 12 million deaths in India and China, with about 10 million killed in India alone.112 Plague remains a significant public health threat today, due to natural outbreaks of the disease, the emergence of antibiotic resistant strains,113 and its possible use as a biological weapon.

Plague in India: The first known human plague epidemic in Calcutta started in the year 1895 and the disease did not completely disappear from the city until 1925. After a lapse of 23 years, it reappeared in 1948 and remained for four years. The peak years were 1900-07 in the first epidemic and 1949 in the last outbreak. The plague also moved south into India, where Bombay lost 19,000 people in the space of the six months from August 1896 to February 1897.114 The disease remained rampant in Bombay until 1923, when it gradually waned to stop completely in 1935. It reappeared in Bombay in 1948 (the same year as in Calcutta) and also recurred in 1949 and 1952, but drastic efforts were made successfully to prevent its spread.115 India was one of the most severely affected countries of third pandemic of plague which spread round the world with more than 10 million deaths reported between the years 1886-1950. However, post Independence, with the increasing availability of DDT and broad spectrum antibiotics, the transmission of plague was curtailed and mortality was also reduced.

In 1994, India was struck by two outbreaks of plague in succession-one of suspected bubonic plague in the Beed district of Maharashtra116 and the other of the suspected pneumonic plague in the Surat city of Gujarat.117 Plague episode in Surat lasted only a little over 2 weeks, but it created an unprecedented panic that had global repercussions.118 It caused a huge financial loss to the economy of the country. In Surat city alone the loss was estimated to be to the tune of US $260 million. In addition, various countries stopped import of agricultural products from India. Plague related restrictions were also imposed on Indian travelers by many countries. In case of Surat, poor sanitation conditions in the town were believed to be the main reason which led to the outbreak of suspected plague during September-October 1994. As many as 832 people were suspected to have been infected by pneumonic plague in Gujarat and another 400 in Maharashtra. The official death toll across India was 52.119 After the outbreak of the plague in Surat, the India government took steps which prevented the disease from spreading beyond Surat, Delhi, Calcutta, Bombay and their vicinities.120 Outbreak of Plague was again reported in Himachal Pradesh121 and Uttrakhand during 2002-2004, causing seven deaths.122 From 1980 to 1994, 20 countries reported 18,739 cases to the WHO, averaging 1,087 cases per year. This number probably underestimates the true incidence of plague. Many countries fail to identify and report the disease, a consequence of inadequate laboratory and surveillance infrastructure. From 2013 to 2018, a total of 2,886 cases were reported worldwide to WHO and the top five countries were: Madagascar (2,323 cases; 80 percent), Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) (410 cases; 14 percent), Peru (40 cases; 1 percent), the USA (40 cases; 1 percent) and Tanzania (36 cases; 1 percent). Other countries with small number of cases detected in the period included Uganda (22 cases), Mainland China (5 cases), Mongolia (5 cases), Bolivia (3 cases), Kyrgyzstan (1 case) and Russian Federation (1 case). Plague is still considered an endemic disease in Madagascar,123 where flea transmission occurs mainly in R. rattus in the highlands, but in the coastal city of Mahajanga, house shrews also harbour infection.124 Disease Plague is primarily a disease of rodents and their fleas, which can infect humans.125 It is transmitted between rodents by rodent fleas, and can be transmitted to people when infected rodent fleas bite them. Human infection may also occasionally results from the handling of body fluids or tissues of an infected animal. The plague bacillus, Y. pestis, lives in the bloodstream of small rodents such as rats, marmots, squirrels or mice. The bacillus has evolved genetically over time, enabling it to enter the animals bloodstream. Once it had done this, it became lethal. The main vector or way in which the disease is spread, is through the fleas that live on the animal. When a flea, usually the rodents familiar, Xenopsylla cheopsis, feeds on an infected host, the plague bacillus will multiply inside the fleas body, blocking its oesophagus and making it chronically thirsty. Its compulsion then is to bite continually to slake its thirst. When the rodent it has been feeding on dies, it will look for another host to drink from, but, because its foregut is full of undigested, infected blood, it will pass the plague bacillus into the bloodstream of whatever animal it tries to feed on next. The flea effectively becomes a syringe, administering potentially lethal doses of Y. pestis to each new host, and with the number of potential hosts diminished due to a plague outbreak, large numbers of fleas would end up living on the same animal; a single rat could have hundreds of plague-infested fleas living on it. With such large numbers of fleas feeding from the same animal, it would hasten the end of the unfortunate host far quicker than if normal numbers of fleas were present, and X. cheopsis would be forced to go further afield to seek sustenance. X. cheopsis does not particularly like human blood but, in the absence of any other host, it will bite.

There are three main forms of plague in humans, namely bubonic, septicaemic and pneumonic.126 The symptoms of bubonic plague usually begin to emerge within one to seven days after a person is bitten by an infected flea. The plague bacillus travels through the lymphatic system to the nearest lymph node where it forms a swelling. The most usual place for this swelling is the groin, but it also occurs in the armpits and the neck. These swellings are known as buboes (derived from the Greek word for groin).127 The bubonic disease is characterized by the abrupt onset of high fever. The septicaemic form of plague occurs when the insect deposits the bacillus directly into the bloodstream. This form is almost always fatal. Neither bubonic nor septicemic plague is transmissible person to person. Pneumonic plague is an infection of the lungs with the plague bacillus. Pneumonic plague can be transmitted directly from person to person via infected air droplets or through infected clothing and other contaminated articles. With bubonic plague, there is some chance of survival if the buboes suppurate, the mortality rate for untreated pneumonic plague is between 95 and 100 percent, with victims usually dying between one and three days after initial infection. Pneumonic plague tends to be more active in the colder months, while bubonic tends to be the more dominant form of the disease in spring and summer. Modern research has found that, untreated, bubonic plague has a mortality rate of around 60 percent. Although buboes are the most well-known symptom of plague, the victim will likely first become apathetic, quickly developing a high fever, with vomiting, extreme headaches, giddiness, intolerance to light, pains in the abdomen, back and limbs, sleeplessness and acute diarrhoea being not long in following.

Plague as a Biologic Weapon Plague has been developed and used as a biological weapon in the past. During the past 4 millennia, plague has played important role in many military campaigns.128 During World War II, the Japanese army dropped infected fleas over China, causing several plague outbreaks.129 The US and the Soviet Union both developed methods for aerosolizing plague, creating a system of infecting large numbers of people compared to infected fleas. During the Vietnam War, plague was endemic among the native population, but American soldiers were relatively unaffected. The protection of troops was largely attributable to the US militarys understanding of the rodent reservoirs and flea vectors of disease, the widespread use of a plague vaccine during the war, and prompt treatment of plague victims with effective antibiotics.130 In 1970, the World Health Association (WHO) estimated that a dispersion of 50 kg of aerosolized plague over a city of 5 million could cause pneumonic plague in 150,000 people with 36,000 deaths.131 The CDC has placed plague in Category A, which is the highest priority category for an agent that could be used for bioterrorist activity. The reasons are: (i)It is easily disseminated or transmitted from person to person, (ii) It results in high mortality rate and has the potential for major public health impact, (iii) It might cause panic or social disruption, and (iv) It requires special action for public health preparedness. Given the availability of Y. pestis around the world, capacity for its mass production and aerosol dissemination, difficulty in preventing such activities, high fatality rate of pneumonic plague, and potential for secondary spread of cases during an epidemic, the potential use of plague as a biological weapon is of great concern.132 2/75. The following two incidents support this view: In 1995, Larry Wayne Harris, a native of West Virginia who had a microbiology degree from Ohio State University, was arrested when trying to purchase Y. pestis, the causative agent of plague from a Maryland company known as American Type Culture Collection. Although he placed the order without trouble, people at the company became concerned when he called repeatedly to check on the delivery date of his order. Harris has written extensively on the dangers of biological warfare and how people can protect themselves with massive doses of antibiotics. Harris and an alleged neo-Nazi, was arrested again three years later after attempting to purchase military-grade anthrax.133 Microbiologist Thomas Butler was sentenced to two years in prison for convictions that stem from a January 2003 bioterrorism scare. The case began when Butler reported vials of plague bacteria missing from his lab at Texas Tech University in Lubbock. After being questioned by the FBI, Butler said he might have accidentally destroyed the vials. Investigators charged Butler with 69 crimes related to the incident, including lying to them and defrauding his university. Butler was cleared of the most serious charges, but was convicted of fraud against Texas Tech and of mislabelling a plague sample he shipped to Tanzania. Butler was told to pay more than $50,000 in fines and restitution. Butler has been stripped of his Texas medical licence.134 In contrast to naturally occurring plague, the most likely form of terrorist-caused plague would be the more serious pneumonic form due to inhalation of a dispersed aerosol containing the organism. The quantity or organisms dispersed, the virulence of the specific strain used, and meteorological and other environmental conditions at the time of release would contribute to the size of the resulting outbreak. Pneumonic plague is transmissible person to person. Symptomatic people leaving the site of the release could spread the disease to others in other cities. Cases of pneumonic plague occurring in areas without enzootic infection, cases in people without other known risk factors, an atypical seasonal pattern (cases in fall, winter, or spring, rather than summer) and the absence of a rat die-off are all clues that the outbreak was manmade.135 In October 1989, Dr Vladimir Pasechnik, a top Soviet microbiologist and Director of the Institute of Ultra Pure Biological Preparation in Biopreparat, defected to England. He disclosed extensive bioengineering genetic research as well as production of bioweapons in Russia.136 According to Vladimir, the top priority of his Institute was to increase the lethality of plague and tularemia, and to make them more resistant to antibiotics and temperature extremes. The dried, powdery superplague became the Soviet weapon of choice (a total of 20 ton stock) and was loaded in various munitions. The war plans included the use of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and strategic bombers carrying plague, anthrax or smallpox.137 In May 1998, Dr Alibek, another Russian scientist who defected to United States, testified before the US Congress: .in the Soviets view, the best biological agents were those for which there was no prevention and no cure. For those agents for which vaccines or treatment existed, such as plague, antibiotic resistance or immunosuppressive variants were to be developed.138 There is a possibility that bioterrorism attack with plague might use a natural or bio-engineered drug-resistant strain.

However, there are reports which suggest that the danger of terrorists using Y. pestis has been greatly exaggerated. In addition, the ability of pneumonic plague to propagate an epidemic is severely restricted by the requirement for close contact with a dying patient, usually on the last day of the patients life.139 Yersinia pestis, the agent of plague, is one of the most feared pathogens in human history which is responsible for nearly 200 million Black Deaths during three major pandemics.140 The Black Death has traditionally been thought to have been a mixture of bubonic, septicaemic and pneumonic plague. Plague remains an enzootic infection of rats, ground squirrels, prairie dogs, and other rodents on every populated continent. The bubonic form of plague is usually not transmitted human to human. However, the pneumonic form can be transmitted through inhalation of contaminated aerosol droplets. The pneumonic plague would be the form most likely implicated in the event of an intentional attack. Inhalation of aerosols can cause devastating consequences resulting in many casualties. Unless antibiotics are administered within 24 hours of the initial symptoms, death is inevitable. Its potential for use as a biological weapon is of major concern to public health officials.141 Despite the availability of a number of highly effective therapeutic agents, mortality due to plague remains unreasonably high.

V. Tularemia The disease tularemia, caused by the bacillus Francisella tularensis,142 is much less known to the public than the other potential biological weapons agents in Category A. Tularemia is extremely infective, with only a small dose (as few as ten organisms) necessary to ensure onset of disease.143 Of those exposed to the bacterium, 90100 percent would develop the disease, with a mortality rate of 3060 percent. Tularemia was researched by the Japanese and by both the US and the Soviet Union in the last century. The bacterium normally infects various wild animals and only causes disease in humans occasionally, say through an insect bite when there is a large natural outbreak or someone is out in wild hunting country. For that reason, the disease is known in different parts of the world as an animal fever, for example rabbit fever or Deer-fly fever.144 Tularemia was first described in 1911 as a potentially severe and fatal disease for humans. Large-scale human epidemics occurred in the 1930s and 1940s in Europe and in the Soviet Union, and the bacterium began to be recognized as a significant laboratory hazard for those working with it because of its extreme infectivity. Although the bacterium does not form a spore; it is extremely resilient and able to survive in the environment (e.g., mud, water, or decaying animal carcasses) for weeks and direct contact or ingestion of contaminated materials including water or soil may cause tularemia. Person-to-person spread of tularemia has not been reported.145 Francisella tularensis is a facultative intracellular bacterium that multiplies within macrophages. The major target organs are the lymph nodes, lungs and pleura, spleen, liver, and kidney. Tularemia can be difficult to differentiate from other diseases because it can have multiple clinical manifestations.146 If inhaled, there may be hemorrhagic inflammation of the airways early in the course of illness, which may progress to bronchopneumonia or a typhoidal syndrome. If transmitted via a bite, there may be ulceration at the site of the bite with swelling of the regional lymph node.147 Infection through the skin, usually produces an ulceroglandular form of the disease, with an ulcer at the point of entry and swelling of the local lymph nodes. Tularemia is classified into six arbitrary clinical forms based on their clinical expressions.148 Worldwide incidence of naturally occurring tularemia is unknown. It is likely that the disease is greatly under-recognized and under-reported. Tularemia occurs throughout North America and Eurasia. In the US, human cases have been reported from every state except Hawaii, with the majority occurring in south-central and western states.149 An outbreak of tularemia occurred in Yorukali village of Bursa, Turkey in December 2005. A total of 70 patients were diagnosed as tularemia. The source of infections was probably the water, since bacteria may remain alive in water up to 70 days.150 Tularemia outbreaks and sporadic cases related to drinking water have also been reported from Bulgaria,151 Georgia, Germany, Italy, Kosovo,152 Macedonia, Norway and Sweden.153In Sweden and Finland, tularemia also transmitted through mosquito bites. The largest recorded outbreak of airborne tularemia occurred in 19661967 in a rural farming area in Sweden, where more than 600 people were infected tularemia.154 Most patients had acquired infection secondary to aerosolization of the bacteria during farm work.

The prevalence of the disease shows a marked seasonal bias related to the life cycle of the ticks that can be the main vector for its spread in certain areas. Most cases reported between May and October are associated with parasite bites. Another peak is seen in the winter relating to hunting, where there is no vector spread but there is direct contact between humans and animals during the skinning and preparation of prey animals. The reservoir for the disease consists of both wild and domestic animals. Although tularemia has not been reported in many parts of the world, with the increasing popularity of adventure holidays where living in wilderness areas forms part of the itinerary, there is a risk of exposure and disease for tourists who might then return home before clinical signs are seen.155 No human-to-human transmission has been documented in the medical literature. Tularemia has gained more attention in recent years because of its potential for use in biological warfare.

Tularemia as a Biological Weapon The Japanese began germ warfare research using F . tularensis as early as 1932 and conducted biological warfare research with it on prisoners of war. Both the former Soviet Union and the US had weaponized F. tularensis by the mid-20th, and both countries experimented with antibiotic-resistant strains. A large number of animal and human studies on tularemia were performed at the US Army Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick, Maryland. The site contained a 1-million-litre aerosolization chamber where volunteers were exposed to F. tularensis and other agents to study the efficacy of prophylactic therapy and vaccines.156 However, after the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention, stockpiles held by the US were destroyed.157 According to a former Soviet Union biological weapons scientist, tularemia outbreaks on the Eastern European front during World War II were the result of intentional use.

The Soviet biological warfare programme encompassed research on a wide range of biological agents, including anthrax, cholera, ebola, plague, tularemia, and smallpox. Even after signing and ratifying the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention, the Soviet Union continued to participate in an extensive offensive weapons programme in violation of its international commitments. The programme, run by the agency known as Biopreparat, attempted to create vaccine-resistant strains of tularemia and supervirulent strains of anthrax.158 The top priority of Boipreparat was to increase the lethality of plague and tularemia, and at the same time make them more resistant to antibiotics and temperature extremes. By introducing specially engineered plasmids into successive generations of tularemia cultures, the strain became resistant to all known Western antibiotics. Dr Alibek of Russia, who defected to Europe, informed that while working in Russia, he had been in-charge of developing Biopreparats first vaccine resistance tularemia bomblet. Dr Alibek also informed that a new Moscow based company named Bioeffekt Ltd had offered, by mail order, three strains of tularemia produced by technology unknown outside Russia (i.e. genetically engineered strains).159 Although tularemia responds to antibiotic therapy, the intentional use of a genetically modified antibiotic-resistant strain could make the countermeasures ineffective.160 The US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has classified F. tularensis as a Category A bioterrorism agent, one most likely to be used as a weapon161 due to the following properties and characteristics: (i) Its highly infectious to both humans and animals; (ii) It is easily obtainable from an extended list of natural animal reservoirs; (iii) It can be easily cultured in large quantities; (iv) It has a tenacious ability to survive in the environment for extended periods of time; and (v) It is without a satisfactory vaccine. The intentional spread of F. tularensis aerosols would probably lead to severe and often fatal pneumonia cases, but also secondary cases from contaminated animals and environments. No vaccine is currently available. A few antibiotics are active against F. tularensis, but strains resistant to these antibiotics could be used in the context of bioterrorism.162 Tularemia has the potential to create a significant amount of morbidity and mortality under the right set of circumstances.163 F tularensis could be used as a biological weapon in many scenarios, causing varying degrees of casualties.164 The most dangerous scenario involves an aerosol release with large numbers of persons exposed since the bacterium was developed into an aerosol biological weapon by several countries in the past. Researchers have estimated that in a large-scale aerosol release of 50 kg over a large metropolitan area with a population of 5 million, there would be an estimated 250,000 incapacitating casualties, including 19,000 deaths.165 F tularensis may also be confused with another biological weapon. Pulmonary tularemia may be difficult to distinguish from Q fever, another potential biological weapon agent. Because of the difficulties in tularemia diagnosis and the nonspecific clinical presentation, the determination of F. tularensis as the causative agent may be delayed.166 Although F tularensis could be used as a weapon in a number of ways, it is believed that an aerosol release would have the greatest adverse medical and public health consequences. Release in a densely populated area would be expected to result in an abrupt onset of large numbers of cases of acute, nonspecific febrile illness beginning 3 to 5 days later (incubation range, 1-14 days), with pleurapneumonitis developing in a significant proportion of cases during the ensuing days and weeks. It would be difficult to distinguish tularemia infection from a natural outbreak of community-acquired infection, especially influenza or various atypical pneumonias.167 The severity of disease caused by F. tularensis is highly dependent on the causative strain and the route of entry of the bacterium into the host. The elderly, people with respiratory illness or whose immune systems are already compromised are most at risk of developing severe illness from F. tularensis.168 However, it may not be a weapon of choice when compared to botulism, anthrax, viral hemorrhagic fever, smallpox, and plague.169 Tularemia is a life-threatening disease caused by infection with the bacterium Francisella tularensis . This bacterium is one of the most infectious microorganisms known and poses a substantial threat as a potential biological weapon. Given its highly pathogenic nature, low infectious dose, and ability to infect via aerosol, F. tularensis has been classified at Category A agent. Water can also become contaminated from animals infected with tularemia and cause human infection. The bacterium is able to survive in water, in mosquito larvae, in biofilms, or in cooperation with amoeba. Human can be contaminated from the aquatic reservoir by drinking contaminated water, after a mosquito bite, or during swimming and fishing activities. Effective control of the aquatic reservoir of F. tularensis would also be of tremendous importance following a bioterrorist attack. After a terrorist attack, tularemia bacillus could survive for months in the environment, leading to a high number of secondary tularemia cases.

VI. Botulinum Toxin Botulism is caused by a bacterium called Clostridium botulinum, producing deadly protein toxins that can cause paralysis or death. Botulinum170 toxins are some of the most lethal known toxins. One gram of crystalline toxin, when properly disseminated, could kill one million people. As a liquid solution, botulinum is colourless, odourless, and tasteless. It is inactivated by heat. The Centre for Disease Control (CDC) has classified botulinum toxin as a Category A biological weapons agent.171 Botulinum neurotoxin has been developed as a biological weapon by many countries, including Japan, Germany, the US, Russia, and Iraq.172 In recent years, unsuccessful attempts were made by a Japanese cult to aerosolize (a fine mist that can easily spread through the air and be inhaled) Clostridium botulinum toxins for use in bioterrorism attacks. One of the most fascinating aspects in the field of botulinum toxin research in recent years has been application of the most potent toxin in treatment of neurological disorders. It has become the first biological toxin which is licensed as drug for treatment of human diseases.173 Injection of botulinum toxin has been used to provide relief from certain involuntary muscle disorders, dystonic conditions, pain syndromes, and headaches.174 Clostridium botulinum is divided into seven strains (A-G) based on antigenic differences. Type A strains are known to be genetically diverse and widespread throughout the world and is considered the most lethal type. Types A, B, E, and occasionally F, cause human disease. Various domesticated animals, such as dogs, cattle, and birds of all types, are affected by type C. Type D has also been known to cause problems for cattle, while horses react to types A, B, and C.175 There are no known cases of animal or human botulism associated with type G toxin.176 Clostridium botulinum and botulism, the disease it causes, have been known to man for centuries. All four forms of botulisms (food borne, infant, wound and animal) cause illness through a common pathway regardless of the manner in which the toxin gains systemic access. Botulism initiates with acute weakness of muscles, causing difficulty in speaking and swallowing and double with blurred vision in all forms of diseases. This is followed by a progressive symmetrical flaccid paralysis, descending from the muscles of the head and throat, which in severe cases causes death due to respiratory muscles paralysis.

Ingestion of food containing the preformed toxin causes food-borne botulism.177 It results from the absorption of botulinum toxin into the circulation from a mucosal surface (gut, lung) or a wound. It does not penetrate intact skin. The toxin irreversibly binds to peripheral cholinergic synapses, preventing the release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from the terminal end of motor neurons. This leads to muscle paralysis and, in severe cases, can lead to a need for mechanical respiration. The incubation period for food-borne botulism can range from two hours to eight days after ingestion, depending on the dose of the bacteria or the toxin. The average incubation period is 1272 hours after ingestion. Patients with botulism typically present with difficulty speaking, seeing and/or swallowing. Worldwide, methods of food preparation and food preservation that fail to destroy the ubiquitous spores result in sporadic cases and small outbreaks. Wound botulism, a relatively rare form of the disease, results from the production of toxin by organisms that multiply in a contaminated wound.178 No cases of waterborne botulism have ever been reported. This is likely due to the large amount of toxin needed, and the fact that the toxin is easily neutralized by common water-treatment techniques.

Under stress, C. botulinum forms a spore that is the hardiest and most efficient biological entity in nature, capable of withstanding extreme environmental conditions. The spores can survive for 30 years in liquid medium and are likely capable of withstanding many months in conditions of outer space. Consequently, C. botulinum spores can survive standard cooking and food processing measures and remain viable in preserved foods, where, under appropriate conditions, the spores could germinate and toxin production can occur.179 Botulinum toxin as Biological Weapon Botulinum toxin is on the A list of potential bioterrorist weapons because of its toxicity, lethality, resistance harsh environmental conditions, ease of production, ease of transport, ease of use, and the need for prolonged, intensive care of affected victims.180 The toxin prevents nerve endings from sending signals to the muscles, which leads to paralysis. Paralyzing muscles of the respiratory system leads to the need for a ventilator for the patient for periods of more than 6 weeks. The impact of a bioterror attack using the toxin would have a devastating impact on medical services. Botulinum toxin have been used as an offensive weapon since the early 1900s. According to Carrus (2001), crude anaerobic fermenters made by burying canteens filled with water, green beans and slivers of meat to facilitate C. botulinum production for use against Mexican federal troops in 1910.181 Attempts to use the botulinum toxin as a weapon of war have been documented since the 1930s. Development of botulinum as a bioweapon began nearly 90 years ago, when a Japanese biological warfare group fed cultures of C. botulinum to prisoners during the Japanese occupation of Manchuria. During World War II, the Japanese biological warfare group, known as Unit 731, did the same to their Chinese prisoners of war, each time killing the prisoners. In 1939, Sir Frederick Banting included botulinum toxins in the Canadian biological weapons arsenal. The agent was known as Agent X to the allies. It proved unstable and difficult to mass produce. About 7 pounds of the biological agent was produced, but US field tests at Horn Island proved the agent to be a failure. The US had produced botulinum toxin as a potential weapon during World War II, but never used them. The US produced made more than 1 million doses of botulinum toxoid vaccine to protect troops for the Normandy invasion on D Day.182 In the early 1960s, Germany also attempted to develop bioweapons.183 In the 1970s, Iraq and the Soviet Union continued to produce botulinum toxin. Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, several nations attempting to develop biological weapons recruited thousands of scientists previously working in the Soviet bioweapons programme.184 The Soviet Union experimented extensively with Clostridium botulinum, and it was one of several agents tested at the Aralsk-7 facilities situated on the Aral Sea on Vozrozhdeniye Island. Reports suggest that the Soviet biological weapons programme, Biopreparat, attempted to splice the botulinum toxin gene into other bacteria.185 Following the 1991 Persian Gulf War, Iraq admitted to the United Nations that it had produced 19,000 liters of concentrated botulinum toxin. Further, approximately 10,000 liters had been loaded into various military weapons.186 Iraq did not use biological agents during the Persian Gulf War or Operation Iraqi Freedom, and it has maintained that its biological weapon stockpiles were destroyed. No biological weapons were discovered in Iraq in wartime from 2003 through 2011.187 By an estimate, if one-third of those 19,000 litres were inhaled, it would kill everyone in the world. A single gram could kill one million people. It has been reported that Iraq got seeds for bioweapon programme from the United States.188 On three known occasions between 1990 and 1995, the Japanese cult Aum Shinrikyo made attempts to spread botulinum toxin through the air. They obtained their Clostridium botulinum from soil they collected in northern Japan. However, none of these attacks succeeded because of faulty technique, aerosol generating equipment failure or internal sabotage.189 Iran, Syria, and North Korea are believed to be developing or to have developed botulinum toxin as a weapon.190 In spite of technical difficulties, terrorists are most likely to use an aerosolized form of botulinum toxin to inflict the greatest number of casualties most efficiently. A successful point source aerosol release could incapacitate or kill 10 percent of people within 0.5 km downwind of the release. Terrorists could also use food as a medium for the toxin. It may not be preferred mode of terrorist action, but may terrorize civilian population, decreasing confidence in the governments ability to protect the food supply and economic losses. Although food contamination would cause fewer casualties compared to an aerosol release, it would be more difficult to distinguish a food-borne attack from naturally occurring food-borne botulism.191 However, modes of dispersion other than aerosolization and food contamination could be attempted.192 It has been reported that the former Soviet Union carried out research and collaborated with Iraq on the weaponization of botulinum toxin into the early 1990s. Dr Alibek, a Soviet Scientist, who defected to the US informed that he has worked in the Soviet Union on their bioweapons programme and the Soviet Union had attempted to splice the gene for the botulinum toxin into other bacteria hoping to modify the toxin and make it a more effective weapon.

The CDC have designated three categories for bioterror agents and botulism is classified in Category A, which is the highest priority category for a potential bioterror agent. Botulism meets the criteria set up by the CDC which are: (i) The agent is easily disseminated or transmitted from person to person; (ii) It results in high mortality rate and has the potential for major public health impact; (iii) It might cause panic or social disruption; and (iv) It requires special action for public health preparedness. Botulism toxin is considered a potential bioterror agent owing to its short incubation period and high toxicity. Given the ease of botulinum toxin production, there is a risk of its future use for malicious purposes. Possible exposure route in case of a bioterror attack include aerosol, and food and waterborne exposures.193Five classic symptoms have also been used to diagnose botulism: nausea and vomiting, dysphagia, diplopia, dry mouth, and fixed dilated pupils.194 It is not necessary that every individual must exhibit all five symptoms. Untreated botulism is frequently fatal. Some contemporary analysts, however, discount the potential of botulinum toxin as a bioweapon because of constraints in concentrating and stabilizing the toxin for aerosol dissemination.195 Conclusion Besides few biological warfare agents and butolotoxin discussed above, there are a number of other pathogens and toxins which could be employed as biological weapons and can be used for both lethal and incapacitating purposes. For example, Category B pathogens are moderately easy to disseminate and cause moderate morbidity and low mortality, when compared to Category A agents. These biological agents cause disease by invading tissues or by producing toxins that are detrimental to the infected individual. Pathogens that normally infect individuals through an ingestion pathway also pose a significant risk of secondary infections from the fecal and oral cycle. Some individuals can become asymptomatic carriers and are also capable of spreading the disease. Biotechnological advancement has paved the way for modification of naturally occurring pathogens into a new generation of genetically engineered pathogens. These new pathogens could be developed into extremely deadly biological agents that could be more dangerous than conventional biological warfare agents discussed in this chapter.196 * * * 1 There are two major virulence factors in B. anthracis, poly--D-glutamic acid capsule and a tripartite toxin. Pathogenic B. anthracis bacteria produce capsule which mimics the immune system of host by masking the bacteria from macrophages. The tripartite toxin of anthrax consists of three independently secreted proteins, i.e., protective antigen (PA), lethal factor (LF) and edema factor (EF). Anthrax toxin is a binary A-B toxin, where PA acts as the binding (B) domain and LF and EF act as active (A) domains individually to form the binary toxins lethal toxin (LTx) and edema toxin (ETx), respectively. Goel Ajay Kumar, Anthrax: A Disease of biowarfare and public health importance, World Journal of Clinical Cases, Vol. 3(1), 16 January 2015, pp. 20-33.

2 In the skin, B. anthracis can often be contained at the infection site by phagocytes until anti-bodies are made to neutralize its toxin. Antibody-coated bacteria are engulfed and killed by macrophages with the help of T-cells, and the infected person usually recovers. When B. anthracis infects the lungs, it spreads to the lymph nodes so rapidly and kills so many macrophages that it can be deadly before neutralizing anti bodies are made. B. anthracis avoids being killed by the macrophage and uses toxin to kill the macrophages from the inside where it is protected from neutralizing antibodies. Decker Janet, 2003, Deadly Diseases and Epidemics: Anthrax, Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publishers, p. 87.

3 Anthrax infection has been described in ancient literature and religious writings. Some biblical scholars have interpreted descriptions of two of the plagues that struck Egypt around 1500 BC as anthrax epidemics. The 5th plague, as described in the book of Exodus, is a plague of grievous murrain (an infectious and fast-spreading disease) that affected livestock. The description of the 6th plague, or the Plague of Boils, is very similar to the symptoms of cutaneous anthrax. Descriptions of anthrax infection exist in ancient literature as well. For example, scholars have construed the burning plague described in Homers Iliad (estimated date 950700 BC) as an anthrax epidemic. In addition, Virgil detailed an outbreak in Georgics (29 BC). Georgics is set in the world of animal husbandry and describes murrain that devastated farms and meadows, polluted water supplies, and contaminated food sources. Flocks of sheep were affected, and human victims died after suffering burning fever and shriveled flesh. Virgil made the connection between the murrain that affected the sheep and the disease killing humans: If anyone wore a garment made from tainted wool, his limbs were soon attacked by inflamed papules and foul exudates, and if he delayed too long to remove the material, a violent inflammation consumed the parts it had touched. Witkowski, J.A. The story of anthrax from antiquity to present: a biological weapon of nature and humans, Clin. Dermatol ., Vol. 20, 2002, pp. 336242.

4 In Britain, the officials at Porton Downs biology department placed an order with a supplier for enough raw materials to make for five million cakes. They contracted a London toilet soap manufacturer to cut the material into individual cakes about an inch in diameter and weighing less than an ounce apiece. They hired a dozen soap makers, all of them women. At a secret facility, the cattle cakes were injected with anthrax spores supplied by the Ministry of Agriculture, which produced them in a lab. By the spring of 1944 five million cakes were manufactured and pumped with anthrax and the modified RAF bombers that would drop them over northern Germany were ready. However, the order from the Prime Minister Winston Churchill for Operation Vegetarian never came. The British had used Gruinard Island (520-acre) less than a mile off the coast of northwest Scotland as a testing site for Anthrax. The Porton Down scientists dumped them at the bottom of a cliff on the Gruinard Island, then buried them by dynamiting the cliff. But one of the sheep was blown into the water and floated to the Scottish mainland, where it washed ashore on a beach. There it was partially eaten by a dog. The dog died, but not before spreading anthrax to seven cows, two horses, three cats, and 50 more sheep, all of whom died as well. Quick payments to the farmers who owned the animals hushed up the incident, and it wasnt until the 1980s that the truth about what killed their dog, cows, horses, cats, and sheep finally became known. Gruinard Island was finally decontaminated in 1990 and the descendants of the original owners were permitted to buy the island back for 500, just as promised.

5 On 25 November 1969, President Richard M. Nixon abolished Americas offensive biological warfare programme with the following statement: The United States shall renounce the use of lethal biological agents and weapons, and all other methods of biological warfare. The United States will confine its biological research to defensive measures, such as immunization and safety measures. The Department of Defence has been asked to make recommendations as to the disposal of existing stocks of bacteriological agents. Richard M. Nixon, Statement on Chemical and Biological Defense Policies and Programs, 25 November 1969, Public Papers of the Presidents: Richard M. Nixon, 1969; Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1971.

6 The Biological Weapons Convention currently has 183 States Parties and four states namely Egypt, Haiti, Somalia and Syrian Arab Republic, have signed but not ratified it. There are 10 States which have neither signed nor ratified the Convention: Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Eritrea, Israel, Kiribati, Micronesia (Federated States of), Namibia, South Sudan and Tuvalu.

7 Cole Leonard A., The specter of biological weapons, Scientific American, 275, December 1996, pp. 60-65.

8 In 1995, the United Nations Special Commission found Iraq had weaponized anthrax spores into Scud warheads. Zalinskas R.A., Iraqs biological weapons: the past as the future, JAMA, Vol. 278, 1997, pp. 418-424.

9 It was claimed that strains of the bacteria were sold during the late 1980s to an American company which in turn sold them to the Iraqis. The British Ministry of Defence, however, denied involvement, and clarified that the material had come from a Department of Health facility next to its own Porton Down site. The Department of Health did not confirm or denied the claim. Fran Abrams, British government supplied Saddam with Anthrax, Independent, 3 April 1998, available at: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/british-government-supplied-saddam-with-anthrax-1154032.html.

10 In 1979, the largest inhalational anthrax epidemic of the 20th century occurred in Sverdlovsk, Russia. Anthrax spores were accidentally released from a military research facility located upwind from where the cases occurred. According to the accounts provided by two Soviet physicians, 96 human anthrax cases were reported, of which 79 were gastrointestinal and 17 cutaneous. The 79 gastrointestinal cases resulted in 64 deaths. Although the initial report of this event attributed the infections to a gastrointestinal source, later evidence indicated that an aerosol release of weaponized anthrax spores from a military production facility had occurred, and thus, inhalational anthrax may have been the predominant cause of these civilian casualties.

11 Wallin Arune et.al., Public health and bioterrorism: renewed threat of anthrax and smallpox,Medicina (Kaunas), Vol. 43(4), 2007, pp. 278-284.

12 Broad William J., Gene-engineered anthrax: is it a weapon? New York Times, 14 February 1998.

13 Kelle Alexander, 2014, Prohibiting Chemical and Biological Weapons: Multilateral Regimes and Their Evolution, USA: Lynne Rienner Publishers, p. 183-184.

14 The FBIs investigation into the 2001 mailings, labelled Amerithrax, was one of the largest and most complex in American history. It involved more than 600,000 investigator work hours, 10,000 witness interviews worldwide, 80 separate searches, and the recovery of more than 6,000 items of potential evidence, including 5,730 environmental samples from 60 site locations. US Department of Justice, Anthrax Investigation Summary, Washington DC, 2010, p. 4.

15 The anthrax strain contained in all the envelopes was the same: one of the known variants of the Ames strain. It is a strain that only became available to the US biodefence program in the early 1980s.

Due to its potency, it became the standard strain for use in animal model efficacy studies during the development of new anthrax vaccines. As best as is known, somewhere between 15 and 20 laboratories in the UK, US, Canada and probably Israel have possessed or worked with the Ames strain. Leitenberg Milton, Biological weapons and Bioterrorism in the First Years of the 21st Century, Paper prepared for Conference on the Possible Use of Biological Weapons by Terrorists Groups: Scientific, Legal, and International Implications, Italy, April 2003, p. 41.

16 Dr. Bruce Ivins committed suicide in 2008, shortly before he could be arrested by the FBI. In February 2010, the FBI closed its investigation into the anthrax attacks after more than eight years, issuing report that concluded that Ivins carried out the attacks entirely on his own. But the results of the investigation were later called into question by the National Academy of Sciences, which issued a study in 2011 determining that while the scientific evidence supports the idea that Ivins might have been the perpetrator, it does not prove it conclusively. Pruitt Sarah, When Anthrax-Laced Letters Terrorized the Nation, 4 October 2018, available at: https://www.history.com/news/anthrax-attacks-terrorism-letters.

17 Kenneth Alibek, Catherine Lobanova, and Serguei Popov, Anthrax: A Disease and Weapon, in Fong I.W. and Ken Alibek (ed.), 2009, Bioterrorism and Infectious Agents: A New Dilemma for the 21st Century, USA: Springer, p. 8.

18 Zimmerman, B.E., and Zimmerman, D.J., 2003, Killer Germs: Microbes and Diseases that Threaten Humanity, New York:Contemporary Books, p. 219.

19 Kalamas Alicia Gruber, Anthrax, Anesthesiology Clin N Am, Vol. 22, 2004, pp. 533540.

20 Anthrax in Humans and Animals, 2008, World Health Organization, p. 101.

21 Davis Jim A. and Anna Johnson-Winegar, The Anthrax Terror: DODs Number-One Biological Threat, Aerospace Power Journal, Winter 2000, pp. 15-29.

22 W. Seth Carus, 1998, Bioterrorism and Biocrimes: The Illicit Use of Biological Agents in the 20th Century, rev. ed. Washington, DC: National Defense University, Centre for Counterproliferation Research, p. 58; Thomas V. Inglesby, et. al., Anthrax as a Biological Weapon: Medical and Public Health Management, Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol.281, May 1999, pp. 173545.

23 Kendall Ronald J., Steven M. Presley, Galen P. Austin and Philip N. Smith (Ed.), 2008, Advances in Biological and Chemical Terrorism Countermeasures, New York: CRC Press, p. 231.

24 Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, Office of Technology Assessment, US Congress, Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1993.

25 Inglesby TV, et. al., Anthrax as a biological weapon: Medical and public health management, Working Group on Civilian Biodefence, JAMA, 281 (18), 1999, pp. 1735-45.

26 Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers and Bioterrorism, Fact Sheet Series, Texas, Department of State Health Service, available at: https://texashelp.tamu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Viral-Hemorrhagic-Fevers.pdf, last visited on 12 June 2020.

27 Groseth Allison, Steven Jones, Harvey Artsob and Heinz Feldmann, Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses as Biological Weapons, in Fong I.W. and Ken Alibek (ed.), 2009, Bioterrorism and Infectious Agents: A New Dilemma for the 21st Century, New York: Springer, p. 172.

28 Smith Tara C., 2011, Ebola and Marburg Viruses: deadly Diseases and Epidemics, New York: Chelsea House, p. 8.

29 The study showed that miners were approximately 14 times more likely to have Marburg antibodies than those who were not miners, suggesting that these mines and caves are a site for infection with the Marburg virus and exposure to the animal or insect reservoir that carries the virus. Bausch D.G., et. al., Risk Factors for Marburg Hemorrhagic Fever, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Emerging Infectious Diseases, December 2003, available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol9no12/03-0355.htm.

30 Smith Tara C., 2011, Ebola and Marburg Viruses, New York: Chelsea House, p. 14-15.

31 In August 2007, Ebola reappeared in Bundibygyo district of Uganda, causing 149 illnesses; however, mortality was significantly lower (36 percent) than most Ebola outbreaks. When scientists tested the pathogen, they discovered different immunological characteristics of virus. Therefore, they determined the entire molecular sequence of the virus, and found that it was a whole new strain of Ebola, which they named Ebola Bundibugyo.

32 In the fall of 1989, a shipment of 100 wild monkeys (crab-eater monkeys) from the Philippines arrived at Hazelton Research Products in Reston, Virginia. Scientists divided the monkeys among 12 different rooms. Workers at the facility noticed that two of the monkeys were dead on arrival. At the time, this was not perceived as an unusual event, as animals occasionally die during transport. However, by 1 November 1989, a total of 29 monkeys had died. With the help of virologists at USAMRIID, the scientists diagnosed that the monkeys were suffering from Ebola. The new strain was named Ebola Reston, after the place where it was first isolated.

33 Olival KJ, Hayman D.T., Filoviruses in bats: current knowledge and future directions, Viruses, Vol. 6(4), 2014, pp. 175988.

34 Kaner Jolie and Schaak Sarah, Understanding Ebola: The 2014 Epidemic, Globalization and Health, Vol. 12, 2016, pp. 7.

35 On 25 September 2014, Ducan, a man aged 45 years, who had arrived in the US from Liberia 5 days earlier, went to a Dallas County, Texas, emergency department with high fever, abdominal pain, and headache. He was treated for possible sinusitis and discharged. On September 28, he returned to the hospital by ambulance with persistent fever, abdominal pain, and new onset diarrhea; he was placed in a private room under standard, droplet and contact precautions and was tested for Ebola. On 30 September, the Texas Department of State Health Services and CDC confirmed that patient was positive for Ebola virus, and this represented the first imported Ebola virus infection diagnosed in the US. On 8 October 2014, Duncan died of Ebola. The persons who came in contact with Ducan in the US were treated and no one who contracted Ebola in the United States died from it.

36 Smith Tara C., 2011, Ebola and Marburg Viruses, New York: Chelsea House, p. 11; also see: Toner E, Adalja A, and Inglesby T., A Primer on Ebola for clinicians, Disaster Med Public Health Prep, 2014, pp.15.

37 On 10 April 2020, an outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) took place in Congo and seven confirmed cases were reported from Kasanga, Malepe and Kanzulinzuli Health Areas in Beni Health Zone. So far no fresh cases of EVD have been reported from North Kivu Province, Congo. Ebola virus disease  Democratic Republic of the Congo, WHO Disease outbreak news: update 14 May 2020, available at: https://www.who.int/csr/don/14-May-2020-ebola-drc/en/.

38 Ebola virus is a biological weapon because its particles are stable in vitro and EVD has long incubation period; one infected person, if not checked, can be responsible for EVD epidemic. Densely populated localities/countries are especially vulnerable for rapid spread of EVD. Sushil Kumar, et.al., Ebola Virus Disease: Biology, Diagnosis, Treatment and Prevention of Epidemics, Proc Indian Natn Sci. Acad., Vol.83, No. 1, March 2017, pp. 103-149.

39 Bibby K., Casson L.W., Stachler E., Charles N. and Haas C. N., Ebola virus persistence in the environment: state of the knowledge and research needs, Environ Sci Technol Lett ., Vol. 2, 2015, pp. 2-6.

40 Sushil Kumar, et.al., Ebola Virus Disease: Biology, Diagnosis, Treatment and Prevention of Epidemics, Proc Indian Natn Sci. Acad., Vol. 83, No. 1, March 2017, pp. 103-149.

41 One Year into the Ebola Epidemic: A Deadly, Tenacious and Unforgiving Virus, WHO, 2015, available at: http://www.who.int/csr/disease/ebola/one-year-report/introduction/en/.

42 Ebola Virus Disease in West Africa  The First 9 Months of the Epidemic and Forward Projections, WHO Ebola Response Team, N. Engl. J. Med ., 371, 2014, pp. 1481-1495.

43 Five characteristics necessary for a biological agent to become a successful bioterrorism agent: pathogenesis and etiology, infectiousness and symptoms, dissemination methods, capacity for weaponization, and the available prophylaxis. Gunaratne Naveen D., The Ebola Virus and the Threat of Bioterrorism, The Fletcher Forum of World Affairs, Vol. 39:1, Winter 2015, pp. 63-76.

44 Halpin Matthew S., Biological Warfare: The Weaponization of Naturally Occurring Biological Diseases, Hous. J. Health L. & Policy, Vol. 16, 2016, pp. 259-291.

45 Ebola Strategy: Ebola and Marburg virus disease epidemics: preparedness, alert, control, and evaluation, World Health Organization, 2014, pp. 107.

46 Gera Prachi, et. al., Recent advances in vaccine development against Ebola threat as bioweapon, VirusDis ., Vol. 28 (3), JulySeptember 2017, pp. 242246.

47 Haines John R., Weaponizing Ebola, Foreign Policy Research Institute, October 2014, pp. 7.

48 Ken Jennison, Hospitals face Eloba Waste Challenge, 24 October 2014, available at: http://www.environmentalleader.com/2014/10/24/hospitals-face-ebola-wastechallenges 49 Gibb Rory, Lina M. Moses, David W. Redding & Kate E. Jones, Understanding the cryptic nature of Lassa fever in West Africa, Pathogens and Global Health (Online Jour), 2017, pp. 15.

50 McCormick JB, Webb PA, Krebs JW, Johnson KM, Smith ES; A prospective study of the epidemiology and ecology of Lassa fever, J. Infect Dis ., Vol. 155 (3), 1987, pp. 437-444.

51 Spickler, Anna Rovid. 2010. Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers Caused by Arenaviruses, available at: http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/DiseaseInfo/factsheets.php.

52 About 80% of Lassa virus infections are asymptomatic. Symptoms are varied and nonspecific, and diagnosis is often difficult. The onset of the disease is usually gradual. Initial symptoms include fever, general weakness, and a vague feeling of bodily discomfort (malaise) progressing to headache, sore throat, muscle pain (myalgia), chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, cough, and abdominal pain. Although hemorrhagic syndrome is less common, severe cases may progress to facial swelling, fluid in the lung cavity, and bleeding from mouth, nose, vagina, or gastrointestinal tract. Further complications include low blood pressure, shock, seizures, tremor, disorientation, and coma. Deafness occurs in 25 percent of patients; half of these may recover some functions after several months. Transient hair loss and gait disturbance may occur during recovery. Ellison D. Hank, 2008, Handbook of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents, New York: CRC Press, p. 553.

53 Epidemiological modelling of Lassa fever admissions data showed that around 20% of hospitalized cases were attributable to human-to-human transmission, although genomic evidence from Lassa virus isolates from hospital patients in Sierra Leone and Nigeria suggests that human-to-human infections are much rarer. Andersen KG, Shapiro BJ, Matranga CB, et al., Clinical sequencing uncovers origins and evolution of Lassa virus, Cell ., Vol. 162(4), 2015, pp. 738750, available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26276630.

54 Gibb Rory, Lina M. Moses, David W. Redding & Kate E. Jones, Understanding the cryptic nature of Lassa fever in West Africa, Pathogens and Global Health (Online Jour), 2017, pp. 15.

55 Olayinka Stephen Ilesanmi et. Al., Awareness of Lassa Fever in a Rural Community in South West Nigeria, Scholars Journal of Applied Medical Sciences, Vol. 3(3B), 2015, pp. 1137-1142.

56 The Eastern Province of Sierra Leone, especially Kenema District, has one of the highest reported incidence of Lassa fever in the world. Despite the end of Sierra Leones civil war that lasted from 19912002, about 70 percent of Sierra Leones population still lives in poverty. Houses where cases of Lassa fever had been reported had significantly worse housing quality and external hygiene and more rodent burrows. A study conducted in eastern Sierra Leone showed that the presence of visible rodent burrows correlated directly with the abundance of multimammate rats in the home. Houses with mud brick or mud and wattle walls were also found to be almost 10 times more likely to have multimammate rat infestation than houses with cement walls. Kelly J. Daniel, et.al., Housing equity for health equity: a rights based approach to the control of Lassa fever in post war Sierra Leone, BMC International Health and Human Rights, Vol. 13(2), January 2013, pp. 6.

57 Bonner Phillip C., et. al., Poor Housing Quality Increases Risk of Rodent Infestation and Lassa Fever in Refugee Camps of Sierra Leone, The American Jour of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 77, Issue 1, 2007, p. 169-175.

58 Stephen A. Berger and Itzhak Shapira, Hemorrhagic Fevers and Bioterror, Biologic Warfare Medicine, IMAJ, Vol. 4, July 2002, pp. 513-519.

59 Melnick Alan L., 2008, Biological, Chemical and Radiological Terrorism: Emergency Preparedness and Response for the Primary Care Physician, USA: Springer, p. 94.

60 Borio L. et. al., Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses as Biological weapons: Medical and Health Management, Infectious Diseases in Clinical Practice, Vol. 11, Issue 3, March-April 2002, pp, 157-159.

61 The name variola comes from the Latin word for spotted and refers to the raised bumps that appear on the face and body of individuals infected with smallpox. The WHO has classified five types of smallpox. The ordinary type, or variola major, accounts for nearly 90 percent of cases, with a case fatality rate of 30 percent. The modified type (variola minor) is rarely fatal. The flat type has a with 97 percent fatality rate among unvaccinated patients. The hemorrhagic smallpox (more than 3percent of cases) is almost invariably lethal. The variola sine eruptione type, in previously vaccinated contacts or in infants with maternal antibodies, is usually asymptomatic or with flu-like symptoms. Fenner F., Henderson D.A., Arita I., Jezek Z, and Ladnyi I.D., Smallpox and its Eradication, Geneva: World Health Organization, 1988, pp. 1460.

62 There is evidence smallpox is at least 3,000 years old. It was known in China as early as 1122 BC. Its scars have been found on the mummy of Pharaoh Ramses V, who died in 1157 BC, as well as on other mummies from the 18th and 20th Egyptian dynasties. The first known smallpox epidemic was recorded in 1350 B.C. During the Egyptian-Hittite war that year, Egyptian prisoners unwittingly spread smallpox to the Hittites. Even the Hittite King Suppiluliumus I and his heir fell victim to the virus. It devastated their civilization and assured the Egyptians victory.

63 Hays J.N., 2005, Epidemics and Pandemics: Their Impacts on Human History, Santa Barbara, CA: ABCCLIO, p. 31; Musson Gail C., 2012, Smallpox as a Bioweapon: Should We Be Concerned? Naval Postgraduate School, California, Unpublished Thesis, p. 7.

64 This campaign, which involved vaccinating all humans in a ring surrounding every suspected case of variola infection, was successful in part because smallpox is solely a human disease with no animal reservoirs to reintroduce the virus into the human population. Arthur J. Goff, et. al., Smallpox and Related Orthopoxviruses, in Bozuf Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (ed.), 2018, Textbook of Military Medicine: Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare, US Army Medical Department Center and School, Texas, p. 617.

65 Poxviruses infect most vertebrates and invertebrates, causing various diseases of veterinary and medical importance. The poxvirus family is divided into two main subfamilies: (1) the Chordopoxvirinae, which infects vertebrates; and (2) the Entomopoxvirinae, which infects insects. Subfamily Chordopoxvirinae is divided into eight genera, one of which is Orthopoxvirus, which consists of numerous genetically similar pathogens capable of causing disease in humans including variola virus, monkeypox virus, cowpox virus, and vaccinia virus. Members of the Orthopoxvirus genus are mostly zoonotic pathogens that are antigenically similar. Antigenic similarity was vital to the smallpox eradication in 1980 and remains a key component for the protection of military personnel, healthcare workers, and researchers who are likely to come into contact with orthopoxviruses. Arthur J. Goff, et. al., Smallpox and Related Orthopoxviruses, in Bozuf Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (ed.), 2018, Textbook of Military Medicine: Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare, US Army Medical Department Centre and School, Texas, p. 617.

66 The risk of death depended on the virulence of the smallpox strain (some were particularly lethal) and especially on the state of the patients immune system and general health. The aftermath of smallpox killed some of those who had survived the acute attack. For girls and women in particular, severe scarring and disfigurement meant the end of life as they were unable to accept it. Some withdrew into their own world and wasted away through depression and self-neglect, while others took more direct action and killed themselves.

67 The causes of death from smallpox are not well elucidated. Massive viral toxemia probably causes a sepsis cascade. Cardiovascular shock may be part of the agonal syndrome. In hemorrhagic cases, disseminated intravascular coagulation probably occurs. Antibacterial agents are not helpful. Loss of fluid and proteins from the exudative rash probably contribute to death. There is no proven therapy. No data exist to show whether modern supportive care could reduce the death rate. Fong I.W. and Ken Alibek (ed.), 2009, Bioterrorism and Infectious Agents: A New Dilemma for the 21st Century, USA: Springer, p.150.

68 The basis for vaccination began in 1796 when an English doctor named Edward Jenner observed that milkmaids who had gotten cowpox did not show any symptoms of smallpox after variolation. The first experiment to test this theory involved milkmaid Sarah Nelmes and James Phipps, the 9 year-old son of Jenners gardener. Dr. Jenner took material from a cowpox sore on Nelmes hand and inoculated it into Phipps arm. Months later, Jenner exposed Phipps a number of times to variola virus, but Phipps never developed smallpox. More experiments followed, and, in 1801, Jenner published his treatise On the Origin of the Vaccine Inoculation, in which he summarized his discoveries and expressed hope that the annihilation of the smallpox, the most dreadful scourge of the human species, must be the final result of this practice.

69 In January 1967, the WHO mandate was renewed, under the aegis of the Intensified Smallpox Eradication Programme (ISEP), this time with a modest pot of $2.4 million in seed money, and a ten-year time frame to concentrate the energies. Dr Donald Henderson, a medical epidemiologist from the US Public Health Service, assumed leadership of the WHO campaign and created the necessary infrastructure, including a multinational cadre of talented and dedicated individuals. Immediate ISEP goals were improvement in the international mechanism for identifying and reporting smallpox cases (99percent of which were estimated not to have made it into published national statistics) and in the development and mass production of unprecedented quantities of high-quality freeze-dried vaccine. The Soviet Union alone donated nearly 1.4 billion doses of vaccine. Extraordinary inventiveness also came to the rescue, with both high technology (the jet injector, capable of vaccinating up to 1,000 to 1,500 people per hour) and low technology (the bifurcated needle, easily sterilized for repeated uses, not requiring any spare parts or maintenance, and simple to train non-experts to use in the field). Koplow David A., 2003, Smallpox: The Fight to Eradicate A Global Scourge, Berkley: University of California Press, pp. 22-23.

70 Dr. A.D. Macrae, a virologist from Nottingham, visited Bangladesh and India in spring 1975, by which time the campaign was closing in relentlessly on the last strongholds of smallpox in Bihar State. Many problems were faced by the team multinational team staying at the Zeropox Guest House in Patna. For instance, bodies of Hindu victims were still being consigned to rivers, because Shitala Mata would be insulted if the recipients of her kiss were cremated in the traditional way. Villagers concealed smallpox cases, including babies under blankets, and sent children to hide in the fields when the vaccinators approached. Their main fear was loss of livelihood as people were locked away in quarantine and guarded by sentries paid by the WHO). They could not work and neither could children with a sore arm following vaccination. WHO policy prevailed over the rights of the individual: dissenters were held down, but only for the few seconds needed to wield the bifurcated needle. Williams Gareth, 2010, Angel of Death: The Story of Smallpox, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 350-351.

71 Now, only these laboratories in the United States and Russia have smallpox stocks, with about 400 strains in the United States and 200 strains in Russia. Finer Kim T., 2004, Deadly Diseases and Epidemic: Smallpox, Philadelphia, Chelsea House Publishers, p. 76; The physical security of these two installations (now designated as WHO Collaborating Centers for smallpox research) has become a matter of international concern. The CDC in Atlanta, Georgia, has not encountered untoward incidents; it reportedly stores its 400 variola samples in the innermost, rigidly guarded portions of the installation with secret and redundant layers of protection. But at the same time, other leading US institutions that formerly conducted variola work have hardly been free of accidents or safety and security lapses in handling other extremely hazardous pathogens. The Soviet variola stash was initially deployed at the Ivanovsky Institute for Viral Preparations in Moscow. In 1994, all 120 samples of variola were transferred to the Vector facility in Koltsovo, near Novosibirsk in southern Siberia without advance notice to, or permission from the WHO. Koplow David A., That Wonderful Year: Smallpox, Genetic Engineering, and Bio-Terrorism, Med. L. Rev ., 2003, pp. 439-440.

72 Smallpox eradication: destruction of variola virus stock, WHO, 72nd World Health Assembly Report by the Deirector-General, A72/28 dated 4 April 2019.

73 Rourke Michell F., Never Mind the Science, Heres the Convention on Biological Diversity: Viral Sovereignty in the Smallpox Destruction Debate, Australian Defence Force Malaria and Infectious Disease Institute, pp. 43.

74 Koplow David A., That Wonderful Year: Smallpox, Genetic Engineering, and Bio-Terrorism, Med. L. Rev ., 2003, p. 444.

75 The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) has a universal acceptance of 196 parties (except the United States). Briefly, its objectives are three: (i) the conservation of biological diversity; (ii) the sustainable use of its components; and (iii) the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources.

76 Rourke Michelle F., Never Mind the Science, Heres the Convention on Biological Diversity: Viral Sovereignty in the Smallpox Destruction Debate, Journal of Law and Medicine, Vol. 25(2), 2018, pp. 429-447.

77 Reardon Sara, Smallpox Watch: Frozen Mummies and Envelopes of Scabs Could Contain Remnants of One of Historys Most Prolific Killers, Nature, Vol. 509, Issue 7498, 2014, pp. 22.

78 Dando Malcom, Benefits and Threats of Developments in Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, SIPRI Yearbook, 1999, pp. 596-611.

79 Variola is a significant threat for use as a biological weapon because of its stability, infectivity in aerosol form, small infectious dose, severe disease manifestations, and inter-human transmissibility. Furthermore, the anticipated morbidity and mortality for the general population may be higher than historical averages resulting from waning immunity following vaccinations in the distant past and immune-suppression as a result of HIV, cancer, organ transplants, and old age. Goff Arthur J., et. al., Smallpox and Related Orthopoxviruses, in Bozuf Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (ed.), 2018, Textbook of Military Medicine: Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare, US Army Medical Department Center and School, Texas, pp. 623.

80 Weiss Martin M., et. al., Retninking Smallpox, Clinical Infectious Diseases, Vol. 39, 2004, pp. 1668-1773.

81 Gordon Steven M., The threat of bioterrorism: A reason to learn more about anthrax and smallpox, Cleveland Clinic Jour of Medicine, Vol.66, No. 10, 1999, p. 592-597.

82 Resnick J., Bidaisee S., Durgampudi P.K., and Keku E.O., The Dangers of Smallpox in Modern Day Bioterrorism, Journal of Translational Diagnostics and Technology, Vol. 1(3), 2016, pp. 21-26.

83 A fear is that the smallpox virus may exist outside the high-security storage laboratories in Atlanta and Siberia. Ken Alibek, a defector who was the former deputy director of the Soviet bioweapons program, reports Russias smallpox weaponization program was active up until 1992 when President Yeltsin ordered it to end. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, scientists working in the program may have sold samples of the virus or hidden them for later sale to support themselves. McEleney Brenda J., Smallpox: A Premier, US Air Force Counter-proliferation Centre, Future Warfare Series No. 9, p. 151.

84 According to report, the assessment was based on evidence that included disclosures by a senior Soviet defector, blood samples from North Korean soldiers that show smallpox vaccinations and the fairly recent manufacture of smallpox vaccine by Iraq. William J. Broad and Judith Miller, Government Report Says 3 Nations Hide Stocks of Smallpox, The New York Times, 13 June 1999, available at: https://www.nytimes.com/1999/06/13/world/government-report-says-3-nations-hide-stocks-of-smallpox.html.

85 Henderson Donald A. et. al., Smallpox as a biological weapon: Medical and public health management, JAMA, Vol. 281, No. 22, 9 June 1999, pp. 2127-2137.

86 Melnick Alan L., 2008, Biological, Chemical and Radiological Terrorism: Emergency Preparedness and Response for the Primary Care Physician, USA: Springer, p. 42.

87 Roberts Brad (ed.), 1997, Terrorism with Chemical and Biological Weapons: Calibrating the Risks and Responses Alexandria, VA: The Chemical and Biological Arms Control Institute, pp. 66-70.

88 Loeb Cheryl, Jihadists and Biological and Toxin Weapons, in Ackerman Gary and Jeremy Tamsett (ed.), 2009, Jihadists and Weapons of Mass Destruction, London: CRC Press, p. 154-159.

89 Musson Gail C., 2012, Smallpox as a Bioweapon: Should We Be Concerned? Naval Postgraduate School, California, Unpublished Thesis, pp. 131.

90 Lane, J. Michael and Lila Summer, Smallpox as a Weapon for Bioterrorism, in Fong I.W. and Kenneth Alibek (ed.), 2005, Bioterrorism and Infectious Agents: A New Dilemma for the 21st Century, New York: Springer pp. 147167.

91 Henderson Donald A. et. al., Smallpox as a biological weapon: Medical and public health management, JAMA, Vol. 281, No. 22, 9 June 1999, pp. 2136.

92 Goff Arthur J., et. al., Smallpox and Related Orthopoxviruses, in Bozuf Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (ed.), 2018, Textbook of Military Medicine: Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare, US Army Medical Department Center and School, Texas, pp. 623.

93 Finer Kim T., 2004, Deadly Diseases and Epidemic: Smallpox, Philadelphia, Chelsea House Publishers, p. 66.

94 Ken Alibek, who had formerly served as Biopreparats deputy director in Russia and defected to the US in 1992, revealed that the Soviets considered smallpox to be their No. 1 strategic weapon. They aerosolized it, weaponized it, grew it by the ton. Despite Russian President Boris N. Yeltsins 1992 declaration that he would shut down the Russian biological warfare program, ambitious, double-edged research with smallpox continued. Wendy Orent, The End of the Trail for Smallpox?Los Angeles Times, 2 August 1998, available at: https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1998-aug-02-op-9367-story.html.

95 Buonsenso D, Gargiullo L, Cataldi L., Ranno O. and Valentini P., Smallpox and Bioterrorism: History and Evaluation of Current State and Medical Knowledge, J Clinic Res Bioeth ., 2011, S3, p. 5.

96 In the US, the CDC has prepared a theoretical smallpox bioterrorism response plan. Its weakness is that it is based on assumptions about the public health infrastructure, political leadership, and public cooperation that are at odds with observed realities. The problem with such plans is that they cannot be audited or refined and whose failure modes will only be detected when it is too late to prevent the consequences of those failures. Richard Edward P., The United States Smallpox Bioterrorism Preparedness Plan: Rational Response or Potemkin Planning, William Mitchell Law Review, Vol. 36: 5, 2010, pp. 5179-5220.

97 Subject to the specific circumstances of an outbreak, the physical stockpile of the SVES will be used for rapid, short-term and limited interventions. The pledged SVES will be mobilized when it is estimated that the physical stockpile will be exhausted or when vaccine from pledged stocks can be deployed faster. The vaccines that currently make up the SVES are NOT sufficient to vaccinate the entire global population and will instead be used to facilitate the initial response to a smallpox outbreak, to allow manufacturers to start production of additional vaccine, and for WHO and countries to implement long-term containment/control strategies. Vaccine from the SVES will only be released to assist containment measures in situations where an outbreak of smallpox has been confirmed by a WHO reference laboratory. See: Operational framework for the deployment of the World Health Organization Smallpox Vaccine Emergency Stockpile in response to a smallpox event, Geneva: WHO, 2017.

98 Weiss Martin M., et. al., Rethinking Smallpox, Clinical Infectious Diseases, Vol. 39, 2004, pp. 1668-1773.

99 Stewart, Jennifer, A Mathematical Model of How Smallpox Can Be Used as a Biological Weapon, Unpublished Thesis, Carroll College, 2001, p. 47.

100 Koplow David A., That Wonderful Year: Smallpox, Genetic Engineering, and Bio-Terrorism, Med. L. Rev ., 2003, p. 445.

101 Henderson Donald A., Smallpox: Clinical and Epidemiologic Features, Emerging Infectious Diseases, Vol.5, 1999, pp. 53739.

102 Lawrence K. Altman, William J. Broad and Judith Miller, Smallpox: The Once and Future Scourge, New York Times, 15 June 1999.

103 Brilliant Lawrence B., 1985, The Management of Smallpox Eradication in India, The University of Michigan Press, p. 205.

104 From the birth of civilization, smallpox was a destructive force so powerful that it was given the status of a god. Until the nineteenth century, it was the Angel of Death that stood over the lottery of life, sweeping down on one person in three and killing up to half of its victims. Williams Gareth, 2010, Angel of Death: The Story of Smallpox, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, p. xvii.

105 Williams Gareth, 2010, Angel of Death: The Story of Smallpox, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 5.

106 Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of plague, is an aerobic, non-motile, gram-negative bacillus belonging to the family Enterobacteriacea . The genus Yersinia is composed of 10 species of Gram-negative coccobacilli. Only three of them, Y. enterocolitica, Y. pseudotuberculosis, and Y. pestis, are pathogenic to humans. Both Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis cause self-limiting food- and water-borne enteric diseases, whereas Y. pestis causes highly lethal invasive disease and is primarily arthropod-borne. Despite their vastly different pathogenic and epidemiological features, Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis are nearly identical genetically. Erickson David L. and Hinneeubusch B. Joseph, Pneumonic Plague, in Anderson Burt, Herman Friedman and Mauro Bendinelli (ed.), 2006, Microorganism and Bioterrorism, USA: Springer, p. 168.

107 WHO Report on Global Surveillance of Epidemic-prone Infectious Diseases: Plague, WHO/CDS/CSR/ISR/2000.1, Geneva: WHO, pp. 14.

108 The Black Death has been a series of well-known historical events that resulted in the death and suffering of millions of people. A common misconception is that black refers to skin discolorations accompanying the disease. Black is meant in the metaphorical sense of terrible or dreadful. In fact, the term Black Death was not used until the middle of the sixteenth century. Contemporaries called it the pestilence. Their Arabic counterparts were somewhat more imaginative in their choice of words: Muslim chronicles refer to it as the universal plague, the great destruction and the year of the annihilation. Martin Stern, 2007, The Black Death, Herts: Pocket Essentials, pp. 28-29.

109 Martin Stern, 2007, The Black Death, Herts: Pocket Essentials, p. 111.

110 With the deaths of so many persons, government, trade, and commerce came to a halt. The streets were littered with dead bodies, cattle and livestock roamed the country unattended. The children, often orphaned or deliberately abandoned, saw horrors of death around them from their early infancy. The childs game of ring-around-the rosy, today played without much general knowledge of either its history or meaning, has been suggested to offer evidence of their world view: Ring around the rosy (The feverous face encircled with pustules), A pocket full of posies (Flowers placed on the foul smelling victim), Ashes, ashes (Septic shock that precedes death, wearing of mourning ashes, or burning of the corpses of the plague victims?) All fall down (The victim dies). This seemingly innocuous childhood rhyme comes to us from the children of 17th century London England. It is a folk memory of the plague. Ligon B. Lee, Plague: A Review of its History and Potential as a Biological Weapon, Seminars in Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 2006, pp. 163-164.

111 The Third Pandemic of plague began in the Yunnan province of China in 1855 and would have probably remained contained there, were it not for a rebellion by the Hui  indigenous Chinese who practised Islam  and other Muslim ethnic groups. This uprising, known as the Dungan Revolt, began in 1862 and lasted for fifteen years. The waves of refugees that the conflict generated took the plague with them, often heading towards more densely populated regions of China and resulting in the pandemic reaching ports such as Shanghai and Canton, where there was a catastrophic outbreak in 1894, killing 60,000 people in a matter of weeks. It was while the plague was raging in Hong Kong in 1894, killing an estimated 100,000 people  75% of the population  in just two months. Martin Stern, 2007, The Black Death, Herts: Pocket Essentials, p. 123-124.

112 The third Plague Pandemic originated in the Yunnan region of southwest China. In 1894, plague reached Canton and then spread to Hong Kong, where Alexandre Yersin identified the bacterium. It was then carried by ships to Japan, Singapore, Taiwan and the Indian subcontinent. Over the next few years, plague spread to many cities around the world: Bombay, Singapore, Alexandria, Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro, Honolulu, San Francisco and Sidney, among others. The earliest known European cases occurred in September and October 1896, when two sailors from Bombay died of plague on ships docked in London on the Thames. There were 1692 cases and 457 deaths from plague reported in Europe between 1899 and 1947. The less number of casualties from plague in Europe during the Third Pandemic can be attributed to two main factors, improved hygiene and the lack of a present-day sylvatic reservoir for the disease. Bramanti Barbara, et. al., The Third Plague Pandemic in Europe, Proc Biol Sci, Vol. 286, 24 April 2019, pp. 8, available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6501942/.

113 There are a number of ways that bacteria can develop resistance to antibiotics. A mutation is a change in the genetic information or DNA of a cell. A single mutation can spread through a population of bacteria in a matter of hours. If that mutation provides a way for bacteria to survive in the presence of a particular antibiotic, the genetic change will soon be found in millions of newly resistant bacteria. When bacteria die, other bacteria often scavenge the DNA of the dead microbe and incorporate it into their own genetic programs. Called transformation, this new information may contain genetic codes for inactivating or neutralizing various antibiotics. Bacteria often are infected by specific viruses. As a virus infects one bacterium, it takes over the cell and forces the bacterium to produce and assemble new virus parts. As the new virus is constructed, it may incorporate some of the bacterial DNA into its own genetic programme. When the new viruses infect other bacteria, they may leave some of the incorporated bacterial DNA in the newly infected bacterium. This process is called transduction and provides new genetic information to a bacterium that may allow it to become resistant to one or more antibiotics. The new genetic information may provide the recipient bacterium with a competitive advantage in its environment. Emmeluth Donald, 2005, Plague: Deadly Diseases and Epidemics, Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publishers, pp. 64-66.

114 In the midst of this death toll, a young Russian microbiologist Waldemar Haffkine was called in to offer assistance to contain the disease. Working in the unlikely setting of a makeshift laboratory set up in a corridor in the citys Grant Medical College, Haffkine spent three months to find a vaccine against plague. It was a strenuous and difficult task; two of his assistants walked out on him, while a third had a nervous breakdown. On 10 January 1897, Haffkine felt that the vaccine was ready and tested it on himself. He then asked for volunteers from a local jail: all those who had been inoculated survived, while the control group, who had not had the vaccine, lost seven members to the plague. Martin Stern, 2007, The Black Death, Herts: Pocket Essentials, p. 124-125.

115 Seal S.C., Epidemiological Studies of Plague in India: 2. The Changing Pattern of Rodents and Fleas in Calcutta and Other Cities, Bull. Wld Hlth Org ., No. 23, 1960, pp. 293-300.

116 In the mid August 1994, the first warning signs of ratfall (domestic rats falling from the rafters onto the floors of the dwellings and dying there) and unusually high flea nuisance were reported in Mamla village of Beed district. This was followed by the people turning up to the health centers with tumors in their armpits and groins, a typical symptom of bubonic plague. By mid September, as much as 10% population of the village had developed the symptoms of bubonic plague. Judith B. Tysmans, Plague in India - l994: Conditions, Containment, Goals, available at: http://www.wastetohealth.com/plague_in_india_1994.html.

117 In September 1994, government hospitals and private clinics in the city of Surat, reported an increasing number of patients with highly fatal illness resembling acute pneumonia. On 21 September 1994, the Deputy Municipal Commissioner of health (DMCH) in Surat received information about the death of a patient from chest complication that seemed to be a case of pneumonic plague. The DMCH immediately shared the information to his superiors and medical community in the area where the suspected plague victim resided was alerted. However, by later in the day, ten more deaths were reported among the residents of Ved Road, the locality in Surat city, from where the disease first surfaced and more than 50 people had been admitted in different hospitals of the city with serious illness. By morning of September 22, 1994, exodus of people from the city had begun. Within two days, more than 300,000 residents deserted the city, which also included several doctors and members of paramedical staff.

118 The 1994 plague epidemic in Surat has exhibited that what can happen when a naturally occurring epidemic is not brought under control. Like many other countries, India had discontinued plague surveillance in the 1980s, believing that it was no longer necessary after the end of the Third Pandemic. According to medical anthropologist Ron Barrett (2008), outbreak appears to have resulted from a natural spillover, but it was greatly exacerbated by temporary and permanent human settlement patterns, insufficient healthcare and urban infrastructure, and other governmental failures. The outbreak was triggered by an earthquake that reactivated a bubonic plague focus in the rural village of Mamla, in the Beed district. Social interactions then transferred the plague to Surat, where it quickly became a pneumonic epidemic. Plague did not move through the city homogenously; 78 percent of confirmed cases were first-generation immigrants to the city, living in slum communities. Barrett, R., The 1994 Plague in Western India: Human Ecology and the Risks of Misattribution, in Clunan A.L., P. R. Lavoy P.R. and Martin S.B. (ed.), 2008, Terrorism, War or Disease? Unraveling the Use of Biological Weapons, Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp. 4971.

119 1994 Surat plague has many lessons for India on how to beat coronavirus, The Print, 14 March 2020, available at: https://theprint.in/health/1994-surat-plague-has-manylessons-for-india-on-how-to-beat-coronavirus/379531/.

120 In response to the outbreak, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases plague research unit has been modernized to make diagnosis easier. In addition to activating plague control units all over the country, the national government plans to set up a more sophisticated national surveillance system. Report of the Technical Advisory Committee on Plague, Government of India, 1995.

121 In the Himachal State in 2002, an outbreak of pneumonic plague resulted in 16 cases and 4 deaths. This outbreak was started by a hunter who killed and skinned a sick wildcat, developing fever 5 days later, followed by cough and hemoptysis suggestive of pneumonia. Before he died, he infected his family and other patients in a hospital. Butler Thomas, Plague into the 21st Century,Clinical Infectious Diseases, Vol. 49, 2009, p. 737.

122 Available at: https://www.nhp.gov.in/disease/communicable-disease/plague.

123 During 2017 to 2019, plague has caused nearly 260 deaths in Madagascar. In August 2017, an unprecedented pneumonic plague outbreak hit the main island, primarily affecting the capital Antananarivo and the main port city of Toamasina. The WHO reported a total of 2417 confirmed, probable and suspected cases, including 209 deaths between 1 August and 26 November 2017. The severity and scope of this outbreak, which has affected those in higher socioeconomic groups as well as those living in poverty, along with factors including the potential for use of multi-drug-resistant strains of plague in bioterrorism, highlights the ongoing threat posed by this ancient disease. Factors likely to have contributed to transmission include human behaviour, including burial practices and movement of people, poor urban planning leading to overcrowding and ready transmission by airborne droplets, climatic factors and genomic subtypes. An outbreak of this scale had not been seen in Madagascar for 20 years. From 19 August 2018 to 21 April 2019, the new plague season occurred in Madagascar. Only 257 isolated cases of plague were reported including 50 deaths from 28 districts. Rabaan A.A., et. al., The rise of pneumonic plague in Madagascar: current plague outbreak breaks usual seasonal mould, J Med Microbiol, Vol. 68(3), March 2019, pp. 292-302.

124 Boisier P., Rahalison L., et .al., Epidemiologic features of four successive annual outbreaks of bubonic plague in Mahajanga, Madagascar, Emerg Infect Dis, Vol. 8, 2002, pp. 311316.

125 In addition to flea transmission, some cases are caused by direct handling of animal tissues, when bacteria are inoculated through skin lacerations or when aerosolized bacteria are inhaled. Two of the cases in the US in 2006 occurred in hunters who had skinned rabbits. Animals associated with human cases that were found to be infected or to harbor infected fleas in the US were white-tailed antelope squirrels, ground squirrels, rock squirrels, cottontail rabbits, jack rabbits, prairie dogs, deer mice, Colorado chipmunks, and wood rats. One case in India in 2002 occurred in a hunter who had killed and skinned a sick wildcat. In Mongolia in 2002, there were 6 cases of plague, for which the most common mode of acquisition was among hunters who skinned sick marmots. In Qinghai Province of China in 2004, there were 19 human cases, with 8 deaths; most of these cases occurred in people who had hunted and butchered marmots. Dogs and other canids are naturally resistant to plague. Butler Thomas, Plague into the 21st Century, Clinical Infectious Diseases, Vol. 49, 2009, pp. 737.

126 WHO Report on Global Surveillance of Epidemic-prone Infectious Diseases: Plague, WHO/CDS/CSR/ISR/2000.1, Geneva: WHO, pp. 14.

127 Regardless of where they develop, the buboes can vary in size, from that of an almond to that of an orange, are extremely painful and sometimes noisy, being known to make strange gurgling sounds. Most victims will only develop one bubo, appearing between two and six days after the initial infection; if more develop, they will normally be on the same chain of lymph glands. If the buboes suppurate within a week, the victim will usually recover. If not, as happened in the majority of cases, the victim will die.

128 The earliest record of what we now consider to be biological warfare is that of a purported effort to use plague at the Crimean port city of Kaffa on the Black Sea during the years 1346 to 1347. When the Tatar army was struck with plague, their leader catapulted corpses of victims at the Genoese sailors. They in turn contracted the disease and fled to Italy, and in the course of their retreat initiated the Black Death. Although this measure was considered the cause of the outbreak of plague among the Genoese sailors, more likely the disease was transmitted by rats because the infected flea leaves its host as soon as the corpse cools. Later, at the battle of Carolstein in 1422, the Lithuanians, under Prince Coribat, catapulted bodies of plague-stricken soldiers plus 2000 cartloads of excrement into the ranks of enemy troops. In 1710, during the battle between Russian troops and Swedish forces in Reval, Russians hurled cadavers of plague victims into the ranks of the enemy.

129 During the WW II, on several occasions, the Japanese apparently used plague as a biological weapon. On 4 October 1940, they released plague bacteria in the form of rice and wheat grains mixed with infected fleas at Chuhsien, resulting in the deaths of 21 people. Several weeks later, on 29 October, Japanese planes dropped plague bacteria at Ningpo; within 2 days, bubonic plague occurred for the first time in that city, killing 99 people in 34 days. As in other events, no excessive mortality was found in the rat population. In January 1941, the Japanese introduced plague into Suiyuan and Ninghsia provinces, resulting in a serious epidemic. In November 1941, a Japanese plane made three low passes over the business center of Changteh in the Hunan province. No bombs were dropped, but a strange mixture of wheat and rice grains, pieces of paper, cotton wadding, and other particles were released. Within 2 weeks, people in the area began dying of plague in a mini-epidemic thought to be of human origin. Ligon B. Lee, Plague: A Review of its History and Potential as a Biological Weapon, Seminars in Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 2006, p. 167.

130 In the US military, there is no requirement for routine immunization against plague. Plague vaccine is administered to personnel who are likely to be assigned to areas where the risk of endemic transmission or other exposure is high. The vaccine may not be effective in the prevention of airborne infection. The addition of antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for such situations. Stewart Smith, Military Vaccinations and Disease Prevention: US Military, 12 February 2019, available at: https://www.thebalancecareers.com/military-vaccinations-4058318.

131 Inglesby Thomas V., et. al., Plague as a Biological Weapon: Medical and Public Health Management, JAMA, Vol. 283, No. 17, 3 May 2000, pp. 22812290.

132 In 1970, the WHO issued a report suggesting that up to 36,000 deaths and more than 150,000 incapacitating illnesses would result from the airborne release of 50 kilograms (approximately 110 pounds) of dried powder containing Yersinia pestis in a country such as the United States. These numbers represent only direct impacts and do not take into account the number of secondary infections and deaths that would result from subsequent person-to-person contact. Emmeluth Donald, 2005, Plague: Deadly Diseases and Epidemics, Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publishers, p. 76.

133 Finer Kim T., 2004, Deadly Diseases and Epidemic: Smallpox, Philadelphia, Chelsea House Publishers, p. 88.

134 Check Erika, Plague professor gets two years in bio-terror case, Nature, Vol. 428, 2004, p. 242, available at: https://www.nature.com/articles/428242b.

135 Inglesby Thomas V., et. al., Plague as a Biological Weapon: Medical and Public Health Management, JAMA, Vol. 283, No. 17, 3 May 2000, pp. 22812290.

136 Moreover, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, microbe stocks, including the smallpox virus and other technologies, have possibly found their way into the hands of unknown individuals, increasing the risk of transfer of these materials to terrorists. Erickson David L. and Hinneeubusch B. Joseph, Pneumonic Plague, in Anderson Burt, Herman Friedman and Mauro Bendinelli (ed.), 2006, Microorganism and Bioterrorism, USA: Springer, p. 70 137 Ainscough Michael J., Next Generation Bio-weapons: The Technology of Genetic Engineering Applied to Bio-warfare and Bioterrorism, Future Warfare Series No. 14, Alabama: Air War College, 2002, p. 4.

138 Ibid, p. 6.

139 Butler Thomas, Plague into the 21st Century, Clinical Infectious Diseases, Vol. 49, 2009, p. 73642.

140 Erickson David L. and Hinneeubusch B. Joseph, Pneumonic Plague, in Anderson Burt, Herman Friedman and Mauro Bendinelli (ed.), 2006, Microorganism and Bioterrorism, USA: Springer, pp. 240.

141 Josko Deborah, Yersinia Pestis: Still a Plague in the 21st Century, Clin Lab Sci, Vol. 17(1), 2004, pp. 25-29.

142 Francisella tularensis is a small Gramnegative coccobacillus. It was first isolated in 1911 from ground squirrels found dying of a plague-like illness in Tulare County, CA, USA. Initially called Bacterium tularense, it was eventually allocated to a new genus named Francisella in honour of the man who pioneered research on the organism, Dr Edward Francis. Currently, there are four subspecies of F. tularensis : Tularensis, Holarctica, Mediaasiatica, and Novicida; and subspecies tularensis is the most virulent in humans. Michell Stephen et.al, Tularemia Pathogenesis and Immunity, in Anderson Burt, Herman Friedman and Mauro Bendinelli (ed.), 2006, Microorganism and Bioterrorism, USA: Springer, pp. 121-133. Also see: Oyston Perta C.F., Francisella tularensis : unravelling the secrets of an intracellular pathogen, Journal of Medical Microbiology, Vol. 57, 2008, pp. 921930.

143 Holland, K.M., et.al., Francisella tularensis  Immune Cell Activator, Suppressor, or Stealthy Evader: The Evolving View from the Petri Dish, J Bioterr Biodef, Vol. 7(2), 2016, p. 144.

144 Tularemia has been found in more than 100 animal species including rabbits, muskrats, squirrels and beavers. Handling infected animal tissue (e.g., skinning or dressing animal carcasses) or eating insufficiently cooked meat from an infected animal may result in tularemia. Domestic pets such as dogs and cats can be responsible for transmitting tularemia to humans as well. Dogs and cats may come in contact with infected animals or ticks and may spread the disease to humans through their saliva or claws.

145 Cohen Miriam, ohen Miriam, in the Context of Infectious Diseases, in Lashley Felissa R. and Jerry D. Durham (ed.), 2007, Emerging Infectious Diseases: Trends and Issues, New York: Springer Publishing Company, p. 415-442.

146 It can lead to enlarged lymph nodes similar to plague (buboes) except the buboes are more likely to ulcerate. In general, the onset is usually abrupt, with fever (1001040F), headache, chills and rigors, generalized body aches (often prominent in the low back), an inflammation of the mucous membrane lining the nose, and sore throat. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur progressing to sweats, fever, chills, progressive weakness, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss.

147 Ellison D. Hank, 2008, Handbook of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents, New York: CRC Press, pp. 509.

148 These are: (i) Ulceroglandular tularemia: After the microorganisms enter the body from skin contact with an infected animal or an insect bite, an ulcer may appear at the point of entry with development of tender lymphadenopathy in the nodes draining that area. This is the most common form of tularemia, and it usually involves one of the extremities, most commonly with an ulcer on a hand. Lymph nodes may suppurate and drain. If left untreated, ulceroglandular disease has a mortality rate of 5 to 6 percent. (ii) Glandular tularemia: This is essentially the same as ulceroglandular tularemia, but there is no formation of an ulcer, so the patient presents with regional adenopathy only. (iii) Oculoglandular tularemia: It occurs when the microorganisms are introduced into the conjunctiva, usually by touch but occasionally by spray or splash. Conjunctivitis can cause pain, redness, and itching of the eyes. Nearby lymph nodes may be swollen and painful. (iv) Oropharyngeal tularemia: This syndrome follows the ingestion of F. tularensis. Eating undercooked, infected animal meat or drinking contaminated water may result in sore throat, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. (v) Pneumonic tularemia: Following inhalation of aerosolized F. tularensis, the patient develops pneumonia. Pneumonia also may result from hematogenous spread of the F. tularensis from other sites. Pleuritic chest pain is common. (vi) Typhoidal tularemia: This is essentially sepsis or bacteremia without any localized symptoms. Donald Kaye, Tularemia, aka rabbit fever: A rare disease and potential bioweapon, Infectious Disease News, May 2020.

149 From 2013 to 2018, about 200 cases of tularemia were reported each year in the United States. The highest incidence of cases per population has occurred in the Midwestern states of Arkansas, Oklahoma, Kansas and South Dakota. It tends to occur in warmer months. Tularemia is also a rare disease found in parts of the world other than the US. Any hobby or occupation that involves increased exposure to insects and animals carries an increased risk for acquiring tularemia (e.g., hunters, farmers, landscapers and veterinarians). Tularemia is much more likely to occur in men than in women. This is probably because men are more often involved with hunting, farming and landscaping, making them more likely to be exposed to infected animals either directly or through biting insects. The very young and the middle aged are most often infected. Donald Kaye, Tularemia, aka rabbit fever: A rare disease and potential bioweapon, Infectious Disease News, May 2020.

150 Solmaz Celebi et. al., Tularemia in Children, Indian Journal of Pediatrics, Volume 75, November 2008, pp. 1129-1132. Also see: Aurelie Hennebique, Sandrine Boisset and Max Maurin, Tularemia as a waterborne disease: a review, Emerg Mocrobes Infect, Vol. 8(1), 2019, pp. 1027-1042.

151 In two regions of Bulgaria, about 260 confirmed cases of tularemia were registered in 1998.

152 In Kosovo, two huge oropharyngeal tularemia outbreaks occurred in 19992000 and 20012002, each one involving more than two hundred patients. Aurelie Hennebique, Sandrine Boisset and Max Maurin, Tularemia as a waterborne disease: a review, Emerg Mocrobes Infect, Vol. 8(1), 2019, pp. 1027-1042.

153 Aurelie Hennebique, Sandrine Boisset and Max Maurin, Tularemia as a waterborne disease: a review, Emerg Mocrobes Infect ., Vol.8(1), 2019, pp. 1027-1042.

154 Hodges Lisa and Robert L. Penn, Tularaemia and Bioterrorism, in Fong I.W. and Alibek Ken (ed.), 2005, Bioterrorism and Infectious Agents, New York: Springer, p. 79.

155 Shakespeare Martin, 2009, Zoonoses, London: Pharmaceutical Press, p.251-255.

156 Hodges Lisa and Robert L. Penn, Tularaemia and Bioterrorism, in Fong I.W. and Alibek Ken (ed.), 2005, Bioterrorism and Infectious Agents, New York: Springer, pp. 71-72.

157 Christopher, G.W., Cieslak, T.J., Pavlin, J.A., and Eitzen, E.M., Jr., Biological warfare: A historical perspective, JAMA, Vol. 278, 1997 pp. 412417.

158 Loeb Cheryl, Jihadists and Biological and Toxin Weapons, in Ackerman Gary and Jeremy Tamsett (ed.), 2009, Jihadists and Weapons of Mass Destruction, London: CRC Press, p. 158.

159 Ainscough Michael J., Next Generation Bio-weapons: The Technology of Genetic Engineering Applied to Bio-warfare and Bioterrorism, Future Warfare Series No. 14, Alabama: Air War College, 2002, p. 4-6.

160 Matthew J. Hepburn, et.al, Tularemia, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army medical Department Centre and School, p. 286.

161 1970, the WHO estimated that the release of 50 kg of F. tularensis by aircraft over a population of 500,000 people would result in 30,000 deaths and 125,000 incapacitated They also noted that vaccinated individuals would only be partially protected from an aerosol exposure. In 1997, the CDC estimated that exposing 100,000 persons to an aerosol of F. tularensis would result in 82,500 cases of tularemia (82.5 percent attack rate) and 6,188 deaths (6.2 percent death rate), and cost between $456 million and $561.8 million. Kaufmann, A.F., Meltzer, M.I., and Schmid, G.P., The economic impact of a bioterrorist attack: are prevention and post-attack intervention programs justifiable? Emerg. Infect. Dis., Vol. 3, 1997, pp. 8394.

162 Maurin M., Francisella tularensis as a potential agent of bioterrorism? Expert Rev. Anti Infect. Ther., Vol. 13(2), 2015, pp. 141-144.

163 The mechanism by which F. tularensis causes death of some infected individuals is unknown. However, death is often a consequence of organ failure, sepsis, with the subsequent development of systemic inflammatory response syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and acute and respiratory distress syndrome. Michell Stephen et.al, Tularemia Pathogenesis and Immunity, in Anderson Burt, Herman Friedman and Mauro Bendinelli (ed.), 2006, Microorganism and Bioterrorism, USA: Springer, pp. 121-133.

164 There are two main recognised types of pathogens: Type A is the more virulent (morbid) variant and occurs primarily in North America. Type B is the less serious variant and can be found throughout the entire Northern hemisphere, especially Scandinavia, the Balkans and Russia. If left untreated, a person with Type A tularaemia will experience multi-organ failure and the collapse of the central nervous system; the mortality rate is 40 percent. When treated mortality is 1 percent. Type B causes milder symptoms regardless of the mode of transmission. It is characterized by localized lesions and generalized symptoms of an infection. If left untreated, the mortality rate is less than 1 percent. Although research into an effective vaccination is ongoing, there is currently no licensed vaccine. Tularemia: Fact Sheet, SPIEZ LABORATORY, January 2012, pp. 2.

165 WHO Guidelines on Tularaemia, WHO, Switzerland: Geneva, 2007.

166 Matthew J. Hepburn, et.al, Tularemia, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army medical Department Centre and School, p. 296.

167 Dennis David T. et. al., Tularemia as a Biological Weapon: Medical and Public Health Management, JAMA, Vol. 285, No. 21, 6 June 2001, pp. 2763-2773.

168 Tularemia (Francisella tularensis ), Communicable Disease Management Protocol, Public Health Branch, November 2016, pp. 8.

169 Rega Paul, Tularemia  A Review with Concern for Bioterrorism, Medical Research Archives, Volume 5, Issue 8, August 2017, pp. 1-15.

170 During the 19th century, it was believed that botulinum toxins developed from eating rotten sausages; the term botulism or the Latin botulus means black sausage.

171 Clostridium botulinum toxin is high-priority category A agents since it pose a risk to national security because it (i) Can be easily disseminated or transmitted from person to person; (ii) Result in high mortality rates and have the potential for major public health impact; (iii) Might cause public panic and social disruption; and (iv) Require special action for public health preparedness. Available at: https://emergency.cdc.gov/agent/agentlist-category.asp.

172 Dembek Zygmunt F., e. al., Botulism, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army Medical Department Centre and School, p. 338.

173 Dhaked R. K., et.al., Botulinum toxin: Bioweapon & magic drug, Indian J Med Res, Vol. 132, November 2010, pp. 489-503.

174 Botulinum toxin is the first biological toxin to be approved as a medical treatment. There are at least 50 different medical uses suggested for botulinum toxin. In recent years, the best known use has been to smooth out the wrinkles in aging skin. The uses of botulinum toxin type A and B for the treatment of facial wrinkles are considered cosmetic. Injecting small amounts of botulinum toxin A into the offending muscle provides relief from twitching of eyes. Holst Otto, Bacterial Toxins: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 145, Humana Press, p. 27.

175 Types A, B, and F are capable of breaking down proteins and are therefore called proteolytic. When they break down proteins, there is often a foul odour in the food that may serve as a warning of bacterial contamination. These strains produce endospores that are very heat resistant. Non-proteolytic types, such as B, are able to grow in refrigerators and do not give off foul odors. Their spores are of low-heat resistance. According to recent studies, type A botulinum toxin is much more toxic than two other well known nerve agentsVX and Sarin. It has been suggested that a single gram of the toxin in crystalline form, if inhaled, would kill more than one million people. The estimated human lethal dose is 0.01 micrograms per kilogram of body weight if the toxin is inhaled and 1.0 microgram per kilogram, if taken orally. This common soil organism has the capability of producing proteins that can sicken, paralyze, or kill vertebrates, including humans.

176 Emmeluth Donald, 2006, Deadly Diseases and Epidemics: Botulism, Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publishers, p. 31.

177 An outbreak of botulism constitutes a medical emergency that requires prompt provision of botulinum antitoxin and, often, mechanical ventilation, and it constitutes a public health emergency that requires immediate intervention to prevent additional cases. In March 2006, Thailand reported foodborne botulism outbreak. In this outbreak, home-canned bamboo shoots were consumed in a village, where 209 individuals consumed a common meal. Of 163 individuals examined in a hospital, 140 were hospitalized and 42 developed respiratory failure and required mechanical ventilation. Sufficient antitoxin was donated to Thailand by various international health organizations to treat patients. This antitoxin was administered to patients with the most severe symptoms, but treatment was delayed 5 to 9 days from exposure. The massive public health response undertaken by the Thai healthcare system, the global health community, and others outside of healthcare, including many embassies, airlines, and commercial partners, is credited for no mortalities. Dembek Zygmunt F., e. al., Botulism, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army medical Department Centre and School, p. 339.

178 Melnick Alan L., 2008, Biological, Chemical and Radiological Terrorism: Emergency Preparedness and Response for the Primary Care Physician, USA: Springer, p. 69-70.

179 Botulinum toxins are variably sensitive to temperature, depending on toxin type and the matrix in which the toxin is located (e.g., the food), but all will be inactivated by heating to 858 C for 5 min. Sobel Jeremy, Botulism, in Lutwick L.I. and S.M. Lutwick (Eds.), 2009, Beyond Anthrax: The Weaponization of Infectious Diseases, Springer: Humana Press, p. 86-88.

180 Arnon S.S., Schechter R., Inglesby T.V., et al, Botulinum Toxin as a Biological Weapon: Medical and Public Health Management, JAMA, Vol. 285, 2001, pp. 10591070.

181 Carrus, S., 2001, Bioterroism and Biocrimes: The illicit use of biological agents since 1900, Centre for Counterproliferation Research, National Defence University, p. 90.

182 Following President Richard M Nixons executive orders in 19691970, all biological agent stockpiles in the US offensive biological program, including botulinum neurotoxin, were destroyed. Lebeda F.J., Deterrence of biological and chemical warfare: a review of policy options, Mil Med ., Vol. 162, 1997, pp.156161.

183 In the early 1960s, as part of the German biowarfare program, laboratory workers exposed rabbits and guinea pigs to aerosolized botulinumtoxin type A. The animals were enclosed in hermetically sealed containers during the exposures, and the workers wore completely protective clothing. Following the exposures, the animals were transferred to other enclosures, and later, examinations were made by the workers with only protective gloves. By the third day after the exposures, the workers developed pooling of secretions in the mouth, an influenza-like feeling, and some dysphagia to solids. The next day, increased weakness, difficulties with gait and speech, and oculomotor pareses were noted. All three were treated with botulinum antitoxin. Subsequently, they had slow recoveries and their serum was shown to contain type A toxin in a mouse assay. Sobel Jeremy, Botulism, in Lutwick L.I. and S.M. Lutwick (Eds.), 2009, Beyond Anthrax: The Weaponization of Infectious Diseases, Springer: Humana Press, p. 85.

184 The Soviet Union experimented extensively with Clostridium botulinum, and it was one of several agents tested at the Aralsk-7 facilities situated on the Aral Sea on Vozrozhdeniye Island. Reports suggested that the Soviet biological weapons programme, Biopreparat, attempted to splice the botulinum toxin gene into other bacteria.

185 In 1992, Colonel K Alibek, the former deputy director of Biopreparat (a Soviet agency whose primary function was to develop and produce biological weapons of mass casualties), defected to the US and eventually described in considerable detail the Soviet biological weapons program in his book Biohazard . Zilinskas R.A., Iraqs biological weapons: the past as future? JAMA, Vol. 278,1997, pp.418424.

186 The biological weapons programme of Iraq was much smaller than its chemical weapons programme. Although the biological work was initiated by Iraq in the 1970s, at that stage it was focused on general research into the basic parameters and characteristics of different micro-organisms but not associated with biological warfare. In August 1991, Iraq informed UN inspectors that one of the declared facilities, had been involved in a biological military research programme and reported that it had obtained 103 vials of bacterial reference strains from foreign suppliers, and provided details on the individual types, source, year of importation and quantities. Of the 103 imported vials, 13 were stated by Iraq to have been used, while 90 were handed over to the UN inspectors unopened. United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) during the period from 1 June to 31 August 2005, Appendix: Biological Weapons Programme of Iraq, Summary, UN Doc S/2005/545 dated 30 August 2005. Also see: S/1995/864, Report of the Secretary General dated 11 October 1995.

187 Dembek Zygmunt F., et.al., Botulism, in Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army medical Department Centre and School, p. 339.

188 Iraqs bioweapons programme that President Bush tried to eradicate got its start with help from the United States. The Centres for Disease Control (CDC) sent samples directly to several Iraqi sites that UN weapons inspectors determined were part of Saddam Husseins biological weapons program, CDC and congressional records from the early 1990s show. Iraq had ordered the samples, claiming it needed them for legitimate medical research. The CDC and a biological sample company, American Type Culture Collection, sent strains of all the germs Iraq used to make weapons, including anthrax, the bacteria that make botulinum toxin and the germs that cause gas gangrene, the records show. Iraq also got samples of other deadly pathogens, including West Nile virus. The transfers came in the 1980s, when the US supported Iraq in its war with Iran. Iraq got seeds for bioweapons from US, Associated Press, 01 October 2002, available at: https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/nation-world/bal-te.bioweapons01oct01-story.html.

189 Arnon S.S., et al., Botulinum Toxin as a Biological Weapon: Medical and Public Health Management, JAMA, Vol. 285, 2001, pp.10591070.

190 Sobel Jeremy, Botulism, in Lutwick L.I. and S.M. Lutwick (Eds.), 2009, Beyond Anthrax: The Weaponization of Infectious Diseases, Springer: Humana Press, p. 95.

191 An unrecognized outbreak of botulism in Canada in the 1990s, secondary to a contaminated restaurant condiment, illustrates the difficulties physicians may have in identifying a covert terrorist attack involving botulinum toxin. Over a 6-week period, before the outbreak was recognized, the restaurant continued to serve the contaminated condiment, resulting in 28 cases from two countries, all misdiagnosed. Melnick Alan L., 2008, Biological, Chemical and Radiological Terrorism: Emergency Preparedness and Response for the Primary Care Physician, USA: Springer, p. 76.

192 Sobel, J., Khan, A.S., and Swerdlow, D.L., Threat of a biological terrorist attack on the US food supply: The CDC perspective, Lancet, 359, 2002, pp. 874880.

193 Berger Tamar, et. al., Toxins as biological weapons for terrorcharacteristics, challenges and medical countermeasures: a mini-review, Disaster and Mil Med, Vol. 2, 2016, pp. 7.

194 Hughes J.M., et.al., Clinical features of types A and B food-borne botulism, Ann Intern Med ., Vol. 95, 1981, pp. 442445.

195 Arnon Stephen S., Botulinum Toxin as a Biological Weapon: Medical and Public Health Management, JAMA, Vol. 285, No. 8, 28 February 2001, pp. 1059-1071.

196 Almosara Joel O., Biotechnology: Genetically Engineered Pathogens, US Air Force Counterproliferation Centre: Future Warfare Series, No. 53, Air University Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, 2010, pp. 43.

Chapter - IV The Biological Weapons: Threat from Coronavirus On 31 December 2019, China informed the World Health Organization (WHO) about a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown origin in Wuhan, the capital of the Hubei Province. The initial evidence suggested that the outbreak was associated with a seafood market in Wuhan, which was closed on 1 January 2020. The causative agent was characterized as a betacoronavirus, later named SARS-CoV-2.1 Human-to-human transmission was confirmed on 14 January 2020, by which time SARSCoV-2 had already spread to many countries throughout the world.2 On 11 March 2020, the extensive global transmission led to WHO declaring COVID-19 as a pandemic  a public health emergency of international concern. There is no approved treatment for Covid-19 and doctors are testing a host of therapies in a desperate bid to save the lives of people who have few other options.3 In humans, coronaviruses cause respiratory tract infections. Some of these are mild, such as some cases of the common cold, while others are lethal, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) and COVID-19. This is the third major coronavirus outbreak over the past 20 years that has had a substantial socioeconomic impact,4 but the first in the 21st century to affect countries across all continents except Antarctica.5 At the time of authoring (30 September 2020), there have been 33.44 million confirmed cases and more than one million deaths worldwide attributed to the COVID-19 virus. The details of COVID-19 cases in some of the states are as follows.6 The United States: The first case was reported on 22 January 2020. Since then, the country has reported 7,077,015 cases, and 203,875 deaths.

India: The first case of COVID-19 was reported on 03 January 2010. Since then, the country has reported 6,225,763 cases, and 97,497 deaths.

Brazil: The first case was reported on 26 February 2020. Since then, the country has reported 4,745,464 cases, and 142,058 deaths.

Russian Federation: The first case was reported on 3 January 2020. Since then, the country has reported 1,167,805 cases and 20,545 deaths.

Colombia: The first case was reported on 6 March 2020. Since then, the country has reported 818,203 cases, and 25,641 deaths.

Peru: The first case was reported on 6 March 2020. Since then, the country has reported 808,714 cases, and 32,324 deaths.

Mexico: The first case was reported on 28 February 2020. Since then, the country has reported 733,717 cases, and 76,603 deaths.

Argentina: The first case was reported on 3 January 2020. Since then, the country has reported 723,132 cases and 16,113 deaths.

The United Kingdom: The first case was reported on 31 January 2020. Since then, the country has reported 439,017 cases, and over 42,000 deaths.

These figures are likely to be great underestimations of the true numbers of infections and deaths. With medical staff and facilities in front line disease regions in or near overwhelm, COVID-19 may also be responsible for many more indirect deaths due to sick people choosing not to seek medical care because of their concerns about contracting COVID-19 in hospitals or not wanting to overwhelm health services.

Signs and symptoms of COVID-19 may appear two to 14 days after exposure and include: fever, cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, tiredness, aches, runny nose, sore throat, diarrhoea, loss of taste or smell, rash on skin, or discolouration of fingers or toes. The severity of COVID-19 symptoms can range from very mild to severe.7 In fact, some people may not show any symptoms. Most of those who do, report flu-like symptoms, typically with a fever and a cough, sometimes with diarrhoea, that get better after a week or so. But some suffer for longer, failing to shake off the infection before getting badly sick. Many of these people, after a time, start to feel a shortness of breath as the lungs ability to oxygenate blood weakens. About 1015% of those who are diagnosedwhich may mean less than 5% of those infectedeventually become ill enough to need hospitalization. Almost all of those hospitalized have symptoms of pneumoniathe general name for the response of the lungs to a variety of viral, bacterial and fungal infections. When the inflammation in the lungs gets completely out of control, the body enters what is called a cytokine storm. Such storms drive the most severe outcomes for COVID-19, including multi-organ failure.8 People who are older or have existing chronic medical conditions, such as heart or lung disease or diabetes, may be at higher risk of serious illness.9 COVID-19 is contagious and a highly progressive infection which can affect healthy persons after trivial contacts. Reducing the mortality rate has been the primary goal for healthcare workers attending patients with severe COVID-19. In the absence of specific antiviral drugs, aggressive maintenance of organ function has been the mainstay of treatment.10 Coronaviruses are large, enveloped, positive-stranded RNA viruses.11 They are zoonotic. In other words, they are transmitted from animals to people. The members of the family Coronaviridae, a monophyletic cluster in the order Nidovirales, are enveloped, positive stranded RNA viruses of three classes of vertebrates: mammals (corona -and toroviruses), birds (coronaviruses) and fish (bafiniviruses). Virions are spherical, 120160 nm across (Coronavirinae ), bacilliform, 170200 X 7588 nm (Bafinivirus ) or found as a mixture of both, with bacilliform particles characteristically bent into crescents (Torovirus ). The particles are typically decorated with large, club- or petal-shaped surface projections (the peplomers or spikes), which in electron micrographs of spherical particles create an image reminiscent of the solar corona. This inspired the name of the true coronaviruses (now grouped in the subfamily Coronavirinae ), which was later adopted for the whole family. The current indications show that SARSCoV2 is transmitted mainly through bats.12 Table 1 compares different strains of coronaviruses.13 Table 1: Strains of Coronaviruses In 20022003, SARS-CoV caused a disease outbreak with deaths in 29 countries, most cases being in China and Hong Kong.14 The total number of reported cases was 8096, of which 774 died, corresponding to a 9.6% fatality rate, before the disease died out in part due to strict quarantine protocols. Based on the genome sequence, SARS-CoV appeared to be very closely related to another virus from Himalayan palm civets. Later, civets were considered an intermediate host for SARS-CoV, with bats as the natural host. MERS-CoV emerged in Middle Eastern countries where the virus was transmitted to humans from dromedary camels. As of January 2020, MERS-CoV has resulted in 2519 laboratory-confirmed cases and 866 deaths (34.3% fatality rate), with more than 80% of the cases reported from Saudi Arabia. The human and camel MERS-CoV strains share more than 99% identity.15 The comparative clinical evolution of SARS-CoV, MERSCoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections are reflected in Table 2.

Table 2. Comparison of SARS, MERS and COVID-19 infections Origin of SARS-CoV-2 It was claimed by China that bats sold in the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market were the source of SARS-CoV-2. Bats are known to be reservoir hosts for viruses with pandemic capability. They can host many different viruses at the same time without getting sick themselves. Horseshoe bats, in particular, have been reported as the source of SARS, Ebola and possibly the latest coronavirus outbreak that began in Wuhan. Their ability to cohabit with viruses that can escape to other animals, in particular humans, can have overwhelming consequences when people invade their territory, trade them in livestock markets, or consume them. Bats are found in every continent, except Antarctica, in close proximity with humans and farms. They can fly short and long distances, which increases the chance of their spreading disease-causing agents, especially through their faeces.16 Researchers in China hold that the novel coronavirus could either be a mutated version of a virus hosted by bats that developed the capacity to affect humans, or got transmitted to pangolins from bats and then to humans. According to the Indian Council of Medical Research, an incident of coronavirus spreading from bats to humans or a virus changing its host species may happen once in maybe a thousand years.17 In tropical and subtropical areas of the planet, wet markets sell live mammals, poultry, fish and reptiles, crammed together and sharing their breath, their blood and their excrement. In Chinas wet markets, various types of animals are sold and killed to be eaten: wolf cubs, snakes, turtles, guinea pigs, rats, otters, badgers and civets. Similar markets exist in many Asian countries, including Japan, Vietnam and the Philippines. In these markets, one can see live fish in open tubs, splashing water all over the floor.18 The countertops of the stalls are red with the blood of the fish, which are gutted and filleted right in front of the customers. Live turtles and crustaceans climb over each other in boxes. Melting ice adds to the slush on the floor, which is covered with water, blood, fish scales and chicken guts. Scientists are of the view that keeping different animals in close, prolonged proximity with one another and with people creates an unhealthy environment, which is a probable source of the mutation that enabled COVID-19 to infect humans. More precisely, in such an environment, a coronavirus, long present in some animals, is likely to have undergone rapid mutation, as it moved from one on-human host to another, and ultimately gained the ability to bind to human cell receptors, thus adapting to the human host. This evidence prompted China, on January 26, to impose a temporary ban on the trade in wild animals. This is not the first time that such a measure has been introduced in response to an epidemic. Following the SARS outbreak, China had prohibited the breeding, transport and sale of civets and other wild animals, but the ban was lifted six months later.19 A few experts opined that the new coronavirus must have been engineered with the key structural proteins of HIV. They claimed that it had been genetically engineered in the laboratory and not come from bats, as reported.20 Others were of the view that molecular evidence did not indicate whether the new coronavirus was the product of an attempt to create a biological weapon or a failed vaccine experiment. For the moment, the majority view is that the coronavirus is not man-made or engineered, but its origin is unclear. WHO has clarified that the coronavirus came from an animal and was not made in a laboratory. Widely available evidence supports the hypothesis that the SARS-CoV-2 virus has evolved naturally.21 SARS-CoV-2 Transmission to Humans As in the case of other respiratory infections, SARS-CoV-2 is reported to be transmitted from person to person through respiratory droplets (aerosol) produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes. These droplets can be inhaled and thus, reach the lungs of a healthy person. The virus can be indirectly transmitted if one touches a surface or an object that has previously been contaminated and then touches ones face, eyes or mouth. Transmission might also be possible via the faecaloral route. Asymptomatic carriers (during the incubation period of the virus) and patients who have recovered from the acute form of the disease are also considered a potential source of transmission of the virus. Interestingly, human coronaviruses are able to survive on steel, metal, wood, aluminium, paper, glass, plastic, ceramic, disposable gowns and surgical gloves for 29 days. High temperature (30oC) can reduce the persistence period, while low temperature (4oC) increases the persistence time up to 28 days. It has not yet been confirmed whether the virus can be transmitted vertically from mother to foetus or via breast milk.22 Risk Factors for SARS-CoV-2 Infection There are many factors that can cause the transmission and spread of SARS-CoV-2. These include, but are not limited to: (i) travel to or contact with individuals who have recently visited Wuhan, China, or other places experiencing an outbreak; (ii) close contact with persons who have tested positive for the disease, such as healthcare workers caring for patients with SARS-CoV-2; (iii) contact with droplets and secretions (produced by sneezing or coughing) from an infected person; and (iv) eating or handling wild animals native to China, such as bats. Additionally, the risk of infection is higher among the elderly and among patients suffering from pre-existing illnesses, such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes and chronic respiratory disease. The reported fatality rate based on age is 14.8%for people above 80 years of age, 8% for the age group of 7079 years, 3.6% for that of 6069 years, 1.3% for that of 5059 years, 0.4%for that of 4049 years and 0.2%for that of 1039 years. Very few fatalities have been reported for children under 10 years of age.23 Notably, the fatality rate is higher among males (2.8%) than females (1.7%).24 Certain groups of people, including older persons, those with weak immune systems and those with pre-existing health conditions, have a higher risk of developing severe illness, if infected by COVID-19.

Studies of COVID-19 patients have revealed new complications associated with the disease. There is evidence that some COVID-19 survivors would face months, or possibly years of debilitating complications. The Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Italy has reported that amongst COVID-19 discharged patients, about 30 percent have lung issues, 10 percent have neurological problems, 10 percent have heart issues and about 9 percent have lingering motor skill problems. It is believed that many patients will have scarring in the lungs and fatigue and likely vascular damage to the brain, resulting in psychological distress.25 Myths and Rumours on Social Media Fake news has travelled much faster than the coronavirus. The social media has been rife with fake posts, myths, rumours, conspiracy theories, and doctored videos about the origins of the disease, its subsequent spread and possible remedies.26 Such rumours pose a significant threat not only to institutions, but also to the physical well-being of individuals. The WHO has labelled such information as infodemic and appealed to people to believe in credible and scientific information.27 The following are a few examples of the myths and rumours doing the rounds.28 Coronavirus is man-made. It did not originate naturally; instead, it was developed in the laboratories of China and the US to be used as a biological weapon.

Coronavirus can be transmitted through mosquito bites. However, to date there has been no information or evidence to suggest that the new coronavirus could be transmitted by mosquitoes.

The virus can be transmitted through the mail or parcels, i.e. receiving a package or letter from an infected area is unsafe.

Using chemical disinfectants, such as bleach, chlorine, 75% ethanol, peracetic acid and chloroform on the skin may kill the virus.

Drinking cow urine, camel urine spiked with lemon juice would prevent COVID-19 virus infection.

Common people can protect themselves from the spread of coronavirus if they wear surgical masks and N95 masks.

Coronavirus cannot be transmitted in areas which are hot, humid, snowy and cold. According to WHO, COVID-19 can be transmitted in all areas, including those with hot and humid climates.

People who are infected with coronavirus will die. The fact is that COVID-19 is fatal only in around 2% of cases. People who are affected by the virus can get mild to moderate upper respiratory illness, like the common cold.

A vaccine against COVID-19 is available and vaccines against pneumonia can provide protection against the new coronavirus.

Home remedies, such as eating garlic, drinking water every 15 minutes, taking vitamin C, applying sesame oil on ones body, using essential oils, colloidal silver and steroids, etc., can prevent coronavirus. According to WHO, garlic is a healthy food and has some antimicrobial properties, but there is no evidence that it prevents infection with coronavirus.

Taking frequent hot water baths prevents COVID-19 infection. The fact is that taking baths with extremely hot water is harmful.

Drinking methanol, ethanol or bleach prevents or cures COVID-19. Methanol, ethanol and bleach are poisons, which are sometimes used to clean products to kill viruses on their surfaces. Drinking them can lead to disability and death.

5G mobile networks are responsible for spreading COVID-19. Viruses cannot travel on radio waves/mobile networks. In fact, COVID-19 is spreading in many countries that do not have 5G mobile networks.

Drinking alcohol can protect against COVID-19. Frequent or excessive alcohol consumption can increase the risk of health problems.

The Covid-19 pandemic has led to more than 2,300 rumours, conspiracy theories and stigmatizing posts that were shared in 25 languages across 87 countries, where they have led to about 800 deaths, some 5,876 hospital admissions, 60 cases of complete blindness, and also triggered acts of violence. Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Spain and the US, were the countries where such phenomena were most prominent.29 COVID-19: A Biological weapon Could COVID-19 be a biological weapon? There are a few reports which allege that it is an experimental germ that accidently escaped from a Chinese laboratory.30 Chinese scientists later ruled out the possibility that the coronavirus pandemic originated either in a laboratory or an animal market in the city of Wuhan.31 Many are of the view that China has deliberately launched a biological attack in order to position itself as the greatest superpower by flattening its rivals industrial and economic capacity.32 The Israeli authorities suspect that COVID-19 has originated from the Wuhan Institute of Virology as the Institute is linked to Beijings Covert Biological Weapon Programme.33 Countries suspected or known to have such biological weapon programmes include the US, Russia, China, France, Germany, Japan, Canada, Israel, Iran and North Korea.34 The array of weapons are anthrax, botulinum, and smallpox and other such diseases which once plagued the world. However, a number of experts and scientists have declared that the COVID-19 virus came from natural sources. China remains under strong suspicion due the death of the whistle blower, Li Wenliang,35 and its unwillingness to open up its bio-related facilities for international inspection.

As for the US, the conspiracy theory put forward in an article titled Coronavirus may have originated in lab linked to Chinas biowarfare programme suggests that the outbreak could be linked to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. The BSL-4 laboratory of this institute is equipped to handle the deadliest pathogens.36 In March 2020, Chinas Foreign Ministry official, Lijian Zhao, contradicted the US claim, stating that COVID-19 had an American origin.37 His statement was based on a research article stating that 300 US soldiers, who had participated in the October 2019 Wuhan military games, may have inadvertently brought the virus with them, linking it back to the August 2019 forced closure of an army germs research laboratory in the US due to safety/security lapse.38 China became a state party to the 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) by accession on 15 November 1984. Under Article I of the BTWC, the states parties have an obligation not to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain any microbial or other biological agents or toxins that are not justified by prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes. Rule 73 of Customary IHL also prohibits the use of biological weapons in both international and non-international armed conflicts.

Biological weapons have been defined by WHO as microorganisms like virus, bacteria, fungi or other toxins that are produced and released deliberately to cause disease and death in humans, animals or plants. Biological weapons are primarily designed to destroy all vital activity, but not necessarily to wipe out the whole human race. These weapons have been used only once on a large scale, by Japan. Japan had used biological warfare, in an unsophisticated manner, against China during the Second World War. Over time, there were reported cases of the use of biological weapons and chemical weapons by countries such as the Soviet Union and Iraq.

The COVID-19 virus could be used as a weapon of mass destruction. The following features of coronavirus account for its effectiveness as a future biological weapon: Proliferates easily; Invisible during an attack; Easy to hide and transfer; Has very low traceability in the initial phase of an attack; Capable of infecting easily via direct contact; Very small quantity required for dispersal;39 Good resistance to external factors (e.g. sunlight); Causes public panic and social disruption; Has a serious indirect impact on countrys public health emergency response system, business and economy; Lack of vaccines, medicines and efficient treatment; Difficulty in quick recognition of causes leading to sickness or death; and Low costs of production.

Due to their large genome size (the largest non-segmented RNA viral genome), frequent recombination and high genomic plasticity, coronaviruses are candidates for cross-species transmission and are able to rapidly adapt to new hosts. Coronavirus has several characteristics as a weapon of mass destruction, in particular, its high infectivity, the devastating nature of the disease, the high mortality, rapid adaptability to new host, and the lack of preventive or therapeutic measures.

The Wuhan Institute of Virology handles the most dangerous pathogens, for which there are few vaccines or treatments available. On 30 December 2019, the virus was discovered in Wuhan Jiyintan Hospital in a patient suffering from an ailment similar to SARS. Coronaviruses existed before 2019 and had been found to cause pneumonia, the common flu and other respiratory ailments. COVID-19, the new strain of the coronavirus, is more fatal than its predecessors. This is what has fuelled speculation that COVID-19 is man-made and originated in the Wuhan Institute of Virology. However, there is no evidence to prove this.

The US Presidents repeated assertion that the virus may have escaped from a Chinese laboratory has placed the security measures at such facilities worldwide under scrutiny.40 Given the poor safety record of both the Chinese and American biodefence laboratories and against the backdrop of heightened USChina tension, both Security Council members have reason to be suspicious of each other.41 A large number of the laboratories, where scientists examine pathogens for research purposes and to develop vaccines, could be a potential source of biological weapons. The impact of the use of biological weapons similar to coronavirus could be devastating. The psychological and economic damage is likely to be a thousand times worse than the physical damage. Another fear is that the modern gene-editing technologies may allow a bacterium or virus to be genetically sequenced, altered or weaponized more affordably and more rapidly.42 The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed the vulnerability of the US, Europe, India and other countries to biological attacks. In the face of the pandemic, even the most developed countries have had trouble in testing and treating patients, tracking the pandemic and sustaining a supply of protective equipment for healthcare workers. Further, questions have been raised about the security of pathogen research laboratories worldwide.43 The COVID-19 pandemic has shown how vulnerable we are to viral infections, which have the potential to disrupt normal life. This global coronavirus outbreak may lead to an increase in the use of biological weapons by terrorists in the future. The use of a microorganism like the coronavirus may cause significantly greater damage to humans and economies than that caused by a traditional terrorist attack.

Though we have not witnessed the use of biological weapons in the last two decades, the pandemic caused by COVID-19 has once again given rise to a heated debate over the possibility of a biological attack in the near future. Even if we accept the view that the virus responsible for COVID-19 was not an accidently released biological weapon, the threat of such attacks in future cannot be ruled out altogether.

Non-State actors have used biological weapons in the past, but their attempts were not effective enough to be considered a threat to humanity. In 2008, the US Commission on Prevention of WMD Proliferation and Terrorism (Graham-Talent Commission) released a report titled World at Risk, wherein it concluded that in the future, terrorists are more likely to be able to obtain and use a biological weapon than a nuclear weapon. The Commission also recommended that the US should enhance the nations capabilities for rapid response to prevent biological attacks from inflicting mass casualties.44 Though the COVID-19 epidemic was not caused by a terrorist attack, the excessively high number of deaths it has caused in the US shows the governments ill-preparedness for such situation in spite of the recommendations of the Commission.

The future role of weapons of mass destruction will be determined by many factors, including technological and scientific advances, the changing geopolitical environment, the character of the military challenges confronting States, the status of terrorism and the choices world leaders make.45 Modern biotechnological research can further modify coronaviruses, making them more lethal and extensive than an atomic bomb. In future, a biological weapon can play the role of an effective weapon of mass destruction.46 Biological weapons offer terrorist groups and rogue states an affordable means of waging unconventional war. Pakistan is an example of a rogue state that could employ such means to counter Indias overwhelming military superiority. Genetic maps of deadly viruses, bacteria and other microorganisms are already widely available in the public domain. With State support, terrorist groups can use exceptionally malicious strains of bacteria and viruses against India. The threat posed to India by bioterrorism is huge.47 The World Health Organization Investigations After World War II, the emergence of an international consensus on multilateral institutions led to the creation of a series of international organizations. In 1946, WHO was established as an agency specializing in all matters of international health. The WHO, which became functional in 1947, has a direct mandate in the field of pandemics. Article 2 of the Constitution of WHO frames its overall function as the directing and coordinating authority on international health work. WHO enjoys extensive powers and has the competence to issue regulations under Articles 21 and 22. These regulations are binding on all Member States, without the need for national ratification procedures.48 Information-sharing by the Member States with the WHOs Secretariat is the cornerstone of international disease surveillance and response. Article 6 of the International Health Regulations (IHR) obliges States to notify WHO within 24 hours of all events that might constitute a public health emergency of international concern.

The World Health Organization conducted a study and released a report, Report of the WHOChina Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),49 detailing their findings on the origin, transmission and prevention of COVID-19. The report stated that COVID-19 is a zoonotic virus and bats appear to be the reservoir of the virus, but that the intermediate host(s) has not been identified yet. The virus is transmitted via droplets and fomites50 during close unprotected contact between an infector and infectee. People with COVID-19 generally develop signs and symptoms, including mild respiratory symptoms and fever, on an average of 56 days after infection (mean incubation period 56 days, range 114 days). Most infected people have mild disease and recover. Individuals at the highest risk for severe disease and death include people of the age of over 60 years and those with underlying conditions, such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic respiratory disease and cancer.

According to WHO report, as COVID-19 virus is a newly identified pathogen, there is no known pre-existing immunity in humans. Based on the epidemiological characteristics observed so far in China, everyone is assumed to be susceptible, although there may be certain risk factors that increase susceptibility to the infection. The early cases identified in Wuhan are believed to have acquired the infection from a zoonotic source, as many patients reported having visited or worked in the Huanan Wholesale Seafood Market. As of 25 February 2020, an animal source had not yet been identified. Given Wuhans status as a transport hub and the movement of people during the Chinese New Year (chunyun), the infection spread quickly throughout the country. Cases were particularly concentrated in cities with the highest volume of traffic with Wuhan. Experts from WHO investigating into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak have concluded visit in Wuhan in the first week of August 2020. The world health agency is now planning to deploy a larger group of experts to undertake epidemiological studies to identify the potential source of infection of the early cases in Wuhan.51 Reparations and Damages against China The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in massive human, economic and social damage around the globe. The scale of the damage has prompted arguments that China bears international legal responsibility for the pandemic and should compensate the countries harmed by the outbreak. A few have asserted that China violated international law on infectious diseases and, under the international legal principles of State responsibility, has an obligation to make full reparation for the harm done through, among other things, compensation that could amount to trillions of dollars.52 A lawsuit has also been filed against the Chinese government in a federal court in the US.53 Spokespersons of the Chinese government have said that in the absence of factual and legal support, such legal cases are frivolous. China has responded aggressively to every demand for an inquiry into the origin of COVID-19 and reparations, mixing threats with stopping aid, adding to a growing mistrust of China.54 None of the treaties addressing the international spread of infectious diseases dating back to the nineteenth century has rules requiring the payment of compensation for damage done to other countries for acts associated with violations of the treaty. The 2005 International Health Regulation (IHR) has no such provisions either. Most treaties do not address the matter of whether the violation of their rules creates an obligation to compensate those states parties adversely affected by the harms caused by the violation. Customary international law on State responsibility holds that a State violating international law has an obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrong act. This customary rule has played no discernible role in the case of disease outbreaks over the long history of international health cooperation, even when States have argued that countries violated applicable treaties. States have not seriously pursued the matter of claiming compensation from countries accused of breaching treaty obligations to report disease events. Under the principles of State responsibility, separating the damage attributable to Chinas delayed reporting to WHO55 from the harms that arose in other countries due to their botched responses to COVID-19, would be difficult. Article 56 of the IHR contains a provision for dispute settlement, so a State party could advance legal claims on the basis that China violated the IHR and, under the principles of State responsibility, has an obligation to make reparation for the damage caused by that wrongful act. Countries have never used the provisions for dispute settlement in treaties on infectious disease to date. Further, the dispute settlement mechanism provides for arbitration only in the event that the violating country consents, which China is very unlikely to do. Under the existing international legal regime, there is no possibility that the lawsuit against China would succeed.

A joint mission of 25 experts from WHO, China and other countries was formed recently to study the COVID-19 outbreak in China.56 The major objectives of the mission are: (i) to enhance the understanding of the evolving COVID-19 outbreak in China and the nature and impact of the ongoing containment measures; (ii) to share knowledge on COVID-19 response and preparedness measures being implemented in countries affected by or at risk of importations of COVID-19; (iii) to generate recommendations for COVID-19 containment and response measures in China and internationally; and (iv) to establish priorities for a collaborative programme of work, research and development to address critical gaps in knowledge and response, as well as readiness tools and activities. While laboratories worldwide are trying to analyse live samples from confirmed cases for the purpose of gene sequencing of the SARS-CoV-2, no vaccine has yet been developed against the new coronavirus.57 According to Edward Gu and Lantian Li (2020), Chinas handling of the COVID-19 outbreak has added another big case (after the SARS outbreak in 2003) to the list of governance failure. The Chinese government failed the new test of the COVID-19 epidemic, which first broke out in Wuhan, Hubei Province in late 2019, and then spread to the entire country and around the world. If the community of virologists had operated with more autonomy, the public would have been informed of the lethal risk of the new virus much earlier.58 Some failings on the part of the Chinese government highlighted by The Associated Press are as follows.59 China concealed information about the outbreak from WHO and other countries.

It failed to take timely action, as a result of which the virus was transmitted to other countries.

China was responsible for an almost two-week delay in providing WHO with detailed data on patients and cases.

The Chinese public health system exercised tight control on the release of information on the outbreak of coronavirus.

China delayed sharing the genetic map or genome of the virus for more than a week, till after three different government laboratories had fully decoded the information, frustrating WHO.

On 7 June 2020, China issued a white paper titled, Fighting COVID-19: China in Action.60 The paper, consisting of four chapters, dwells on Chinas prevention, control and treatment efforts in the battle against the virus, as well as its cooperation with the international community. The paper proclaims that China has neither delayed giving information, nor concealed anything, and has made important contributions to the international community in the battle against COVID-19. According to the white paper, a united and collective response from all States will succeed in overcoming the pandemic.

Socio-economic Impact The COVID-19 pandemic has enveloped the whole world. It has posed enormous medical, scientific, social and moral challenges to the world. Its social and economic impact on some countries has been severe, while the impact on others has been moderate owing to the fact that they took timely preventive measures. Daily wage workers, private workers, shopkeepers and thousands of similar workers have lost their jobs and the opportunity to earn their livelihood. Companies prefer to have their employees work from home to limit the outbreak and avoid contracting COVID-19.61 The pandemic has affected all countries, especially the US, Brazil, Russia, Spain, the UK, Italy, France, Germany, India, Turkey, Iran and Egypt. The world has gone into self-isolation. Businesses have been closed. The disruption in education due to COVID-19 has been unprecedented, with higher education institutions closed for an indefinite period. Schools have closed nationwide in at least 147 countries, affecting more than 1.4 billion children and youth, around 86% of the worlds student population.62 The worlds tourism sector, which has come to a stand still for nearly four months, could lose at least US $1.2 trillion or 1.5% of the global gross domestic product. Between February and May 2020, the international tourism sector has seen a loss of about US $2.1 trillion.

The United Nations Framework for the Immediate Socio-economic Response to the COVID-19 Crisis has warned that the pandemic is far more than a health crisis: it is affecting societies and economies at their core. According to a UNDP report, two concurrent global crises  a health crisis and an economic crisis  are engulfing the world. The pandemic has exposed the vulnerabilities and inadequacies inherent in current systems. It has exposed and is exacerbating deep inequalities and injustices, including in the case of women, who suffer worse economic impacts than men. While the impact of COVID-19 will vary from country to country, it will most likely increase poverty and inequalities at a global scale, making the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) even more urgent. Without urgent socio-economic responses, global suffering will escalate, jeopardizing lives and livelihoods for years to come. Post-pandemic, a new social contract will be needed, featuring greatly reduced inequalities, strengthened resilience to shocks and protection of human rights.63 The UN Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, recently sent out a warning stating that the pandemic has pushed 60 million into extreme poverty. Some 1.6 billion people have been left without livelihoods and there has been a loss of US $8.5 trillion in global output  the sharpest contraction since the Great Depression of the 1930s. He said, Unless countries across the world act together now, the COVID-19 pandemic will cause unimaginable devastation and suffering around the world.64 On top of the millions of lives that hang in the balance, the cost of current pandemic to the global economy could be US $82 trillion across five years. The human race can ill afford another.65 Social Impact The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic can be described in terms of a very complex web. Apart from the fact that the virus itself is very complex in its origin, spread and effects, the pandemic has had consequences in multiple areas: medical, social, political, economic, educational, religious and cultural. The crisis has changed the way we use technology, challenged our world views and the values we live by, and forced us to redefine priorities to prevent or prepare for a new crisis. Two harmful social and psychological aspects of the pandemic are stigma and xenophobia. Stigmatized individuals have been objects of social avoidance, rejection, isolation, criticism, physical violence and even elimination. Further, many are refused housing and emergency healthcare facilities. There have been reports of growing prejudice, xenophobia and racism against people from China or those with similar facial characteristics.

Social media platforms, which act as a centralized news source that give a voice to small, independent creators, have been used to spread misinformation about the pandemic.66 According to Harari (2020), today humanity faces an acute crisis not only due to the coronavirus, but also due to the lack of trust between humans. To defeat a pandemic, people need to trust scientific experts and the public authorities, and countries need to trust each other. Real protection will come from the sharing of reliable scientific information and global solidarity.67 Food Security COVID-19 is also going to have a serious impact on food security. The impact will be more serious for people residing in either conflict-affected countries or countries transitioning from armed conflict following peace agreements. Countries which are heavily reliant on humanitarian assistance, including basic food aid, will face a serious crisis. One group that will be hit hard is displaced persons, especially those residing in overcrowded camps for internally displaced persons and refugees.68 Labour shortages due to restrictions on movement and social distancing rules will have an impact on producers, processors, traders and logistics companies in food supply chains. As the coronavirus crisis unfolds, disruptions in domestic food supply chains and factors affecting food production, as well as loss of incomes and remittances will create tensions and food security risks in many countries. Restrictions on export could further hurt food security in importing countries.69 It is feared that due to the COVID-19 pandemic, an additional 130 million people could face starvation by the end of 2020.

Conclusion The prevailing danger posed by terrorism is likely to become more severe in the near future, due to increasing terrorist access to a wide range of biological warfare agents. Viral agents are much more prone to genetic variation and mutation, and can be manipulated or created in the laboratory to take on desired characteristics. The threat of bioterrorism requires countries to work together proactively and develop collective strategies to thwart any future use of coronaviruses as weapon of mass destruction. The huge health impacts of this COVID-19 virus imply enormous economic impacts. The International Monetary Fund has predicted that over the next two years, cumulative output losses from the pandemic could reach USD 9 trillion. The International Labour Organization estimates that pandemic will wipe out 6.7 per cent of working hours globally in the second quarter of 2020equivalent to 195 million full-time workers. According to the World Food Programme, the potential impact of COVID-19 virus on food systems could lead to more than a quarter of a billion people suffering acute hunger by the end of 2020. According to UNESCO, for example, more than one billion students worldwide missed attending school or university in some 160 countries. We need to improve the way we respond to biological warfare agents in the past. There is a need to invest in disease surveillance, including a case database that is instantly accessible to relevant organizations and rules requiring countries to share information. Governments should have access to lists of trained personnel, from local leaders to global experts, who are prepared to deal with an epidemic immediately, as well as lists of supplies to be stockpiled or redirected in an emergency.70 * * * 1 On 11 February 2020, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses named this virus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). On the same day, the World Health Organization (WHO) named the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 as coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19).

2 Dorpa Lucy van, et. al., Emergence of genomic diversity and recurrent mutations in SARS-CoV-2, Infection, Genetics and Evolution, Vol. 83, 2020, pp. 9.

3 The Russian government has approved a COVID-19 vaccine for widespread use despite it apparently undergoing only a phase I trial (38 people) with no published results. The announcement was made on national television on 11 August 2020 when Russian President, Vladimir Putin, said, I know that it works quite effectively, forms strong immunity, and I repeat, it has passed all the needed checks. He claimed that one of his daughters had been given the vaccine. Members of the Russian elite have reportedly also received doses of the vaccine since April. The chief of the Russian Direct Investment Fund, Kirill Dmitriev, has said that a phase III trial will start in August and will involve thousands of people in Russia, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. The approval of a vaccine without large scale testing has caused concern, and researchers have called for the results to be published for scrutiny and for further trials to take place before the vaccine is rolled out to the public. The vaccine is being referred to as Sputnik V, a reference to the first satellite launched into orbit around the Earth during the cold war space race between the US and the USSR. Mahase Elisabeth, COVID-19: Russia approves vaccine without large scale testing or published results, BMJ, 2020, 13 August 2020. See infra note 57 also.

4 The pandemic caused by COVID-19 has placed two-third of the global population under lockdown posing socio-economic and political risks for the whole world. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), many economies may face negative per capita income growth in 2020 due to the pandemic. The countries across the world have come forward with economic packages to rescue the economies. The World Trade Organisation (WTO), in its forecast indicated a fall in world trade between 13 per cent and 32 per cent in 2020, perhaps the highest fall since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The effects of COVID-19 in the tourism, hospitality and recreation sectors have been unprecedented. Due to pandemic, nations have circumscribed social behaviours. Some have restricted the movement of people, both citizens and non-citizens. Governments have restricted travel (both intra-national and international) with some placing arriving international passengers into mandatory quarantine, some limiting air travel, and others closing borders. Governments have also shut schools and non-essential businesses, and implemented or encouraged social distancing, with people only allowed to leave home out of absolute necessity. And many countries have banned gatherings, though the maximum size of the group permitted differs from country to country. Increasingly, countries have advised people to wear protective equipment, including facemasks, when out in public.

5 Docea Anca Oana, et. al., A new threat from old enemy: Re-emergence of coronavirus (Review), International Jour of Molecular Medicine, Vol. 45, 2020, pp. 1631-1643.

6 World Health Organization: Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard, updated 30 September 2020. Available at: https://covid19.who.int/.

7 Older adults and people who have severe underlying medical conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes seem to be at higher risk for developing more serious complications from COVID-19 illness. Recovery from COVID-19 can be a drawn-out process for patients of all ages and genders. The Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, USA, available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html.

8 The paths of destruction: How SARS-CoV-2 causes disease and death in covid-19, The Economist, 6 June 2020.

9 MalakarMaharshi, Coronavirus-A Review Article, Acta Scientific Dental Science, Vol. 4, Issue 5, May 2020, pp. 10-12.

10 Xie Peng, et. al., Severe COVID-19: A Review of Recent Progress With a Look Toward the Future, Frontiers in Public Health, Vol. 8, Article 189, May 2020, pp. 1-7.

11 The genome is packed inside a helical capsid formed by the nucleocapsid protein and further surrounded by an envelope. Associated with the viral envelope are at least three structural proteins: the membrane protein and the envelope protein are involved in virus assembly, whereas the spike protein mediates virus entry into host cells. Among the structural proteins, the spike forms large protrusions from the virus surface, giving coronaviruses the appearance of having crowns (hence their name; corona in Latin means crown). In addition to mediating virus entry, the spike is a critical determinant of viral host range and tissue tropism and a major inducer of host immune responses. Li, F., Structure, Function, and Evolution of Coronavirus Spike Proteins, Annual Review of Virology, Vol. 3(1), September 2016, pp. 237-261.

12 Current studies showed that bats, snakes, and pangolins may be the hosts for SARSCoV-2. The intermediate host for SARS-CoV-2 is still unknown. Xie Peng, et. al., Severe COVID-19: A Review of Recent Progress With a Look Toward the Future, Frontiers in Public Health, Vol. 8, Article 189, May 2020, pp. 1-7.

13 Adapted from the data of WHO and US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

14 It has been alleged that the emerging strain of coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) was recovered from a 60-year-old Saudi man in June 2012. His physician, Dr. Ali Mohamed Zaki, senta biopsy of the mans lung tissues to a colleague, Dr. Ron Fouchier in Rotterdam, Holland, for genetic sequencing of the virus, which was acquired by Dr. Frank Plummer, the Scientific Director of the Canadian National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg, Canada in May 2013. It was later alleged that an unexplained delivery of deadly viruses was made to China in March 2019. A high-powered enquiry traced the smuggled viruses to Chinese scientists (Dr. Xiangguo, her husband, Dr. Keding Cheng and some members of her research team) who had been working at the Canadian National Microbiology Laboratory, but were later dismissed. It was alleged that they smuggled the deadly viruses from the Canadian research facility to Chinas institutes of virology, particularly in Changchun, Hubei and Beijing. These research institutes are well known for their biological warfare programme. For more details see: EnitanSeyi Samson et.al., The 2019 Novel Coronavirus Outbreak: Current Crises, Controversies and Global Strategies to Prevent a Pandemic, International Journal of Pathogen Research, Vol. 4(1), 2020, pp. 1-16.

15 Docea Anca Oana, et. al., A new threat from old enemy: Re-emergence of coronavirus (Review), International Jour of Molecular Medicine, Vol. 45, 2020, pp. 1631-1643.

16 EnitanSeyi Samson et.al., The 2019 Novel Coronavirus Outbreak: Current Crises, Controversies and Global Strategies to Prevent a Pandemic, International Journal of Pathogen Research, Vol. 4(1), 2020, pp. 1-16.

17 Coronavirus in bats affecting humans rare: ICMR, available at: https://news.rediff.com/commentary/2020/apr/16/coronavirus-in-bats-affecting-humans-rare-icmr/16db2e4e7b8045afaff5038bd8868287.

18 One of the great questions of the past six months is where SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, came from. It is thought that the answer involves bats, because they harbour a variety of sars-like viruses. Yunnan, one of Chinas southernmost provinces, has drawn the attention of virus hunters, as the closest-known relatives of sars-cov-2 are found there. But some think the origins of the virus are not to be found in China at all, but rather just across the border in Myanmar, Laos or Vietnam. The hunt for the origins of SARS-CoV-2 will look beyond China, The Economist, 22 July 2020.

19 Peter Singer and Paola Cavalieri, The Two Dark Sides of COVID-19, Project Syndicate, 2 March 2020, available at: https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/wet-markets-breeding-ground-for-new-coronavirus-by-peter-singer-and-paola-cavalieri-2020-03.

20 On 26 January 2020, The Washington Times reported that the deadly animal virus epidemic spreading globally may have originated in a Wuhan laboratory. The report quoted Dany Shoham, a former Israeli military intelligence officer who has studied Chinese biological warfare, who stated that the Wuhan institute is linked to Beijings covert bio-weapons programme. Bill Gertz, Coronavirus may have originated in lab linked to Chinas biowarfare programme, The Washington Times, 26 January 2020.

21 Healy Melissa, Was the coronavirus made in a Wuhan lab? Heres what the genetic evidence shows Los Angeles Times, 9 May 2020, available at: https://www.latimes.com/science/story/2020-05-09/was-the-coronavirus-made-in-a-wuhan-lab-heres-whatthe-genetic-evidence-shows.

22 Docea Anca Oana, et. al., A new threat from old enemy: Re-emergence of coronavirus (Review), International Jour of Molecular Medicine, Vol. 45, 2020, pp. 1631-1643.

23 A few countries have reported having come across infants who tested positive for COVID-19 a few days after birth, suggesting the possibility of vertical transmission. Cheng ZJ, and Shan J., 2019 Novel coronavirus: where we are and what we know, Infection, Vol. 48, 2020, pp. 155163.

24 Docea Anca Oana, et. al., A new threat from old enemy: Re-emergence of coronavirus (Review), International Jour of Molecular Medicine, Vol. 45, 2020, pp. 1631-1643.

25 Humer Caroline, et.al., COVID-19 long-term toll signals billions in healthcare costs ahead, Reuter, 3 August 2020, available at:https://in.reuters.com/article/uk-healthcoronavirus-fallout-insight/covid-19-long-term-toll-signals-billions-in-healthcarecosts-ahead-idINKBN24Z1C5.

26 A team of doctors, health workers and revenue officials who had gone to identify the family members of a 65-year-old man who died of COVID-19 were attacked in Indore, Madhya Pradesh, on 2 April 2020, after fake videos claimed that healthy Muslims were being taken away and injected with the virus, reiterating the dangers and physical manifestations of misinformation. A study on misinformation in India by scholars from the University of Michigan, released on 18 April 2020, has shown a rise in the number of debunked stories, particularly after the announcement of janata curfew by Prime Minister Modi on 22 March 20, and the countrywide lockdown. The misinformation that was circulating on various social-media apps, as found by the study, was classified into seven categories (i) culture, (ii) government, (iii) doctored statistics, (iv) cure prevention and treatment, (v) nature and the environment, (vi) casualty, and (vii) business and economy. Prachi Salve, Manipulative Fake News on the Rise in India under Lockdown: Study, 3 May 20, available at: https://www.indiaspend.com/manipulative-fake-news-on-the-rise-in-india-under-lockdown-study/.

27 The term infodemic has been coined to outline the perils of misinformation while trying to managevirus outbreaks, since this phenomenon could even speed up the epidemic process by influencing and fragmenting social response. The information that people receive can strongly influence their behaviour and alter the effectiveness of the countermeasures taken by governments. Social media platforms such as YouTube and Twitter provide direct access to an unprecedented amount of content and may amplify rumours and questionable information. The case of the COVID-19 epidemic demonstrates the critical impact of this new information environment. Cinelli Matteo, et.al., The COVID-19 Social Media Infodemic, pp. 18, available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.05004.pdf.

28 Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public/.

29 Islam Md Saiful, et. al., COVID-19Related Infodemic and Its Impact on Public Health: A Global Social Media Analysis, The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, August 2020, available at: https://www.ajtmh.org/content/journals/10.4269/ajtmh.20-0812, accessed 15 August 2020.

30 Dany Shoham, a former Israeli military intelligence officer who has studied Chinese biological warfare, said the Wuhan Institute of Virology is linked to Beijings covert bio-weapons programme. The laboratory is the only declared site in China capable of working with deadly viruses. The Wuhan virology institute is under the Chinese Academy of Sciences, but certain laboratories within it have linkage with the PLA or BW-related elements within the Chinese defence establishment. Gertz Bill, Coronavirus may have originated in lab linked to Chinas biowarfare programme, The Washington Times, 26 January 2020.

31 Areddy James T., China Rules Out Animal Market and Lab as Coronavirus Origin, Wall Street Journal, 26 May 2020, available at: https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-rules-outanimal-market-and-lab-as-coronavirus-origin-11590517508.

32 Tara Kartha, Is Covid-19 a Chinese weapon or an accident? Either way, world must stop playing in bio labs, 3 April 2020, available at: https://theprint.in/opinion/covid-19-achinese-weapon-or-an-accident-world-must-stop-playing-in-bio-labs/394160/.

33 Syed Javaid Khurshid, Novem Coronavirus (nCoV-2019): Is it a Biological weapon? Journal of Bioterrorism and Biodefence, Vol. 11, Issue 1, 2020, pp. 2.

34 Wheelis Mark L., Lajos Rozsa and Malcolm R. Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 479.

35 Li Wenliang was a Chinese ophthalmologist who worked at the Wuhan Central Hospital. On 30 December 2019, the Wuhan municipal health service issued emergency warnings to local hospitals about a number of mysterious pneumonia cases discovered in the city in the previous week. In a tragic turn of events, Li subsequently contracted SARS-CoV-2 and, after a period in intensive care, died on the morning of 7 February 2020.

36 The Wuhan Institute of Virology was set up in 1956 as a microbiology laboratory, one of the first of its kind in the country, following the communist takeover of China seven years earlier. As a level-4 biosafety facility, the highest level of security in China, it is allowed to handle the worlds deadliest viruses. Scientists at the facility are known to have created hybrid versions of a bat coronavirus that could infect human cells. Nature, the scientific journal, published an article in 2015 that raised questions about the level of risk associated with such research. This has contributed to theories that the virus could have originated due to a leak from the laboratory. Simon Wain-Hobson, a virologist at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, noted in the article that the novel virus grows remarkably well in human cells and if the virus escaped, nobody could predict the trajectory. Don Weinland and Katrina Manson, How a Wuhan lab became embroiled in a global coronavirus game, Financial Times, 5 May 2020. Also see: Bill Gertz, Coronavirus may have originated in lab linked to Chinas bio-warfare program, Washington Times, 26 January 2020.

37 Available at: https://twitter.com/zlj517/status/1238269193427906560?s=21.

38 Larry Romanoff, Covid-19; Further Evidence that the Virus Originated in the US, Global Research, 4 March 2020, available at:https://www.globalresearch.ca/covid-19-further-evidencevirus-originated-us/5706078; Also see: Denise Grady, Deadly Germ Research is Shut Down at Army Lab Over Safety Concerns, New York Times, 5 August 2019, available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/05/health/germs-fort-detrickbiohazard.html.

39 The minimum infectious dose of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, is unknown so far, but researchers are of view that it is very low. The virus is spread through very, very casual interpersonal contact. Those with more severe symptoms tended to have higher viral loads. A high infectious dose may lead to a higher viral load, which can impact the severity of Covid-19 symptoms. If exposure to higher doses, or even frequent low doses, of SARS-CoV-2 does lead to worse health outcomes, there are significant implications for healthcare workers who are routinely exposed to Covid-19 patients. Alex Hogan, How much of the coronavirus does it take to make you sick? The Science, explained, 14 April 2020, available at:https://www.statnews.com/2020/04/14/how-much-of-the-coronavirus-does-it-take-to-make-you-sick/.

40 The US President, Donald Trump, asserted that he has seen evidence that the novel coronavirus was leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology. His assertions, however, clash with reports from the USs scientific and intelligence communities, as well as some of the health experts leading the fight against coronavirus in the country. The Chinese Government did not respond to the allegation, but a few statements indicated that the CIA had planted the virus in Wuhan last year. Don Weinland and Katrina Manson, How a Wuhan lab became embroiled in a global coronavirus game, Financial Times, 5 May 2020. Available at: https://www.ft.com/content/255a3524-0459-4724-a92a-58268ab627e2.

41 Lin Christina, Safety lapse in US and Chinese germ labs give rise to Covid-19 conspiracies, ISPSW Strategy Series, Issue No. 682, March 2020, pp. 5.

42 Marx Willem, COVID-19 has shown US, UK are vulnerable to biological terrorism, experts say, 18 May 2020, available at: https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/national-security/experts-covid-19-has-shown-u-s-u-k-are-n1207776 43 Marx Willem, COVID-19 has shown US, UK are vulnerable to biological terrorism, experts say, 18 May 2020, available at: https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/national-security/experts-covid-19-has-shown-u-s-u-k-are-n1207776.

44 Recommendation 1(5), Graham Bob, et, al., 2008, World at Risk: The Report of the Commission on the Prevention of WMD Proliferation and Terrorism, New York: Vintage Books, pp. 161, at p. xviii.

45 Caves John P. Jr., and W. Seth Carus, 2014, The Future of Weapons of Mass Destruction: Their Nature and Role in 2030, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction National Defence University, pp. 62.

46 Ibid.

47 Sarkar Debajit, Beyond Coronavirus: Why India needs to be prepared for Bioterrorism, Financial Express, 16 March 2020, available at: https://www.financialexpress.com/defence/beyond-coronavirus-why-india-needs-to-be-prepared-forbioterrorism/1899820/.

48 The main instruments adopted by the WHO under Article 21 are the International Sanitary Regulations, the International Health Regulations (IHR), and the Nomenclature Regulations, as adopted by the 20th World Health Assembly in 1967. The WHO has over 150 country offices and employs more than 7000 persons.

49 World Health Organization, Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), 16-24 February 2020, pp. 8-12.

50 Objects or materials which are likely to carry infection.

51 WHO advance team probing COVID-19 origin ends China visit; group of experts to visit Wuhan soon, The Associated Press, 4 August 2020.

52 Fidler David, COVID-19 and International Law: Must China Compensate Countries for the Damage? 27 March 2020, available at: https://www.justsecurity.org/69394/covid-19-and-international-law-must-china-compensate-countries-for-the-damage-international-health-regulations/; Tzeng Peter, Taking China to the International Court of Justice over COVID-19, EJIL: Talk, available at: https://www.ejiltalk.org/taking-chinato-the-international-court-of-justice-over-covid-19/; Patnigere Jushua Abhay, Corona-virus Outbreak: Beijing can be prosecuted under international laws for under-reporting virus threat, 28 May 2020, available at: https://www.firstpost.com/india/coronavirusoutbreak-beijing-can-be-prosecuted-under-international-laws-for-under-reportingvirus-threat-8200871.html; Egyptian lawyer to sue China for $10 trillion over coronavirus damages, available at: https://www.dailysabah.com/world/mid-east/egyptian-lawyer-to-suechina-for-10-trillion-over-coronavirus-damages.

53 The complaint has been filed in the US district court for the northern district of Texas and prays for an award of US $20 trillion and other such relief that the court may deem just and proper. The complainant alleged, This is a complaint for damages and equitable relief arising out of the creation and release, accidental or otherwise, of a variation of coronavirus known as COVID-19 by the Peoples Republic of China and its agencies and officials as a biological weapon in violation of Chinas agreements under international treaties, and recklessly or otherwise allowing its release from the Wuhan Institute of Virology into the city of Wuhan, China, in Hubei Province, by among other acts failing to prevent the Institutes personnel from becoming infected with the biological weapon and carrying it into the surrounding community and proliferation into the United States.

54 Steven Erlanger, Global Backlash Builds Against China Over Coronavirus, New York Times, 3 May 2020, available at:https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/03/world/europe/backlash-china-coronavirus.html.

55 On 15 June 2007, the International Health Regulations (IHR), 2005 came into effect. China is a signatory. The IHR guidelines place obligations on States to provide adequate information to WHO to prevent the spread of pandemics. It is alleged that China failed under its obligations in this regard. Further, not only did China downplay the seriousness of COVID-19 till as late as February 2020, it seems to have hidden vital information until January 2020 by stating that the virus does not spread through human-to-human contact.

56 The Joint Mission consisted of 25 national and international experts from China, Germany, Japan, Korea, Nigeria, Russia, Singapore, the US and WHO. The Joint Mission was headed by Dr Bruce Aylward of WHO and Dr Wannian Liang of the Peoples Republic of China. For more details, see: Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), 16-24 February 2020, pp. 40.

57 Several biotech companies are beginning trials of promising vaccines and treatments. More than 100 coronavirus vaccines are being developed around the world, through the use of a range of techniques, some of which are well-established and some of which have never been approved for medical use before. Jonathan Corum, Knvul Sheikh and Carl Zimmer, Different Approaches to a Coronavirus Vaccine, New York Times, 20 May 2020, available at: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/05/20/science/coronavirusvaccine-development.html. See supra note 3 also.

58 Edward Gu and Lantian Li, Crippled community governance and suppressed scientific/professional communities: a critical assessment of failed early warning for theCOVID-19 outbreak in China, Journal of Chinese Government, Vol. 5, No. 2, 2020, pp. 160-177.

59 China delayed releasing coronavirus info, frustrating WHO, The Associated Press, 2 June 2020.

60 Fighting Covid-19 China in Action: The State Council Information Office of the Peoples Republic of China, June 2020, pp. 65.

61 Malik A.R., Global Socio-Economic Impact of Covid-19, Modern diplomacy, 24 April 2020, available at:https://moderndiplomacy.eu/2020/04/24/global-socio-economicimpact-of-covid-19/.

62 COVID-19 and Human Development: Assessing the Crisis, Envisioning the Recovery, New York: UNDP, 2020, pp. 35.

63 The Social and Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the Asia-Pacific Region, UNDP, 2020, pp. 36..

64 COVID-19: Act now or risk unimaginable devastation globally, warns UN chief, UN News, 28 May 2020, available at: https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/05/1065002.

65 Charlie Campbell, Yuxi Yunnan and Alice Park, Inside the Global Quest to Trace the Origins of COVID-19and Predict Where It Will Go Next, Time, 3 August 2020.

66 Miro Jakovljevic, et. al., COVID-19 Pandemic and Public and Global Mental Health from the Perspective of Global Health Security, Psychiatria Danubina, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2020, pp 6-14.

67 Harari Yuval Noah, In the battle against coronavirus, humanity lacks leadership, Time, 15 March 2020. Available at: https://time.com/5803225/yuval-noah-hararicoronavirus-humanity-leadership/.

68 Jiayi Zhou and Caroline Delgado, The impact of COVID-19 on critical global food supply chains and food security, SIPRI Topical Backgrounder, 26 June 2020.

69 Food Security and COVID-19, The World Bank, 28 May 2020, available at:https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/agriculture/brief/food-security-and-covid-19.

70 Gates Bill, Responding to Covid-19  A Once-in-a-Century Pandemic? N Engl J Med, Vol. 382, 2020, pp. 1677-1679.

Chapter - V The Biological Weapons: Impact of New Technology Advances in biotechnology, especially genetically modified organisms (GMOs)1 and synthetic biology, easy availability of drone systems pose serious threat to humanity. These advances open possibilities of a catastrophic biological attack by the non-state or state-sponsored terrorists in any part of the world. However, there are opposing views in this matter. Few scientists are of the view that weaponization of potential GMO pathogens is technically very challenging. Given the complexity of living organisms and their genetic makeup and responses, it is extremely difficult to predict the outcome of any genetic modification.2 One cannot deny that the field of genetic modification of living organisms for human use has undergone explosive change in the last two decades. Both historical and recent events show the potentially devastating effect of using biological warfare agents and the terror they cause among the populace. Even more alarming is that technological advancements in the field of biological sciences will transform biological warfare agents into a new classification of genetically engineered pathogens eliciting catastrophic consequences, with no control over the mutations that can occur, once they are released.

In a study, Mapping the Global Future: 2020, undertaken by the National Intelligence Council in 2004, it was brought out that, Over the next 15 years, a number of countries will continue to pursue their nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons programs and, in some cases, will enhance their capabilities. Major advances in the biological sciences and information technology probably will accelerate the pace of biological warfare agent development, increasing the potential for agents that are more difficult to detect or to defend against.3 Given the goal of some terrorist groups to use weapons that can be employed surreptitiously and generate serious impact, biological weapons can be terrorists preferred choice in the near future. In this chapter, the impact of advancement of biotechnology like synthetic biology, gene editing and CRISPR technology, development of ethnic bioweapons, impact of dual-use scientific research, additive manufacturing or 3D printing), the role of biohackers, and the likely use of drones for dissemination of bioweapons have been covered.

Synthetic Biology Synthetic biology is a new field which has developed into one of the most dynamic areas of life sciences research and revolutionized medicine and manufacturing. It has already been applied to the development of an anti-malarial drug, more rapid synthesis of flu vaccines, as well as in the production of biofuels, detergents, adhesives, perfumes, tires, and specialized chemicals. Synthetic biology has opened a new angle of perception towards life and the influence that men can exert on the living organisms in the natural environment. However, synthetic biology may be misused and can have national security implications. Given the historical pattern of misuse of advances in the life sciences, the bio-security implications of synthetic biology deserve close attention.

In the past, naturally occurring specific pathogens were selected for bioweapons based on their ability to kill and be converted into large-scale weapons. Synthetic biology has raised the possibility of designing, developing and deploying pathogenic bioweapons in new ways that depart from the disease-causing characteristics of a naturally occurring pathogen. Though attempts have been made by a number of states as well as the UN to limit access to dangerous pathogens, synthetic biology makes it possible to synthesize genomes and use those to generate copies of naturally occurring organisms in the laboratory. This has opened up new opportunities for the acquisition of existing, regulated pathogens. Synthetic biology techniques could also be used to modify existing organisms that are not subject to limited access regulations, potentially leading to the acquisition of desired attributes. For example, such manipulations could potentially result in pathogens that have, in comparison to the original pathogen, increased virulence, the ability to produce toxins, antibiotic resistance, or the ability to evade known prophylactic or therapeutic modalities. In addition, synthetic biology tools could be used to synthesize and boot entirely new organisms, potentially incorporating genetic material from multiple existing organisms.4 Some of the virus traits that could theoretically be targeted for modification using biotechnology are: (i) Altered tropism - capacity of a virus to infect or damage specific cells, tissues, or species; (ii) Enhanced viral replication to increase the impact and spread of a virus-based bioweapon; (iii) Enhanced virulence i.e., relative capacity of a virus to cause actual disease in a host, rather than just infection; (iv) Ability to evade immunity; (v) Ability to evade detectionmaking it difficult to detect virus using current outbreak response approaches; (vi) Ability to resist cure; (vii) Enhanced transmissibility in human; (viii) Enhanced stability outside the hostincreased resistance to temperature, ultraviolet radiation, relative humidity, and air movement; (ix) Reactivation of latent or persistent viruses by using chemical or biological means. The bacterial traits that could theoretically be targeted for modification using biotechnology include: (i) Altered tropism; (ii) Enhanced virulence; (iii) Enhanced toxin production; (iv) Ability to evade immunity or evade the immune response; (v) Ability to evade detection; (vi) Ability to resist cure; (vii) Enhanced stability in adverse natural environment; and (viii) Enhanced transmissibility facilitating rapid spread within a community and thus presenting a greater capacity to threaten public health.5 Tucker and Zilinskas (2006) have identified three categories of risk flowing from synthetic biology: (i) Synthetic microorganisms might escape from a research laboratory or containment facility, proliferate out of control, and cause environmental damage or threaten public health; (ii) A synthetic microorganism developed for some applied purpose might cause harmful side effects after being deliberately released into the open environment; and (iii) A rogue state, non-state actors, terrorist organizations, or individuals might exploit synthetic biology for hostile or malicious purposes. Two prominent journals, Nature and Science, published articles in 2012, wherein the authors claimed to have succeeded in genetically engineering strains of the avian flu virus (H5N1). It was claimed by the authors ( Masaki Imai, et al., 2012) that all recombinant viruses were generated by using reverse genetics. There is a possibility that the viruses could leak out of a laboratory in the event of an accident. In addition, the research could be leveraged by terrorists to create a biological weapon and unleash a devastating pandemic.6 Significant technological advances are being made across a range of fields, including artificial intelligence, nanotechnology, and genetic engineering. Most of them are inherently vulnerable to exploitation and can be used to serve malicious or lethal purposes. In recent years, the fields principal breakthroughs have occurred in genome editing, gene drives, and synthetic biology. Current trends suggest there will be a profusion of biotechnology products that are significantly different in type, scope, and complexity than previous ones. Gene alterations can generate unpredictable and undesirable consequences in the modified species, as well as in other species, and can even give rise to new and unknown animal and human diseases.

In the near future, synthetic genomics technology should make it possible to recreate any existing virus for which the complete DNA sequence is known. A lone operator with expertise in synthetic biology would also have a number of characteristics that would pose special difficulties for those seeking to prevent or defend against terrorist attacks.7 The growing availability of new biotech tools could make it possible for terrorists to create and modify pathogens or otherwise misuse biological materials and expertise. It has been reported that groups such as al-Qaeda and the Islamic State have called on scientists, doctors, and engineers to join their cause, which includes the use of specialized skills to inflict harm.8 The technological barriers to exploit biological organisms as weapons have gradually reduced. Synthetic biology is accelerating and broadening the usability of tools to achieve various capabilities.

Gene Editing and CRISPR technology Gene editing is a newer technique that is used to make specific and intentional changes to DNA. Gene editing can be used to insert, remove, or modify DNA in a genome. All gene editing technologies involve an enzyme known as a nuclease for cutting the DNA, in addition to a targeting mechanism that guides the enzyme to a specific location on the DNA strand (i.e. a gene within the genome). Genome editing could be used to achieve objectives found in two groups of capabilities, thus modifying bacteria and viruses to be more dangerous, and manufacturing hazardous toxins. Genome editing contributes to traditional concerns that pathogens could be made more dangerous by altering their virulence, transmissibility, or other relevant properties.9 The genetic sequences for diseases such as smallpox, 1918 Spanish flu (H1N1), and anthrax have been published and stored openly in an online repository called GenBank.

CRISPR technology is a powerful tool for editing genomes.10 It allows researcher to add, delete, or modify multiple genes simultaneously, and with a high degree of precision. Consequently, CRISPR has launched a revolution in the field of genome editing that is having a transformative effect on the entire life sciences research enterprise.11 CRISPR technology has also been applied in the food and agricultural industries to engineer probiotic cultures and to vaccinate industrial cultures (for yogurt, for example) against viruses. CRISPR has allowed geneticists to breed GMO pigs that glow in the dark by inserting jellyfish bioluminescence genetic code into pig DNA. It is also being used in crops to improve yield, drought tolerance and nutritional properties. CRISPR is opening doors to genetic modifications the likes of which were unimaginable just a decade ago. Its many potential applications include correcting genetic defects, treating and preventing the spread of diseases and improving crops.

One of the major discoveries in the last two decades has been the CRISPR-Cas9, which offers the potential for substantial improvement over other gene editing technologies.12 It is simple to use and inexpensive and has a relatively high degree of precision and efficiency. These characteristics have led many in the scientific and business communities to assert that CRISPR-Cas9 will lead to ground breaking advances in many fields, including agriculture, energy, ecosystem conservation, and the investigation, prevention, and treatment of diseases. These genetic modifications can lead to a variety of outcomes such as production of a toxin (i.e., a protein), loss or gain of cellular function (i.e., changes in a signaling pathway), and cell death. Currently, an individual can purchase a CRISPR-Cas9 kit for a specific sequence for just a few hundred dollars.13 Genome editing, and CRISPR in particular, pose a new set of challenges to biosafety, and biosecurity. The biological threats enabled by gene editing could affect in five different ways: modifying pathogens to be more dangerous; recreating known pathogen viruses; weaponizing gene drives; hijacking the microbioms; and weaponizing gene therapy.14 However, CRISPR-Cas9 is not without its drawbacks. The many potential applications of CRISPR technology raise questions about the ethical merits and consequences of tampering with genomes. The development of this technology does not directly equate to a terrorists ability to use synthetic biology to create a biological weapon. In theory, advances in gene editing could be used to create novel pathogens or change the hardiness, resistance, infectivity, pathogenicity, or specificity of existing pathogens.

CRISPR can offer greater flexibility, precision, and versatility than previous approaches and provide scientists with a new suite of tools that can be used to explore and exploit a variety of potential applications. CRISPR poses a double-edged risk, it provides capabilities for accelerating and expanding our understanding of functional genomics as well as the tools needed to exploit these discoveries, for good or for ill. The technical advantages of CRISPR may cause harm, whether deliberately through the creation of a biological weapon, or accidently in the event of a biosafety failure that results in the escape of an engineered organism into the environment, inadvertently through the discovery of new knowledge or vulnerabilities, or recklessly through inappropriate conduct that harms the health of humans or the ecosystem. The likelihood and consequences of each of these risks depends largely on the intent and capability of the actor involved. Genome editing has been practised not only by established practitioners of molecular biology such as those working in government laboratories, large corporations, and universities, but also by nontraditional citizens or do-it-yourself (DIY) amateur biologists. Rogue states and non-state actors with ill intentions may use genome editing to engage in biological warfare or biological terrorism. Even scientists with the best of intentions can pose risks in the form of dual-use research and biosafety failures.15 Since CRISPR technique allows scientists to cut and paste DNA more easily than in the past, there are concerns that gene editing could be used in the development of biological weapons. Some of the possible misuses of synthetic biology tools are:16 Creating harmful viruses or other infectious agents Designing proteins, genome editors, and vectors targeted to harm humanity Producing novel toxins and/or to produce toxins within the body Developing novel products that enhance existing pathogens or agents Creating unique bioweapons (pathogens) Releasing an organism without authorization Developing a product that is ethically dubious or has unintended ethical outcomes The availability and low cost of the basic ingredients of technologies like CRISPR makes it particularly concerning. However, few argue that with the help of CRISPR, a terrorist group may at the most create a biological agent, but due to lack of additional skills for growing and disseminating biological weapons agents, they may not be able to create an effective weapon. But this argument cannot ignore hostile exploitation of CRISPR by non-state actors and the development of more lethal state-sponsored biological weapons programme. Under the Biological Weapons Convention, only the signatory states have agreed never under any circumstances to acquire or retain biological weapons. This Convention is imperfect and lacks a way to ensure that states are compliant. An imperfect convention cannot guarantee that these states will always decide against the hostile exploitation of biology.17 These developments have prompted security analysts to examine the security implications of CRISPR and evaluate its likely future use for bioweapons developments.18 A few scientists working on CRISPR have opined that an amateur scientist could set up a lab in small place and gene editing may be misused to create more lethal or infectious pathogens. There are also fears that CRISPR technology may be used to introduce antibiotic resistant bioweapons agent, and the technology may allow the development of chimeric (inter-species hybrid) bioweapons, i.e., weapons that cause the symptoms of one disease but ravage the body with a different, undetected disease.19 CRISPR is now being used for some of the many COVID-19 tests that are available. Studies have been undertaken to investigate whether CRISPR can be used to attack SARS-CoV-2. CRISPR is also being used to edit viruses in other ways, such as to get them to attack harmful bacteria that dont respond to antibiotics.20 CRISPR-Cas9 biotechnology has also raised many concerns, such as to what extent can the genome, or in fact nature itself, be altered. Some nations put liberal ethics aside and aim at achieving technological high ground, enrolling other nations into a realist biotech-arms race with state and individual security at stake.21 Ethnic Bioweapons In 2005, the International Committee of the Red Cross expressed the view that the potential to target a particular ethnic group with a biological agent is probably not far off.22 Advances in genetics may soon make possible the development of ethnic bioweapons that target specific ethnic or racial groups based upon genetic markers.23 The development of ethnic weapons with very specific effects would be easiest with techniques that use a genomic marker as a trigger for an activity that is unrelated to the location of the marker, i.e. the effect would be triggered even if the sequence is in a non-coding or non-translated region of the genome. This kind of technology does not yet exist. However, techniques are available that can inhibit genes with a specific sequence.24 According to the United States Defence Threat and Reduction Agency25 report of 2011, There is a possibility that biological agents may be developed that target specific populations while leaving others unaffected. As the knowledge of human genetics advances, it may be possible to identify unique genetic markers carried by members of a particular ethnic group. A number of scientists are of the view that this information could conceivably allow weapons to be developed that would target only carriers of these distinct markers.26 Biological agents could be designed to alter behaviour, cause long-term chronic conditions, and even target specific ethnic groups by interacting with particular foods or genetic markers. There is evidence that some infectious diseases subtly influence the behaviour of humans who carry them. Experts are of the view that with the progress of synthetic biology, it is certainly possible to construct such customized biological weapons.27 Designer diseases could be a viable candidate as a potential bioweapon in 2035.28 Weapons targeting specific population groups need not be lethal. They could cause temporary incapacitation, illness, sterility, permanent fatigue, or any other condition that may not be fatal but desirable from an aggressors perspective. They may be used in an all out war, in the battlefield or against civilian population, or they may be used in covert operations in conflict situations and with long-term effects, in order to destabilize, harm economically or weaken an enemy society.29 This risk of ethnic bioweapons becomes intense as it moves from theoretical realms into a possibility.30There is a fear that some genetically engineered agents might have already been produced and stockpiled by the rogue states.

Dual-Use Life Science Research The dual-use research in the field of bioscience has been one of the most debated subjects in the last two decades. The expression dual use was historically used to refer to technology, equipment, and facilities that could be used for both civilian and military purposes. In contemporary discussions, the expression dual use is usually used to refer to research in science and technology that can be used for both good and evil purposes. For example, CRISPR can be used to edit the genes of a mosquito to prevent it from carrying the Zika virus, or it could be used to make a pathogen resistant to antibiotics. This dual-use nature of modern technology makes it difficult to completely prevent nefarious use.

According to Selgelid (2016; 140), the expression dual-use refers to research and technology that (i) have good/legitimate uses, but, (ii) might also be intentionally used by malevolent actors in making and/or use of weapons that could have catastrophic consequences.31For instance, using the recombinant DNA technology (gene splicing), a single gene is inserted in an organism to alter its genetic properties - an example is the splicing of genes to produce insulin for diabetics. Genes responsible for generating insulin are spliced into plasmid DNA that can then infect bacteria. The infected bacteria will then multiply and the product is a large amount of insulin for medicinal purposes. Despite the benefits of this biotechnology, hazard cannot be ignored because genes can be programmed into an infectious state that could easily be transformed into a bioweapon.

The major concern is that the recent developments in the biotechnology and synthetic biology may enable development of a new generation of especially dangerous bioweapons. These concerns are exhibited by a number of controversial genetic engineering experiments reported during the past two decades.32 Some of these are discussed below.

Genetic engineering of a super strain of vaccine-resistant mousepox : One of the most cited examples of dualuse research is that of Australian scientists who inadvertently developed a lethal mouse virus. The researchers used standard genetic engineering techniques to insert the gene for interleukin4 (IL4) into the mousepox virus. They hoped that the altered virus would induce infertility in mice (a major pest in Australia) and would thus serve as an infectious contraceptive for pest control. To their surprise, they discovered that the altered virus could kill both mice that were naturally resistant to, and mice that had been vaccinated against ordinary mousepox.33 The discovery was made over a period beginning in 1998 and ending in 1999.

At first, the scientists informed only the Australian government and military about it. But after some debate, the research paper was published in the Journal of Virology in 2001.34 This raised a concern that the same techniques used to engineer the mousepox virus could be applied to create more virulent forms of poxviruses that afflict humans, including a vaccine-resistant strain of smallpox. Although smallpox was eradicated in the 1980s, fears remains that genetically reconstituted forms of the virus could be put to use by the non-state actors.

Artificial synthesis of a live poliovirus : Owing to known genome sequences, modern strategies of DNA synthesis have made it possible to recreate in principle all known viruses independent of natural templates. In July 2002, it was reported that the American researchers based at State University of New York have artificially synthesized a live polio virus. This research was financed by the US Armys Defence Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) as part of a programme to develop biowarfare countermeasures. The scientists constructed the virus using its genome sequence,35 which is available on the Internet, as their blueprint and genetic material from one of the many companies that sell made-to-order DNA. The lab-built poliovirus killed mice and was almost indistinguishable from the original.36 Dr. Eckard Wimmer, professor of molecular genetics and microbiology at Stony Brook and leader of the project, stated that he made the virus to send a warning that terrorists might be able to make biological weapons without obtaining a natural virus. The work initiated a debate whether the same technique might be applied to other viruses. The response was that it can probably be achieved a rogue laboratory with two trained scientists. It was proclaimed by experts that the research  or the synthesis of any pathogen  does not violate the 1972 Biological Weapon Convention banning germ weapons, which gives wide latitude to all kinds of defensive research.37 The work was hailed as a milestone in biology and also condemned as dangerous and irresponsible, scorned as a stunt and perceived as a challenge to divine power.38 Reconstruction of the 1918 Spanish Flu virus : The 1918-1919 H1N1 influenza pandemic has been the most deadly events in recorded human history, having killed an estimated 50 to 100 million persons. The host that served as the source of the 1918 H1N1 influenza virus has not been identified, nor is it known how the virus adapted to humans. In 2005, the American scientists at the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reconstructed the influenza virus and tested it in laboratory animals, which quickly died. The research work was done in collaboration with Mount Sinai School of Medicine, the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology and Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory. In 1996, it became possible to recover and sequence highly degraded fragments of influenza viral RNA retained in preserved tissues from several 1918 victims whose bodies were buried in Norway and Alaska. The scientists used reverse genetics with the available 1918 influenza virus coding sequence to generate an influenza virus bearing all eight gene segments of the pandemic virus.39 It was reported that in stark contrast to contemporary human influenza H1N1 viruses, the 1918 pandemic virus had the ability to replicate in the absence of trypsin, caused death in mice and embryonated chicken eggs, and displayed a high-growth phenotype in human bronchial epithelial cells. The result of this research was published by Science in 2005.40 The achievement of reconstructing an extinct pandemic virus raised a number of questions. The most fundamental of these was whether it was necessary or wise to recreate by molecular means a naturally extinct virus that represented one of the deadliest infectious agents in human history. In response, a senior American government scientists and officials at the Department of Health and Human Services stated that such research could play an important role in pandemic influenza preparedness. This research work exemplifies the benefits of studying pathogens that have a potential for dual use, provided that biosafety and biosecurity issues are adequately addressed.41 Synthetic Yeast : Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) 42 is a familiar microorganism, central to the production of everyday foods like bread and beer. With its ability to ferment at industrial scale, yeast has been an essential part of the biotechnology industry from its beginnings, and is currently in widespread use for the production of medicines, vaccines and biofuels. Scientifically, yeast is one of the most important model organisms for studying eukaryotic genetics and its full genome was sequenced in 1996. In March 2014, the complete synthesis of one of the chromosomes of yeast species S. cerevisiae was announced.43 The synthetic yeast could be used to produce new strains with improved fermentation efficiency and ethanol tolerance, therefore, better for the wine industry or biofuel production. In addition, the strains can also be served as a cell-factory to manufacture valuable products such as fine chemicals, drugs, antibiotics or vaccines by shuffling the exogenous pathways into the synthetic genome.44 In 2010, J. Craig Venters team became the first scientists to create a living organism from computer data. His team assembled a genome based on digitized DNA sequences, synthesized the DNA, inserted the artificial DNA into a bacterial cell.45 The bacteria began to function, grow, and replicate. In 2018, scientists invented an easier, faster, and more accurate method for synthesizing DNA. The new method could potentially lead to the development of desktop DNA printers for use in research labs. In the past, scientists either had to order DNA from specialized vendors, who had the ability to screen what was being ordered to see if it was likely intended for nefarious use, or they had to synthesize short sequences and assemble genes by stitching them together, a process that required much trial and error (i.e., tacit knowledge), time, and the use of toxic chemicals. The new technique leverages an enzyme found in the immune system that has the ability to synthesize long strands of DNA. This would allow scientists to skip over the difficult process of piecing genes together and make it easier for them to engineer new living organisms; it might also evade one of the control mechanisms that is currently in place to help prevent synthetic DNA from being misused.

The emerging technologies are science-based innovations that empower small groups and individuals to acquire technologies that may rival capabilities of larger institutions. Technologies such as 3D printing, advanced robotics, synthetic biology, and nanotechnology are not only disrupting and transforming society and industry in profound ways, they are also disrupting how policymakers need to think about national security and countering weapons of mass destruction (WMD). These technologies are lowering barriers to effective development and use of WMD, creating new pathways for developing WMD, reducing the risk of detection of WMD activities, and offering nefarious actors new capabilities to cause mass effects.

In the past decade, high-throughput sequencing technology has completely revamped our knowledge about genomic information. However, these researches raise an important a question: Is it possible that research into new vaccines against cancer and other diseases could inadvertently create lethal human viruses? Many of the most promising modern vaccines depend on viruses to transport genes into the body, and contain genes that directly alter the immune response. While the Australian discovery was worrisome, it is not known whether the technique could be applied to human viruses and designer pathogens. The potential for abuse of this discovery is real. There are many hundreds of laboratories around the world performing thousands of different types of genetic manipulation experiments on a multitude of different organisms. Such techniques may be used to produce deadlier forms of human viruses and new kinds of biological weapons.

Additive Manufacturing (3D Printing) Today a series of technological advancements are blurring the boundaries between the physical, digital, and biological domain. The advent of additive manufacturing (AM) has created a new revolution. With the right equipment and software, a person can build almost anything from toys to a small house. AM offers a lot of advantages and opportunities, but it also creates some serious challenges for national and international security.46 AM has already been used to build firearms, leading to a concern regarding unrestricted access to weapons. It has also created inexpensive hardware for research laboratories in the life sciences. The application of AM in the life sciences may aid in weapons proliferation. The non-state actors have shown an ability to make crude biological weapons with limited resources. AM may refine the ability to create and deliver biological weapons.47 In AM, the object is built from scratch using powders, filaments, resins, pastes, or liquids. The list of materials that can be used for AM includes: plastics, metals and alloys (including titanium, stainless steel, aluminum, niobium, gold, copper, zinc, cobalt, chrome, nickel), carbon fiber, synthetic fiber, ceramics, glass, rare earths, chemicals, new materials (metallic glass, graphene, boron nitride nanotubes), and even organic materials (living cells, bacteria, tissue). The list is growing.48 AM can create a variety of highly customizable objects at relatively low cost and their applications are nearly endless. The increasing convergence of information technology, robotics, biotechnology, and nanotechnology will affect the way we make things in the future.49An Individual may create a bioweapon laboratory at very little cost without any regard for regulations or export controls on certain components. AM could be used for printing secondary equipment and tissue needed for research in the weaponization of biological materials. As AM technology matures, bio-printed samples could be used for biomedical R&D, necessary for the production of biological weapons. For example, bio-printed tissue could be used to assess specific interactions between biological agents and certain tissue types under conditions that are otherwise difficult to simulate.50 It is believed that tissue testing could be misused to speed up the discovery of novel CW agents and to improve the toxicity models used to predict CW effects on humans.51 Certain spray tanks and types of nozzles required for delivery of aerosols that are subject to export controls can be produced using AM. Delivery systems, especially those capable of delivering biological agents could also be manufactured through 3D printing technology.52 With the advancement of biotechnology and AM, proliferation of biological weapons may increase.

Advances in AM have been met with concerns over its potential to facilitate the development, production, and delivery of biological weapons. Article IV of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) enjoins states to take any necessary measures to prohibit and prevent the development, production, stockpiling, acquisition or retention of the agents, toxins, weapons, equipment and means of delivery specified in Article I. Article IV may be useful in stemming any evil application of AM for use in building biological weapons. The domestic legislation related to BWC must be accordingly amended to prevent and deter the use of AM for building a bioweapons laboratory. The legislation may also incorporate provisions relating to codes of conduct for AM hobbyists to ensure they may not be inadvertently building materials for use in a bioweapons laboratory. The Security Council Resolution 154053 requires UN members to create domestic legislation targeted at preventing non-state actors from acquiring components for nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons.54 Under Resolution 1540, action may be taken to address potential threats posed by additive manufacturing.55 Biohackers A wide range of emerging biotechnologies for production of specific microorganism, online databases of gene sequences and genetic information, additive manufacturing (3D printing) to produce equipment and parts, availability of GPS enabled drones as platform for dissemination,56 makes a perfect setting for the use of bioweapons by a rogue state-sponsored terrorist. Anyone with access to a computer, 3D printer, raw materials, and the internet has the ability to create and share physical things in the comfort of their own home.57 DNA sequencing and synthesis have become easier and cheaper, greatly simplifying the creation of living organisms from scratcheven more lethal than COVID-19. Today cheap gene editing tools are becoming widely available around the world. An amateur biohacker58 who tinker with the genetic make-up of living organisms could develop new types of biological weapons.59 In the modern time, biohacking or Do-It-Yourself (DIY) biology is a movement where citizens conduct biological experiments in a small community or garage lab. The biohacking revolution was an attempt to bring science to households, instead of scaring citizens of biology, it was an attempt to let citizens experience biology first hand. However, it has become a dual-use facility. Such labs could also be ideal targets for bioterrorists for developing a dangerous cocktail of bioweapons.

Wikswo (2014) has identified five different strategies which a biohackercould adopt. These are Wolf in Sheeps Clothing, Trojan Horse, Spoof, Fake Left, and Roid Rage. The author explains: A Wolf in Sheeps Clothing occurs when a biological organism or toxin is modified through genetic engineering so that it can be expressed in an active form but does not present the normal epitopes.60 In a Trojan Horse, a biohacker maintains the epitope of a non-threatening agent but re-engineers the active component of the toxin to increase the biological threat without increasing the detectability. The Spoof occurs when a benign agent is modified to express epitopes distinctive of a known toxin in order to trigger an unnecessary protective response by the target parties (the local, state, or federal government), while the delivering party (the biohacker) can afford to remain unencumbered. The Fake Left is a means to modify through selection or genetic engineering the method of transmission of an organism (for example, one that is typically passed by fluid to an airborne method). Such modification makes it easier to disperse an agent among a target population. The Roid Rage strategy aims to potentiate the effects of a common virus by expressing components of a deadly virus, such as expressing Ebola virus RNA sequences into the common flu virus. An infected person would demonstrate symptoms of the flu, hampering early detection and treatment of Ebola and favouring its deadly outcomes. Any of these strategies could be used individually or in conjunction with one another.61 About six years back, the number of biohackers around the world was nearly 4,000 and this number has been growing rapidly.62 In the past few years, biohackers across the US have taken gene editing into their own hands. As the equipment becomes cheaper and the expertise in gene-editing techniques, mostly Crispr-Cas9, more widely shared, citizen-scientists are attempting to re-engineer DNA in surprising ways. The laws that cover biotechnology have not been significantly updated in decades, forcing regulators to rely on outdated frameworks to govern new technologies.63 There are reports that biohacker communities have also embraced the coronavirus as an object of enquiry.64 It has been claimed that the biohackers/DIY community has developed a range of community standards as well as codes of ethics and actively engages with concerns over biosafety and possible misuse of biotechnology.65 The DIY community codes include commitments to use biotechnology only for peaceful purposes. However, there remains a possibility of a disgruntled biohacker modifying existing or emerging biological warfare agents and use them in bioterrorism. A biohacker might use genetic engineering or synthetic biology to create and distribute an organism that causes harm, for example by reducing biological diversity, weakening an existing population of plant or animal life, making people sick, destroying crops, threatening the food supply, or deterring tourism.66 According to the Economist, Biohacking groups are now experimenting with DNA as a form of software they can manipulate the way hackers did with computers and the internet. They could use these processes to create killer bugs or provide training for bioterrorists. Biosecurity experts envisage the possibility for actors to also use drones to spray aerosols containing bioweapons or toxic substances in much the same way as commercial drones spray pesticides.67 Use of Drones for Dissemination of Bioweapons The commercialization has led to the development of small, nimble fixed-wing and quadcopter drones capable of carrying payloads for a variety of purposes. Over the past few decades, drone technology has proliferated beyond nation-states into the private sector as well as non-state actors or terrorist organizations.68 Several non-state actors have incorporated drones into their operations. While rebel groups from South America to the Middle East have used commercially available rotary-winged drones for surveillance over enemy positions, more tech-savvy groups such as ISIS have armed these over-the-counter drones and used them in combat. In June 2019, Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) released a video claiming to have used a drone against Israeli forces along the border. In October 2016, Kurdish forces shot down and captured an Islamic State quadcopter that was armed with explosives.69 Commercially available drones have diverse capabilities and could be used for multiple purposes. Even nano-robots could be used to disseminate pathogens. Commercialization of synthetic biology, 3-D manufacturing, and drones will continue to reduce both the intellectual and material barriers that currently hinder biological weapons proliferation. With the improvements in flight duration, payload capacity, and flight software, the risk of a drone being used to deliver bioweapon at distant places increases.70 Aerosol delivery is the most effective method of disseminating biological agents. To achieve the greatest effectiveness, agents could be delivered in small aerosol particles to ensure that the particles reach lungs. The use of drones, similar to commercial crop sprayers, would be an exceptionally effective means of delivery of biological agents.71 Imagine a situation when the world has just recovered from COVID-19 pandemic and people have gathered to witness final of IPL cricket day-night match. A news headline flashes across the television sets and screens of Smartphone, terrorists have been successful in delivering an unknown biological agent at the stadium using drone controlled via a smartphone. The news further reveals that an unidentified terrorist cell claimed credit for the attack and that the biological organisms is much more lethal that COVID-19 virus. Next day, the terrorists release a message that it may take a time of four to ten days for the pathogen to show its effect on the people and the pathogen can be transmitted from person-to-person. The outcome of such an attack would be horrendous. This is a fictional situation, but the potential for non-state actors to carry out such an incident exists today.

Since drones are becoming so common that their novelty is fading, and it is possible that drones flying overhead will become such a common occurrence that few will question their presence. Recently, GPS-fitted big drones were used to drop arms and ammunition from across the border in Punjab, India.72 Drones are being used in India for spray of pesticides.73 COVID-19 pandemic has shown that even threat of the use of bioweapons, unlike a conventional or chemical/nuclear weapon, will have the potential to create a disastrous effect. Drones are now much more capable in terms of survivability, penetration capability, accuracy, reliability, and range/payload capability than they were a few years ago. Also, the lethality of many of the viral and bacterial agents is extraordinary, even when compared to chemical agents. Under the current state of biotechnological development and progression, the risk of a terrorist developing and employing a biological weapon is increasing every day.74 According to recent SIPRI report, advances in three emerging technologies: (i) additive manufacturing (AM), (ii) artificial intelligence (AI), and (iii) robotics, could expedite each in their own way, the development of biological agents and their delivery systems. This could be by enabling the automation of developmental or production steps that previously required manual manipulation or analysis by a human. There could be new possibilities for biological weapon use and increase the exposure of digitized biological data and operating parameters to cyberattacks. All three technologies are mainly developed by the civilian and private sectors and therefore difficult to control.75 Conclusion In the last two decades or so, the progress in bioscience and biotechnology has increased the danger of threat from biological weapons. With genomic revolution, it will be possible to enhance the antibiotic resistance of biological agents, modify their antigenic properties or transfer pathogenic properties between them. Such tailoring of classical biological warfare agents could make them harder to detect, diagnose and treat; in other words, make them more offensive and militarily useful. The mapping of the human genomes completed in 2003, has paved a new age of research in the field of synthetic biology.76 The digitization of biological data combined with the increasing accessibility of synthetic biology has made the task of developing biological weapons easy. A malevolent actor can tamper with characteristics of a pathogen without having direct access to a physical laboratory. When coupled with the easily available Cas9 enzyme, an actor could edit a virus or bacteria to be more pathogenic using the CRISPR system making it more virulent or transmissible.77 Scientists have warned that recent advances in biological research could eventually lead to the creation of a new type of biological arsenal capable of targeting a specific group of human beings with common genetic characteristics.78 Biologically, there are certain differences among human beings.79 In case there are sufficient ethnic genetic differences between population groups, it may one day be possible to target a particular group with dangerous micro-organisms. The potential to target a particular ethnic group with a biological agent is probably not far off.80 Although scientists may argue that the technology to produce ethnic weapons is not a reality now, some feel there is a real chance that it may be developed within the next two decade or so.81 It is believed that by 2045, even non-state actors will have capability to produce DNA-targeted bioweapons, specifically designed to infect or kill a particular individual.82 In the longer term, we can expect further development of the synthetic biology which may include (i) synthetic viruses and prions; (ii) synthetic cellular pathogens of exceptional virulence; (iii) synthetic, non-replicating cell-like entities as vectors for biochemical agents; (iv) stealth pathogens; (v) genotype-specific pathogens of crop plants and domestic animals; (vi) ethnic-specific human pathogens; and (vii) pathogens that cause ethnic-specific autoimmune diseases with effects such as sterility.83 * * * 1 Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are living organisms whose genetic characteristics has been artificially altered in a laboratory through genetic engineering by the insertion of a modified gene or a gene from another organism using the techniques of genetic engineering. This creates combinations of plant, animal, bacteria, and virus genes that do not occur in nature or through traditional crossbreeding methods. Most GMOs have been engineered to withstand the direct application of herbicide and/or to produce an insecticide. However, new technologies are now being used to artificially develop other traits in plants, such as resistance to browning in apples, and to create new organisms using synthetic biology. Despite biotech industrys promises, there is no evidence that any of the GMOs currently on the market offer increased yield, drought tolerance, enhanced nutrition, or any other consumer benefit. In the absence of credible independent long-term studies, the safety of GMOs is unknown. Increasingly, citizens are taking matters into their own hands and choosing to opt out of the GMO experiment. Genetically modified crops also are responsible for the emergence of superweeds and superbugs, which can only be killed with ever more toxic poisons such as 2,4-D (a major ingredient in Agent Orange). In this study, single cell microorganisms have been considered which could be modified by insertion of genes from another organism, also referred to as transgenic organisms.

2 Warner Jerry, et.al., Analysis of the Threat of Genetically Modified Organism for Biological Warfare, Centre for Technology and National Security Policy, Washington DC: National Defence University, May 2011, pp. 37.

3 Mapping the Global Future, Report of the National Intelligence Councils 2020 Project, NIC-2004-13, December 2004, pp. 99-100.

4 Zhang, Y., et.al., A semisynthetic organism engineered for the stable expansion of the genetic alphabet, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 114(6), 2016, pp.1317-1322.

5 Biodefence in the Age of Synthetic Biology, Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2018, pp. 57-66.

6 Masaki Imai, et al., Experimental Adaptation of an Influenza H5 HA Confers Respiratory Droplet Transmission to a reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 Virus in Ferrets, Nature, Vol. 486, 21 June 2012, pp. 420428; and Russell Colin A., et al., The Potential for Respiratory Droplet-Transmissible A/H5N1 Influenza Virus to Evolve in a Mammalian Host, Science, Vol. 336 Issue 6088, 22 June 2012, pp. 15411547.

7 Tucker JB and Zilinskas RA, The Promise and Perils of Synthetic Biology, The New Atlantis, Vol. 12, Spring 2006, p. 25-46.

8 Gryphon Scientific, Risk and Benefit Analysis for Gain of Function Research: Final Report, 2016, pp. 177, 898, available at: http://gryphonsci.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Risk-and-Benefit-Analysis-of-Gain-of-Function-Research-Final-Report-1.pdf.

9 Kirkpatrick Jesse, Koblentz Gregory D, Palmer Megan J., et.al., Editing Biosecuirty: Needs and Strategies for Governing Genome Editing, Institute for International Studies, December 2018, pp. 110, at p. 48.

10 In 2012 scientists discovered that an obscure bacterial defense mechanism called Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) could be used more widely to make precise cuts in DNA. Less than a year later, CRISPR was used to edit the genome of mammalian cells. In combination, these two developments launched a revolution in the field of genome editing that has transformed the life sciences research enterprise. While the capability to modify the genomes of living organisms is over four decades old, CRISPR is the most significant recent advance and most publicly visible example of genome editing technology. CRISPR allows scientists to add, delete, or modify multiple genes simultaneously with a high degree of precision. Genome editing is poised to make major contributions to basic research; however, there are risks associated with intentional, reckless, or accidental misuse of genome editing. As a result, the threat landscape may be expanded to include new means of disrupting or manipulating biological systems and processes in humans, plants, and animals that are in addition to future threats coming from edited pathogens. Kirkpatrick Jesse, Koblentz Gregory D, Palmer Megan J., et.al., Editing Biosecurity: Needs and Strategies for Governing Genome Editing, Institute for International Studies, December 2018, pp. 110, at p. 2.

11 CRISPR uses small strands of RNA and an associated protein (e.g., Cas9: CRISPR-associated protein) to cut recipient DNA at a precise spot. CRISPR is heralded as an important new innovation because it seemingly produces mutations much faster, with greater precision, and at a lower cost than previous gene-editing techniques. Additionally, scientists have recently used CRISPR to create and Drive edited genes through organisms. These so-called gene drives ensure that, through natural reproduction, edited genes are passed on to the offspring of genetically altered organisms, thus ensuring that the edited genes are carried forward from one generation to the next. Vogel Kathleen M. and Sonia Ben Ouagrham-Gormley, Anticipating emerging biotechnology threats: A case study of CRISPR, Politics and the Life Sciences, 2018, pp. 1-17.

12 Though first discovered by Francisco Mojica in 1993, it was the work of multiple researchers around the world that culminated in Feng Zhengs discovery at MIT that the same CRISPR-Cas9 complex could be used to target specific DNA sequences in both mice and humans. In vivo experiments have demonstrated that this technology can be applied to living cells for the incorporation of foreign DNA into a host cell. This inserted DNA sequence is then replicated and propagated into daughter cells during cellular replication. In short, the modified DNA is propagated into future generations of cells along with the effects of that modification. These characteristics led Science magazine to name CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technology Breakthrough of the Year in 2015.

13 Hummel Stephen and Burpo F. John, Small Groups, Big Weapons: The Nexus of Emerging Technologies and Weapons of Mass Destruction Terrorism, Combating Terrorism Centre at West Point, US Military Academy, April 2020, p. 36.

14 Kirkpatrick Jesse, et.al., Editing Biosecurity: Needs and Strategies for Governing Genome Editing, Institute for Philosophy and Public Policy, December 2018, pp. 110, at p. 9.

15 Kirkpatrick Jesse, et.al., Editing Biosecurity: Needs and Strategies for Governing Genome Editing, Institute for Philosophy and Public Policy, December 2018, pp. 110.

16 Carter Sarah R. and Diane DiEuliis, Synthetic Biology Industry Practices and Opportunities for Biosecurity and Potential Roles for the US Government, 2019, pp. 25, available at: https://wmdcenter.ndu.edu/Portals/97/SynBio-Industry-and-Biosecurity-Nov-201912.pdf.

17 Revill James, Could CRISPR be used as a biological weapon? The Conversation, 31 August 2017, available at: https://phys.org/news/2017-08-crispr-biological-weapon.html.

18 Gerstein D.M., How genetic editing became a national security threat, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 25 April 2016.

19 Begley S., Gene drive gives scientists power to highjack evolution, STAT, 17 November 2015, available at: https://www.statnews.com/2015/11/17/gene-drive-hijack-evolution/; Vogel Kathleen M. and Sonia Ben Ouagrham-Gormley, Anticipating emerging biotechnology threats: A case study of CRISPR, Politics and the Life Sciences, 2018, pp. 1-17.

20 2020 Synthetic Biology Update, QUAKERS, Canadian Friends Service Committee, Toronto, pp. 12.

21 Romanowski Konrad, Genomics and International Security, CECRI, 2019, pp. 28.

22 Preventing the use of biological weapons: 80 years on, statement by Jacques Forster, Vice-President, ICRC, 10 June 2005.

23 Appel J.M., Is All Fair in Biological Warfare? The Controversy Over Genetically Engineered Biological Weapons, J Med Ethics, Vol. 37(7), July 2009, pp. 429-432.

24 These techniques target mRNA, the molecule that transmits information from the DNA to the place of protein synthesis within a cell. One of these techniques, called RNA interference (RNAi), uses a mechanism by which a specific RNA sequence is degraded by the cell if an externally applied RNA molecule of the same sequence is entering the cell. A similar approach called antisense technology inhibits further mRNA processing by binding endogenously produced mRNA to an externally applied DNA molecule with the corresponding sequence. Both technologies lead to the inhibition of a specific target gene with a specific sequence. If the sequence of the target gene varies from one population to another, this can be used to interrupt the gene in one population and not in the other. Military abuse of this technology would require the identification of population specific sequences in genes that are active and vital for the body function. Emerging Technologies Genetic Engineering and Biological Weapons, Sunshine Project Background Paper No.12, November 2003, pp. 21, available at: http://agenda21treffpunkt.de/archiv/03/11/EmergingBiotech-sun.pdf.

25 The mission of the Defence Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) is to safeguard America and its allies from weapons of mass destruction (chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and high explosives) by providing capabilities to reduce, eliminate, and counter the threat, and mitigate its effects.

26 Revolutions in Science and Technology: Future Threats to US National Security, Defence Threat Reduction Agency, Advanced Systems and Concepts Office, 2011, pp. 176.

27 Gautam Mukunda, Kenneth A. Oye and Scott C. Mohr, What rough beast? Synthetic biology, uncertainty, and the future of biosecurity, Politics and the Life Sciences, Vol. 28(2), September 2009, pp. 2-25.

28 Almosara Joel O., Biotechnology: Genetically Engineered Pathogens, US Air Force Counterproliferation Centre: Future Warfare Series, No. 53, Air University Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, 2010, pp. 43.

29 Brooks Rosa, Can there be war without soldiers? Foreign Policy, 15 March 2016, available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2016/03/15/can-there-be-war-without-soldiersweapons-cyberwarfare/; also see: Emerging Technologies Genetic Engineering and Biological Weapons, Sunshine Project Background Paper No.12, November 2003, pp. 21, available at: http://agenda21treffpunkt.de/archiv/03/11/EmergingBiotech-sun.pdf.

30 Luke Richards, Ethnic-bioweapons: between conspiracy and reality, The Badger, 8 May 2018, available at: https://thebadgeronline.com/2018/05/ethic-bioweapons-conspiracyreality/.

31 Selgelid Michael J., Ethics and Censorship of Dual-Use Life Science Research, in Gross Michael L. and Don Carrick, 2016, Military Medical Ethics for the 21st Century, London: Routledge, pp. 138-154.

32 Selgelid Michael J., Ethics Engagement of the Dual-Use Dilemma: Progress and Potential, in Rappert Brian (ed.), 2010, Education and Ethics in the Life Sciences: Strengthening the Prohibition of Biological Weapons, Canberra: ANU Press, pp. 23-34.

33 Ron Jackson of CSIROs wildlife division and Ian Ramshaw at the Australian National University, both in Canberra, inserted into a mousepox virus a gene that creates large amounts of interleukin 4. IL-4 is a molecule that occurs naturally in the body. As part of a study aimed at creating a contraceptive vaccine, they were trying to stimulate antibodies against mouse eggs, which would make the animals infertile. The mousepox virus was merely a vehicle for transporting the egg proteins into mice to trigger an antibody response. The researchers added the gene for IL-4 to boost antibody production. The surprise was that it totally suppressed the cell-mediated responsethe arm of the immune system that combats viral infection. Mousepox normally causes only mild symptoms in the type of mice used in the study, but with the IL-4 gene added it wiped out all the animals in nine days.

34 Broad William J., Australians Create a Deadly Mouse Virus, New York Times, 23 January 2001; Jackso Ronald J., et. al., Expression of Mouse Interleukin-4 by a Recombinant Ectromelia Virus Suppresses Cytolytic Lymphocyte Responses and Overcomes Genetic Resistance to Mousepox, Jour of Virology, Vol. 75(3), 2001, pp. 1205-1210.

35 Full-length poliovirus complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized by assembling oligonucleotides of plus and minus strand polarity. The synthetic poliovirus cDNA was transcribed by RNA polymerase into viral RNA, which translated and replicated in a cell-free extract, resulting in the de novo synthesis of infectious poliovirus. Experiment confirmed that the synthetic virus had biochemical and pathogenic characteristics of poliovirus. Our results show that it is possible to synthesize an infectious agent by in vitro chemical-biochemical means solely by following instructions from a written sequence. Cello Jeronimo, Aniko V. Paul, Eckard Wimmer, Chemical Synthesis of Poliovirus cDNA: Generation of Infectious Virus in the Absence of Natural Template, Science, Vol. 297, 9 August 2002, pp. 1016-1018.

36 Couzin-Frankel Jennifer, Poliovirus Baked From Scratch, Science, 11 July 2002.

37 Pollack Andrew, Traces of Terror: The Science; Scientists Create a Live Polio Virus, New York Times, 12 July 2002.

38 Wimmer Eckard, The test-tube synthesis of a chemical called poliovirus, EMBO Reports, 2006, Vol. 7, special issue, 2006, pp. S3-S9.

39 These viral RNA sequences eventually permitted reconstruction of the complete 1918 virus, which has yielded, almost a century after the deaths of its victims, novel insights into influenza virus biology and pathogenesis and has provided important information about how to prevent and control future pandemics. Taubenberger Jeffery K., et.al., Reconstruction of the 1918 Influenza Virus: Unexpected Rewards from the Past, mBio, Vol. 3, Issue 5, September/October 2012, pp. 1-5.

40 Tumpey Terrence M., et.al., Characterization of the reconstructed 1918 Spanish Influenza pandemic virus, Science, Vol. 310, 5745, pp. 77-80.

41 Taubenberger Jeffery K., et.al., Reconstruction of the 1918 Influenza Virus: Unexpected Rewards from the Past, mBio, Vol. 3, Issue 5, September/October 2012, pp. 1-5.

42 The Latin name Saccharomyces cerevisiae means beer sugar mould, shows that the name for this organism is inseparable from its common cultural use.

43 Narayana Annaluru et. al., Total synthesis of a functional designer eukaryotic chromosome, Science, Vol. 344 (6179), 2014, p. 55.

44 Dai Junbiao, et. al., Whole genome synthesis: from poliovirus to synthetic yeast, Quantitative Biology, Vol. 5(1), 2017, pp. 105-109.

45 For the first time scientists created life from scratch. As reported, Craig Venters team at the J. Craig Venter Institute in Rockville, Maryland, and San Diego, California, made a bacterial genome from smaller DNA subunits and then transplanted the whole thing into another cell. The cell was created by stitching together the genome of a goat pathogen called Mycoplasma mycoides from smaller stretches of DNA synthesized in the lab, and inserting the genome into the empty cytoplasm of a related bacterium. The transplanted genome booted up in its host cell, and then divided over and over to make billions of M. mycoides cells. Callaway Ewen, Immaculate creation: birth of the first synthetic cell, New Scientist, 20 May 2010; Gibson Daniel G., et.al., Creation of a Bacterial Cell Controlled by a Chemically Synthesized Genome, Science, Vol. 329, Issue 5987, pp. 52-56.

46 The British Ministry of Defence has specifically identified AM as a threat: The adoption of AM by technologically less advanced adversaries may make it increasingly difficult for the UK to maintain its technological edge on the battlefield. In addition, AM may lead to an increase in the illicit and unregulated transfer of weapon-related technology, to both state and non-state actors. United Kingdom, Ministry of Defence: Strategic Trends Programme: Future Operating Environment 2035, London: Ministry of Defence, 2015, pp. 14, 41.

47 Cruz Francisco J., Additive Manufacturing and Biological Weapons: How 3D Printing May Give Rise to Unforeseen Biosecurity Threats, UPMC Center for Health Security, p. 1.

48 Fey Marco, 3D printing and international security: Risks and challenges of an emerging technology, PRIF Report No. 144, 2017, pp. 48.

49 Schwab Klaus, 2016, The Fourth Industrial Revolution, Geneva: World Economic Forum.

50 Kolja Brockmann, Advances in 3D printing technology: Increasing biological weapon proliferation risks? SIPRI, 29 July 2019.

51 Zilinskas Raymond A., Mauger Philippe, Biotechnology E-commerce: A Disruptive Challenge to Biological Arms Control, CNS Occasional Paper No. 21, Monterey: James Martin Centre for Nonproliferation Studies, 2015, pp. 74.

52 Brockmann Kolja and Sibylle Bauer, 3D Printing and Missile Technology Control, SIPRI Background Paper November 2017, pp. 16.

53 With regards to nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons and their means of delivery, UNSCR 1540 calls in part upon all states to: Develop and maintain appropriate effective border controls and law enforcement efforts to detect, deter, prevent and combat, including through international cooperation when necessary, the illicit trafficking and brokering in such items in accordance with their national legal authorities and legislation and consistent with international law.

54 For example, the Regulations of the Peoples Republic of China on Export Control of Dual-Use Biological Agents and Related Equipment and Technologies, and its Annex, Dual-Use Biological Agents and Related Equipment and Technologies Export Control List became effective in December 2002. The Ministry of Commerce followed up on this action in 2006 by publicizing the Biological Agents and Related Equipment and Technologies Export Control List. Under Article 16 of the above regulations, China maintains a catch-all clause that would still be applicable for sales of spray dryers: where any unit or individual knows or should know that the dual-use biological agents and related equipment and technologies to be exported will be used by the receiving party directly for the purpose of biological weapons, it shall not export such dual-use biological agents and related equipment and technologies, whether included in the Control List or not.

55 Cruz Francisco J., Additive Manufacturing and Biological Weapons: How 3D Printing May Give Rise to Unforeseen Biosecurity Threats, UPMC Center for Health Security, p. 1.

56 In the next few years, drone manufacturers will continue to integrate rapid advances in the areas of materials, communications, guidance systems, information technology, and sensors into commercial and off-the-shelf platforms, resulting in enhanced capabilities for end users. Lighter and longer lasting batteries will lengthen flight times. New guidance systems will broaden access to spaces with diminished GPS or no signals. A major development in the drone technology could generate massive leaps forward in their potential as delivery systems for bioweapons. Bajema Natasha E., WMD in the Digital Age: Understanding the Impact of Emerging Technologies, Emergence &Convergence, October 2018, pp. 34.

57 Bajema Natasha E., WMD in the Digital Age: Understanding the Impact of Emerging Technologies, Emergence & Convergance, October 2018, pp. 34.

58 Many biological warfare agents are naturally occurring around the world or easily derived from plants and could be transformed by biohacking. The advent of modern technologies enables the biohacker to employ one or a multitude of strategies to increase the tactical or strategic effectiveness of a biological agent. Wikswo John, et.al., The Biohacker: A Threat to National Security, CTC Sentinel, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2014, available at: http://www.ctc.usma.edu/posts/the-biohacker-a-threat-tonational-security.

59 Richard Gray, Amateur biohackers could build a biological weapon: Gene editing may be used by terrorists, scientist warns, Daily Mail, 7 September 2016.

60 Epitopes are specific amino acid sequences on the surface of a cell, or certain BW agents such as anthrax that invoke a specific immune response.

61 Wikswo John, et.al., The Biohacker: A Threat to National Security, CTC Sentinel, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2014, available at:http://www.ctc.usma.edu/posts/the-biohacker-a-threattonational-security.

62 Biohackers of the world, unite, The Economist Technology Quarterly, 6 September 2014.

63 Emily Baumgaertner, As D.I.Y. Gene Editing Gains Popularity, Someone Is Going to get Hurt, New York Times, 14 May 2018.

64 Biohackers from BioCurious, a community laboratory created in 2010 near San Francisco, are closely watching the Covid-19 outbreak and organized the Wuhan Virus Co-Learning Hackathon recently. The hackathons objectives were to understand how viruses in general work and spread, analyzing the genome of the coronavirus, examining how it spreads. Available at:http://www.csi.mines-paristech.fr/en/featured-articles/doit-yourself-strategies-against-the-coronavirus/.

65 Christopher F. Chyba and Alex L. Greninger, Biotechnology and Bioterrorism: An Unprecedented World, Survival, Vol. 46, No. 2, Summer 2004, pp. 143162.

66 Ikemoto Lisa C., DIY Bio: Hacking Life in Biotechs Backyard, University of California, Davis, Vol. 51, 2017, pp. 539-568.

67 Improvised Weapons: Hells Kitchens, The Economist, 21 May 2016.

68 Zicouzi George, et.al., 2018, Assessment of the Proliferation of Certain Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems, RAND Corporation, pp. 91.

69 Bergen Peter, Melissa Salyk-Virk, and David Sterman, World of Drones, 22 November 2019, New America Organization. https://www.newamerica.org/international-security/reports/world-drones/non-state-actors-with-drone-capabilities 70 Hummel Stephen and Burpo F. John, Small Groups, Big Weapons: The Nexus of Emerging Technologies and Weapons of Mass Destruction Terrorism, Combating Terrorism Centre at West Point, United States Military Academy, April 2020, pp. 36.

71 Renehan Jeffery N., Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Lethal Combination?Air University PressMaxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, June 1997, pp. 49.

72 Heavy-lifting drones were used by Pakistan to drop AK-47 rifles, counterfeit currency and narcotics in 10 sorties spanned over eight days, an investigation into weapons seizure at Tarn Taran in Punjab has revealed. GPS-fitted drones from Pakistan airdropped weapons into Indian Territory, The Economic Times, 25 September 2019.

73 Now, farmers use drones to spray pesticide, THE HINDU, 19 December 2019, available at: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Hyderabad/now-farmers-use-drones-tospray-pesticide/article30342501.ece.

74 For more details see: John P. Caves, Jr., and W. Seth Carus, The Future of Weapons of Mass Destruction: Their Nature and Role in 2030, Occasional Paper 10, National Defence University, March 2016, pp. 75.

75 Brockmann Kolja, Sibylle Bauer and Vincent Boulanin, Bio Plus X: Arms Control and the Convergence of Biology and Emerging Technologies, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), March 2019, pp. 56.

76 David A. Wheeler et. al., The Complete Genome of an Individual by Massively Parallel DNA Sequencing, Nature,452, No. 7189, 2008, pp. 87276.

77 Dunlap Garrett and Pauwels Eleonore, The intelligent and connected bio-labs of the future: Promise and peril in the fourth industrial revolution, Wilson Briefs, Wilson Centre, September 2017, pp. 15.

78 Ethirajan Anbarasan, Genetic weapons: a 21st-century nightmare? UNESCO Courier, March 1999, pp. 35-39.

79 99.9% of the genetic sequence of any two human individuals is said to be identical  but the remaining 0.1% accounts for a total of 3 million letters of the human genome. There are thought to be several tens of thousands coding genes in the human genome, thus it is possible that every single gene between one individual and another could be slightly (or greatly) different, even if there is 99.9% homology in overall genetic sequence. Some of this huge genetic diversity breaks out in differences between populations. These genetic populations in biological sense often correspond with (culturally-determined) ethnic groups. Emerging Technologies Genetic Engineering and Biological Weapons, Sunshine Project, Background Paper No. 12, November 2003, pp. 21, available at: http://agenda21treffpunkt.de/archiv/03/11/EmergingBiotech-sun.pdf.

80 Preventing the use of biological weapons: 80 years on, statement by Jacques Forster, vice-president, ICRC, 10 June 2005, available at: https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/resources/documents/statement/gas-protocol-100605.htm.

81 Though ethnic or population specific biological weapons do not exist, but they are theoretically possible. New technologies are indeed available to translate specific genetic sequences into markers or triggers for biological activity. Ethnic specific biological weapons may become possible in the near future. Weapons targeting specific population groups do not need to be deadly. They could cause temporary incapacitation, illness, sterility, permanent fatigue, or any other condition that may not be fatal but desirable from an aggressors perspective. They may be used in an all-out war, in the battlefield or against civilian population, or they may be used in covert operations in conflict situations and with long-term effects, in order to destabilise, harm economically or weaken an enemy society. Emerging Technologies Genetic Engineering and Biological Weapons, Sunshine Project, Background Paper No. 12, November 2003, pp. 21, available at: http://agenda21treffpunkt.de/archiv/03/11/EmergingBiotech-sun.pdf.

82 Miller David T., Defence 2045: Assessing the Future Security Environment and Implications for Defence Policymakers, Centre for Strategic & International Studies, November 2015, p. 28.

83 Wheelis Mark, Will the New Biology Lead to New Weapons? Arms Control Today, Vol. 36(4), 2004, pp. 6-13.

Chapter - VI The Biological Weapons Prohibition Regime The history of mankinds efforts to limit and restrict the use biological weapons is as long as the history of the use of such weapon. Manu Smriti, one of the oldest and probably the most important Indian treatise on the conduct of war, urged combatants not to use poison or poisoned arrows.1 The first international attempt to control biological (and chemical) weapons was made in 1874, when the International Declaration Concerning the Laws and Customs of War was signed in Brussels. The Declaration included the prohibition of use of poison or poisoned arms.2 The Declaration of the Second Hague Peace Conference (1907) retained the ban against poisons.3 In 1922, the Washington Treaty, signed by the US, Japan, France, Italy and Britain, prohibited the use of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and all analogous liquids, materials or devices, but this did not enter into force. Following the extensive use of poisonous gases, such as chlorine and mustard in the First World War, the international community agreed to prohibit the use of chemical, biological and toxin weapons in war. These efforts produced the 1925 Geneva Protocol.

The St. Petersburg Declaration of 1868 The St. Petersburg Declaration of 1868, which was part of Hague law4 was the first multilateral treaty to set limit on the conduct of hostilities.5 This treaty is of major historical importance as the principle set forth in its preamble provides: The only legitimate object which States should set before themselves during war is to weaken the military forces of the enemy; . For this reason it is sufficient to disable the greatest possible number of men; . this object would be exceeded by the employment of arms which would uselessly aggravate the sufferings of disabled men, or render their death inevitable; .. the employment of such arms would, therefore, be contrary to the laws of humanity.

The St. Petersburg Declaration prohibited means of warfare or weapons which could cause unnecessary suffering or which would render death inevitable. It may be argued that a good number of biological warfare agents produce illnesses but do not cause the death of every infected individual and therefore the provisions of declaration are not applicable to such weapons. Moreover, with the availability of modern medicine biological weapons could never be absolute in their effect. It could not be expected to infect all the individual intended victims in the target area, rendering their death inevitable. The Declaration therefore is vague and indefinite and does not make any prohibition against biological warfare.6 The 1899/1907 Hague Conventions The 1899 and 1907 conferences at The Hague produced two important documents, now known as the Hague Conventions. Both documents included principles governing the conduct of warfare. In the 1899 Hague Convention, signatory parties specifically agreed to abstain from use of projectiles that disperse asphyxiating or deleterious gases. This ban was on the use of chemical weapons and not related to biological organisms. Thereafter, laws of war were first comprehensively codified in the 1907 Hague Convention, which constitutes an authoritative source of customary international law. This Convention contained an indirect reference to biological weapons, when it states that employing poison or poisoned weapons was forbidden.7 This reference to poison reveals that development of modern biological weapons was an actuality when the treaty was finalized.8 The 1925 Geneva Protocol to the Hague Convention The origin of multilateral efforts to control biological weapons started with the 1925 Protocol to the Hague Convention. Under the auspices of the League of Nations, the Conference for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War considered provisions prohibiting international trade in poisonous or asphyxiating gases.9 The delegates to the Convention concluded the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare (Geneva Protocol) on 17 June 1925.10 This treaty, which is usually referred to as the Geneva Protocol of 1925, entered into force on 8 February 1928 and has 137 States Parties, including the five permanent members of the Security Council. The Protocol provides: Whereas the use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of all analogous liquids, materials or devices, has been justly condemned by the general opinion of the civilized world; and Whereas the prohibition of such use has been declared in Treaties to which the majority of the Powers of the World are Parties; and To the end that this prohibition shall be universally accepted as a part of International Law; binding alike the conscience and practice of nations.

The signatories to the Protocol agreed to be bound by the prohibition against the use of such arms in war and agreed to apply the Polish proposal to extend this prohibition to the use of bacteriological methods of warfare. The Protocol also established that the prohibition shall be universally accepted as part of international law. The inclusion of the prohibition as part of international law is significant, binding even those States that are not parties to the treaty, thereby creating a universal standard against the first use of such weapons.11 The Protocol outlawed the use of chemical as well as biological weapons in armed conflict, but was silent on the issues of research, production, development, storage, testing, and stockpiling. This loophole enabled nations to continue with programmes related to biological weapons.12 In addition, the Protocol did not address the issues of monitoring and verifying instances of non-compliance even with respect to the future use of such weapons. Many States became parties to the Protocol subject to the reservation that it would be binding only in relation to other States party to it and would cease to be binding if an enemy state or its allies failed to respect the prohibitions embodied therein.13 In other words, the Protocol was regarded by such States as containing not an absolute prohibition of the use of such weapons, but only an agreement not to use such weapons first.14 Moreover, many States Parties reserved the right to use the weapons in retaliation against an attack with such weapons; the treaty was in effect a no-first-use agreement.15 As an international agreement, the Geneva Protocol had limited scope of application. Its de facto recognition of a potential defensive or deterrent basis for biological weapons; coupled with the absence of any prohibition on their development, acquisition, possession, manufacture, or transfer, resulted in biological weapons race. It can be concluded that as of 1925, there was no universally accepted prohibition against biological warfare. Soon after the Geneva Protocol was signed a number of states started their ambitious biological weapons programme. Research into the means of waging biological warfare was conducted in Germany, Russia, Japan, the UK and the USA during the 1930s.16 The prohibition of the use of biological weapons, even in retaliation, came up during the second phase of the League of Nations Disarmament Conference in 1932-1933. The draft convention for general disarmament proposed an absolute ban on the use of bacteriological weapons, even in retaliation. However, the conference was postponed and never reconvened. A number of biological warfare research programmes were undertaken after World War II. The largest of these were conducted by the Soviet Union and the US. The weapons developed made use of agents causing anthrax, smallpox, plague and tularaemia.17 In 1946, the UN General Assembly called for the disarmament of atomic and other weapons of mass destruction. In 1948, the UN Commission for Conventional Armaments included biological weapons in its definition of weapons of mass destruction. Since 1966, the UN General Assembly has adopted several resolutions calling for the strict observance of the principles of the 1925 Geneva Protocol. Resolution 2603A (XXIV) of 1969 interprets the Protocol, declaring that it prohibits the use in international armed conflicts of: (a) Any chemical agent of warfarechemical substance, whether gaseous liquid or solidwhich might be employed because of their direct toxic effects on man, animals or plants; (b) any biological agents of warfareliving organisms, whatever their nature, or infective material derived from themwhich are intended to cause disease or death in man, animals or plants, and which depend for their effects on their ability to multiply in the person, animal or plant attacked.18 During the 1960s, chemical and biological weapons (CBW) control and disarmament focused on the United States. At that time, the US had not ratified the Geneva Protocol and was accused of using chemical weapons in Vietnam. Discussions of disarmament issues took place both in New York at the UNs First Committee and in Geneva at the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee (ENDC). In 1966, Hungary presented a draft resolution to the First Committee that demanded strict and absolute compliance by all States with the Geneva Protocol. In 1968, the UK tabled a working paper on microbiological warfare at the ENDC, describing the principle elements of a draft convention. The working paper recommended the establishment of a competent body of experts, under the auspices of the United Nations, to investigate allegations of breaches of the Protocol and a commitment by parties to cooperate with any investigation.19 The principal elements in the draft convention were:20 A common understanding that any use of microbiological warfare, in any circumstances, was contrary to international law and a crime against humanity and therefore the need for a complete prohibition of use.

A ban on the production of agents for hostile purposes while recognising the necessity of production of agents for peaceful purposes.

A ban on the production of ancillary equipment.

An obligation to destroy stocks of agents or equipment.

A ban on research aimed at production of prohibited agents and equipment.

Provisions for access by authorities to all research which might give rise to allegations of non-compliance.

Openness of relevant research to international investigation and public scrutiny.

In November 1969, the President Nixon unilaterally declared that US will not possess any lethal biological agents and weapons, and other methods of biological warfare and all biological research in the future would be confined to defensive measures.21 The reason was that President Nixon and US military leaders had serious reservations about the effectiveness of biological weapons and believed that nuclear weapons would provide better strategic deterrence for the US. According to Tucker (2002), President Nixons decision was influenced by three interrelated factors: (i) Biological weapons had limited tactical utility on the battlefield and did not constitute a reliable and effective strategic deterrent, (ii) The secret field trial conducted by the US in the Pacific had demonstrated that biological weapons posed a potential mass casualty threats to US cities, and (iii) Nixon wished to be seen as a man of peace at a time when the war in Vietnam was provoking strong opposition both at home and abroad. By abandoning a category of weapons widely considered to be repugnant, he could deflect criticism of use of tear gas and herbicides in the ongoing combat in Vietnam.22 As the US destroyed its bio-warfare arsenal, the UK made an attempt to achieve a worldwide treaty banning biological weapons. In 1969, the British and the Americans were able to agree on the final wording of such a treaty. However, the Soviet Union opposed the effort even after the British removed language requiring enforceable verification measures. In August 1970, the Soviets dropped their objections to the proposal, and within a year the Americans, the British, and the Soviets submitted the draft BTWC to the United Nations for its approval.23 The Biological Warfare Draft Convention tabled in 1969 contained very strong provisions which were watered down in the 1972 Biological Weapon Convention.24 It prohibited the use of biological agents for hostile purposes in any circumstances and explicitly outlawed the hostile use of BW against humans, other animals, or crops. It extended the ban on possession and its use in research and required parties to destroy or divert to peaceful purposes stocks of weapons agents, ancillary equipment and vectors. The draft also described the procedures for dealing with complaints of violation of the Convention, with allegations of use being treated differently from other allegations of non-compliance. Allegations of use were to be taken to the UN Secretary-General along with a recommendation for an investigation. Allegations of breaches of the Convention that did not involve use were to be taken to the Security Council along with a request for an investigation. Such requests, of course, would be subject to the veto power of the permanent members.25 The 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention Finally, on 10 April 1972, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction (BTWC) was signed in Washington, London and Moscow.26 The BTWC was the first multilateral disarmament treaty banning the production and use of an entire category of weapons. Article I of the treaty mandates several prohibitions: States Parties to the BTWC agreed never in any circumstances to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain: (1) Microbial or other biological agents, or toxins whatever their origin or method of production, of types and in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes; (2) Weapons, equipment or means of delivery designed to use such agents or toxins for hostile purposes or in armed conflict.

Article I of the BTWC prohibits the development or production of microbial or other biological agents, or toxins, without further defining them. In view of this, the World Health Organization (WHO) formulated a definition of biological agents considered to be authoritative.27 It defined biological agents as those that depend for their effects on multiplication within the target organism and are intended for use in war to cause disease or death in man, animals or plants; they may be transmissible or non-transmissible. The BTWC (in its title and in Article I) does not explicitly prohibit use of biological weapons. However, the Final Declaration of the 1996 Treaty Review Conference reaffirmed that, although use is not explicitly prohibited under Article I of the BTWC, it is still considered to be a violation of the Convention.

There were two important improvements in the 1972 Convention when compared to the 1925 Protocol: (i) the use of the phrase never in any circumstances removed one of the main shortcoming of the Geneva Protocol: which did not prohibit use in peacetime or in internal conflict; and (ii) the term bacteriological was replaced with the much broader phrase biological agents, or toxins whatever their origin or method of production, thus broadening the definition of covered agents.28 Article III of the Convention extends prohibitions related to biological weapons to international transfers and assistance to manufacture or acquire biological agents or weapons. Article VI authorizes any State Party to lodge a complaint with the UN Security Council concerning another State Partys breach of its obligations; all States Parties must cooperate in investigating the complaint.29 Article IV requires each State Party to extend the Article I prohibitions to persons within its jurisdiction and implement the provisions of the Convention domestically. Article X provides that States Parties are to facilitate in exchanges of equipment, materials, and scientific and technological information for the peaceful use of biological agents.

Under Article XI of the BTWC, States Parties may propose amendments to the Convention. An amendment enters into force for each State Party accepting the amendment, when it has been accepted by a majority of the States Parties to the Convention. For each remaining State Party thereafter, the amendment takes effect on the date of acceptance. The Convention gives a State Parties the right of withdrawal, provided that notice is given to all other States Parties to the Convention and to the UN Security Council three months in advance. The notice must include a statement of the extraordinary events the State regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests (Article XIII).

The BTWC requires that States Parties participate in review conferences to be held at five-year intervals. The objective of these meetings is to undertake an article-by-article review of the BTWCs operation, ascertaining whether the purposes of the treatys preamble and main articles are being achieved. Each such review should take into account any new scientific and technological developments relevant to the BTWC (Article XII).

The Convention embodies the principle known as the general purpose criterion under which all relevant activities are prohibited unless they can be justified as being for the peaceful purposes permitted under the Convention, including justifications relating to types and quantities of materials being used for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes.

Investigations Articles VI and VII of the BTWC provide a mechanism for investigating the alleged use of biological and toxin weapons and for extending assistance during such an event.30 Article VI states: (1) Any State Party to this convention which finds that any other State Party is acting in breach of obligations deriving from the provisions of the Convention may lodge a complaint with the Security Council of the United Nations. Such a complaint should include all possible evidence confirming its validity, as well as a request for its consideration by the Security Council.

(2) Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any investigation which the Security Council may initiate, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, on the basis of the complaint received by the Council. The Security Council shall inform the States Parties to the Convention of the results of the investigation.

The Security Council Resolution 620 of 1988 has authorised the UN Secretary-General to carry out investigations into the possible use of chemical and bacteriological (biological) or toxin weapons, whenever reported by any member State. The Third Review Conference requested the Security Council to inform State Parties about the outcome of any investigation initiated under Article VI. Article VII of the BTWC provides: Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to provide or support assistance, in accordance with the United Nations Charter, to any Party to the Convention which so requests, if the Security Council decides that such Party has been exposed to danger as a result of violation of the Convention. Further, in view of Article VII, the Review Conference requested the UN and its organisations such as WHO to provide timely emergency assistance whenever any State Party was exposed to the dangers of biological weapons. The General Assembly resolution of 4 December 199031 provides the mechanism for investigations of reports on the possible use of chemical and bacteriological (biological) or toxin weapons.32 Shortcomings of the BTWC The 1972 Convention does not have provisions for monitoring and verification, implementation and enforcement. There is no formal verification regime to monitor compliance. Member States are encouraged to abide by numerous confidence-building measures (CBMs) prescribed by State Parties at various review conferences. These include domestic implementation measures, if considered necessary; consultation and cooperation among parties; lodging of complaints with the UN Security Council; and incentives, such as assistance to victims. Since 1991, there have been efforts to negotiate a verification protocol to strengthen the BTWC and put in place an international mechanism to monitor compliance. The difficulty with creating such a verification regime is that any nation with a developed pharmaceutical industry has the potential to make biological weapons.

To cite one example of allegations of non-compliance, in 1981, the US accused the Soviet Union of supplying mycotoxinspoisonous compounds synthesized by fungito its Communist allies in Southeast Asia for military use against resistance forces in Laos and Cambodia. The UN Secretary-General dispatched two expert groups to the region to investigate the allegations. Both the investigations proved inconclusive, demonstrating the need to launch an investigation shortly after an alleged attack, when the forensic evidence is still fresh, and to gain full access to the affected sites and attack victims.

An additional problem is that many governments have not ratified or fully implemented national legislation and other instruments to ensure the fulfilment of their obligations. There are concerns regarding the possible misuse or negative impact of bio-defence programmes, such as their potential to provide cover for the illegal development or maintenance of biological weapons-related expertise. There is also a fear of the impact of terrorist actions, coupled with profound concern that modern economies may be particularly vulnerable to disruption from the deliberate spread of disease.33 The other important shortcoming of the Convention is that it cannot deal with the dual-use biological agents. For instance, a biological agent can be weaponized or used peacefully and it is often impossible to ascertain the intentions of the possessor. The Convention also does not specify permissible quantities of a biological agent which may be used for peaceful purposes. For instance, the Convention does not specify how much corona-virus may be used for the purpose of testing a vaccine, and at the same time it is difficult to ascertain how much of the virus would be required for the testing.

Protocol to 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) After the BTWC came into force, the number of countries possessing or actively pursuing biological weapons gradually increased. The spread of these weapons enhanced the risk of their falling into the hands of non-State actors or terrorists. There is also the risk of the biological agents escaping from a clandestine production plant and causing a deadly epidemic in the civilian population. In an effort to strengthen the BTWC, a Special Conference of the States Parties established the Ad Hoc Group (AHG) in 1994. Its task was to consider necessary measures, including possible verification measures, and to draft a legally binding protocol to strengthen the effectiveness and improve the implementation of the Convention. A draft protocol was prepared with consensus of the members of AHG in July 2001.

The text of the draft protocol mandated the States Parties to declare certain facilities and activities if they had or used for biological weapons in the past and to disclose whether they had national biological defence programmes or activities. The States Parties were bound to disclose other relevant facilities, such as maximum biological containment facilities. The monitoring regime contained in the draft protocol had three basic elements: (i) mandatory declarations of dual-capable activities and facilities; (ii) routine visits to declared facilities, without specific evidence of a treaty violation; and (iii) short-notice challenge investigations, requested by a Member-State, of a suspect facility, an alleged use of biological weapons, or a suspicious outbreak of disease, so as to address concerns about possible noncompliance.

To encourage the States to join, the draft protocol guaranteed the States Parties assistance and protection against the use or threat of use of biological weapons and established measures to promote scientific and technological cooperation in peaceful biotechnology, including genetic engineering, biological agents, toxins, and capabilities to combat disease. The protocol also called for the development of an international system for the global monitoring of emerging diseases. In addition, the protocol required states to review and report on their national export controls and declare data on the export of certain dual-use equipment. Under the rules of negotiations, the draft protocol has to be adopted by a consensus of all 56 participating countries, and any country could block approval.

In the US, after the Bush administration took office in January 2001, a government inter-agency committee reviewed the draft protocol and identified a number of serious problems with the text. The US officials were of the opinion that the proposed regime would compromise legitimate biodefense research and commercial trade secrets, and would not be effective in stopping proliferators from acquiring biological weapons. At the Fifth Review Conference of the BTWC, which was held in Geneva from 19 November to 7 December 2001, the US proposed that the Ad Hoc Groups mandate be terminated, thereby blocking the consensus needed to adopt the binding Final Declaration.34 The US, at one time a strong supporter of improved verification under the BTWC, abruptly rejected the draft protocol.35 The rejection of the protocol by the US set off a wave of condemnation among the States that had actively negotiated it as well as NGOs that had supported efforts to strengthen the BTWC. The US has used double standards as regards biological weapons: judging itself and its allies by more permissive criteria than it did its enemies. All American presidents who have dealt with the BTWC have accepted the notion that the world is divided into two camps: responsible states that can be trusted with weapons of mass destruction (WMD), including nuclear weapons, and irresponsible states that cannot be trusted with any sort of WMD. This was one of the most important underlying reasons for its reluctance to create a verification regime for the BTWC.36 Reviewing the Convention In accordance with Article XII of the BTWC, Review Conferences have been held at five-year intervals since 1980.37 The aim of these conferences has been to review the operation of the Convention and take into account any new scientific and technological developments relevant to the Convention. Although Article XII required only one Review Conference, which took place in March 1980, the States Parties have chosen to meet regularly of their own volition. Review Conferences have been held in 1986, 1991, 1996, 20012002, 2006, 2011 and 2016. Each Review Conference has its own achievements.38 A summary of the important outcomes of these Review Conferences follows.

The first39 and second review conferences took place in Geneva from 3 to 21 March 1980 and from 8 to 26 September 1986 respectively. The Second Conference asserted that the provisions of the BTWC cover all relevant current and future scientific and technological developments and apply to all international, national and non-State actors, thereby bringing the issue of bioterrorism within the scope of the Convention. It also permitted WHO to coordinate emergency response measures in cases of the alleged use of biological and toxin weapons. Further, it laid down the procedure for resolving doubts about compliance, known as the Formal Consultative Process, and established an annual exchange of information, known as confidence-building measures (CBMs). The CBMs were intended to reduce ambiguities, doubts and suspicions, and improve international cooperation in the field of peaceful biological activities. An Ad Hoc Meeting of Scientific and Technical Experts was held from 31 March to 15 April 1987, to establish the precise format of the CBMs. The four CBMs dealt with: (1) Exchange of data, including name, location, scope and general description of activities, on research centres and laboratories that meet very high national or international safety standards established for handling, for permitted purposes, biological materials that pose a high individual and community risk or specialize in permitted biological activities directly related to the Convention.

(2) Exchange of information on all outbreaks of infectious disease and similar occurrences caused by toxins that seem to deviate from the normal pattern as regards type, development, place, or time of occurrence. If possible, the information provided would include, as soon as it is available, data on the type of disease, approximate area affected, and number of cases.

(3) Encouragement of publication of results of biological research directly related to the Convention, in scientific journals generally available to States Parties, as well as promotion of use for permitted purposes of knowledge gained in the research.

(4) Active promotion of contacts between scientists engaged in biological research directly related to the Convention, including exchanges for joint research on a mutually agreed basis.

Prior to the Third Review Conference, a number of countries recognized the inadequacy of relying solely upon voluntary CBMs for enhancing confidence in compliance with the BTWC. Besides, certain developments contributed to widening concerns about the BTWCs weaknesses. A number of reports alleged that as many as 10 countries possessed or were in the process of acquiring biological weapons. Moreover, after the 1991 Gulf War, the UN Special Commission began to detect evidence that Iraq, then a signatory to the BTWC, had a biological weapons programme. The situation in Iraq highlighted the lack of an independent inspectorate to monitor the BTWCs prohibitions.40 The Third Review Conference held in Geneva from 9 to 27 September 1991, asserted that the BTWC covered agents relating to humans, animals and plants. It requested States to re-examine their national implementation measures; revised the format for Formal Consultative Meetings; revised the CBMs; indirectly encouraged the UN Secretary-General to conduct investigations into allegations of the use of biological and toxin weapons; and expanded upon the coordinating role of intergovernmental organisations in response to such occurrences. The Third Review Conference is remembered for the establishment of the Ad Hoc Group of Verification Experts (VEREX).41 VEREX examined and evaluated 21 measures that ranged from off-site surveillance of publications to on-site monitoring and inspections. It evaluated each proposed verification measure according to the amount of data it could or could not provide; its ability to differentiate between activities that are prohibited and permitted under the BTWC; its capability to clarify ambiguities concerning compliance; its requirements for manpower, technology, equipment, or other material; its implications for the protection of confidential business information and for the development of permitted research and scientific activities; and its financial, legal, organizational, and safety ramifications.42 In all, VEREX met four times from March 1992 to September 1993. In its final report, VEREX concluded that no single approach could adequately monitor the BTWC. Rather, it recommended a combination of meansincluding off-site and on-site measuresto make the BTWC a more effective instrument. Off-site measures include national declarations of biological weapons defence programmes, vaccines, and facilities handling specific organisms and toxins; on-site measures included short notice-inspections and information visits to declared facilities.

In September 1994, a Special Conference of BTWC State Parties was convened in Geneva to discuss the findings of VEREX. This Conference called for the formation of the Ad Hoc Group (AHG) to draft verification measures to be incorporated into a legally binding protocol to the BTWC. In the course of its negotiations, the AHG was to address the creation of measures to investigate the alleged use of biological weapons, as well as the following four issues: (i) the definition of terms and objective criteria (e.g., lists of biological warfare agents and possible threshold quantities); (ii) the possible incorporation of existing and additional enhanced CBMs into the verification regime; (iii) the development of a system of measures to promote compliance with the BTWC; and (iv) the delineation of a programme for technical cooperation in the field of biotechnology for peaceful purposes. The CBMs were extended to the following: (1) Declaration form stating: Nothing to declare or Nothing new to declare.

(2) Confidence-building measure A: Part 1: Exchange of data on research centres and laboratories; Part 2: Exchange of information on national biological defence research and development programmes.

(3) Confidence-building measure B:  Exchange of information on outbreaks of infectious diseases and similar occurrences caused by toxins.

(4) Confidence-building measure C:  Encouragement of publication of results and promotion of use of knowledge.

(5) Confidence-building measure D: (deleted at the Seventh Review Conference):  Active promotion of contacts.

(6) Confidence-building measure E:  Declaration of legislation, regulations and other measures.

(7) Confidence-building measure F:  Declaration of past activities in offensive and/or defensive biological research and development programmes.

(8) Confidence-building measure G:  Declaration of vaccine production facilities.

The Fourth Review Conference established that the BTWC effectively covered the use of biological and toxin weapons, and asserted that destruction and conversion activities related to existing weapons and associated facilities should take place prior to accession to the Convention. It also recommended a series of specific measures to enhance the implementation of Article X. The Fifth Review Conference opened in Geneva on 19 November 2001, but was suspended on its last day, after the US tabled a controversial proposal to terminate the AHDs mandate and replace it with an annual meeting of BTWC States Parties. The States Parties resumed the Fifth Review Conference in November 2002, but failed to agree on any verification measures, including the proposed Protocol. It was decided at this session that a series of annual meetings of experts and of States Parties would be held to discuss and promote common understanding and effective action on a range of topics to strengthen the Convention in the years leading up to the Sixth Review Conference in 2006. These meetings were meant to bridge gaps between divergent national positions and demonstrate that States Parties could still work together to improve the functioning of the BTWC. They were tasked with discussing, and promoting common understanding and effective action on a number of predetermined topics. In practice, these meetings turned out to be a much greater success than predicted. The value of the first inter-sessional process was summed up in Indias opening statement at the Sixth Review Conference held in Geneva from 20 November to 8 December 2006: When the first inter-sessional process started, there was some scepticism about its prospects. Contrary to these forebodings, however, States Parties gained considerably from it. Treating the BTWC regime as one of the live issues of the multilateral disarmament agenda strengthened the regime. Besides, the States Parties benefited from a most useful exchange of information and experiences on issues relevant to the effective implementation of the Convention. The knowledge creation and its dissemination, which characterised the exchanges, were enriched by the participation in the process of relevant international organisations and national public-health stakeholders.43 The Sixth Review Conference was the most substantive review of the BTWC since the Third Review Conference. Some positives of the final declaration: It closed a loophole on destruction deadlines for States that had signed but not previously ratified the BWC and strengthened the requirements for safety, security and reporting for destruction and conversion activities.

It established a need for national export control regimes as a means to mitigate direct or indirect transfers of relevant material.

It also developed a basic requirement for ensuring the safety and security of relevant material when used for permitted purposes.

It required national penal legislation and other measures to implement the BWC and called for their extraterritorial application.

It developed basic requirements for national education, outreach and awareness-raising activities for relevant stakeholder communities.

It included a commitment to develop national, regional and international capabilities for the detection and surveillance of disease and to review national legislative and regulatory frameworks to ensure they comply with Article X and to report on how this article is being implemented.

It called for an efficient coordination mechanism for relevant scientific cooperation and technology transfer in the UN system and noted the increasing importance of publicprivate partnerships in implementing the BWC.

It institutionalized the use of Arabic as an official language of future BWC meetings.

The Seventh Review Conference was held at Geneva from 5 to 22 December 2011. It took concrete action to strengthen the BTWC, including: creating a plan of action to increase the membership of the treaty; reaching an agreement for States Parties to nominate national contact points to facilitate communications relevant to the BTWC; officially endorsing the common understandings reached during the first inter-sessional process; establishing an Implementation Support Unit, addressing a long-standing need for institutional support for the efforts of States Parties, and tasking them with updating the reporting procedure for CBMs to take into account modern information technology; and initiating a detailed second intersessional work programme to help ensure effective implementation of the BTWC until the Seventh Review Conference.

It its final declaration, the Conference reaffirmed that under all circumstances, the use of biological and toxin weapons is effectively prohibited by the Convention and reiterated the determination of States Parties to condemn any use of biological agents or toxins other than for peaceful purposes, by anyone at any time.44 The Conference emphasised that States must take all necessary safety and security measures to protect human populations and the environment, including animals and plants, when carrying out destruction and/or diversion of agents, toxins, weapons, equipment or means of delivery prohibited by Article I of the Convention. Effective national export controls and other appropriate measures were called for to ensure that only authorised direct and indirect transfers relevant to the Convention took place. The Conference called upon States Parties to adopt legislative, administrative, judicial and other measures, including penal legislation, to enhance domestic implementation of the Convention, ensure the safety and security of microbial or other biological agents or toxins in laboratories and facilities, and during transportation and to prevent unauthorized access to and removal of such agents or toxins.45 The Eighth Review Conference was held in Geneva from 7 to 25 November 2016. It was preceded by a strengthened preparatory process which consisted of two meetings of the Committee, one from 26 to 27 April and the other from 8 to 12 August 2016. The Preparatory Committee considered both procedural and substantive issues ahead of the Review Conference. This was something unique to the Review Conference and aimed to maximize the chances of a successful outcome.46 Despite these high expectations, deliberations at the Review Conference were protracted and there were very few topics on which the States Parties could agree. The States Parties were unable to reach an agreement on a new, more ambitious work-plan for the next five years. The US representative stated that the American Government did not support the need to negotiate any supplementary treaty, however, would continue to further strengthen a regime that is rightly credited with making the world a safer place.47 Many States Parties and observers of the BTWC expressed disappointment at the outcome of the Conference. However, a treatys implementation should not be assessed only in terms of the success or failure of diplomatic meetings. The outcome of did not lead to a reduction in the political attention paid to the BTWC.48 Some Additional Agreements and their implications are as follows:49 Year Additional Agreement Implications 1980 Article V: Development of procedures on consultation and Cooperation.

Empowered states to call a meeting of experts to address any challenges to implementation of the Convention.

1986 Article I: Reaffirmed that the Convention unequivocally covers all microbial or other biological agents or toxins, naturally or artificially created or altered, as well as their components, whatever their origin or method of production.

Recognition and confirmation by States Parties that scientific developments fall under the scope of the BTWC and that the Convention remains comprehensive in its scope and implementation.

1986 Confidence building measures The development of formal and annual information sharing in specific areas between States Parties.

1991 Article IV: Education and awareness Urged the inclusion of information on the Convention and the 1925 Geneva Protocol in medical, scientific and military educational materials, thus contributing to education of scientists and professionals.

1996 Article I: On use of biological weapons Reaffirmed that the use by States Parties, in any way and under any circumstances, of microbial or other biological agents or toxins, that is not consistent with prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes, is effectively a violation of Article I.

2006 Article VI: Investigation of alleged use of biological and/or toxin weapons.

Called upon the UN Security Council to consider immediately any allegations of alleged use and initiate any measures it considered necessary for the investigation of the complaint; this included the Secretary-Generals investigation mechanism, which is external to the BTWC.

2006 Article X: Information sharing on implementation of the Article.

Encouraged states parties to provide appropriate information on how Article X was implemented, and requested the United Nations to collate such information.

2011 Article VII. Assistance in the event of use of biological weapons.

Noted that the States Parties were willing to provide or support assistance when a State Party has been exposed to danger or damage as a result of the use of bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins as weapons by anyone other than a State Party, i.e. a non-State Party, terrorist group etc.

The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) suggested certain measures during the Eighth Review Conference. It proposed: (i) The States Parties should develop effective means to monitor and assess compliance with the BTWC and the Review Conference should establish a working group to take this issue forward from 2017. (ii) The States Parties must remain prepared to respond and assist each other in the event that biological weapons are used; shared efforts to increase preparedness should focus on enhancing capabilities to assist victims of any such attack. (iii) The States Parties should establish an effective mechanism for assessing the implications of developments in science and technology for the BTWC; they must remain up to date with fast-moving scientific and technological developments and their potential risks in order to prevent the development and use of biological weapons while ensuring that biological research for peaceful and beneficial purposes remains unhindered. (iv) The States Parties must continue their efforts to promote universal ratification or accession to the BTWC. There is no reason why any State should not be party to the treaty. Further, the States still holding reservations to the Geneva Protocol must withdraw them. (v) The States Parties must make serious efforts towards effective implementation of the BTWC. They must ensure that their domestic laws reflect international obligations, and that appropriate biosafety, biosecurity, export-control and enforcement measures are in place.50 The ICRC has also drafted a model BTWC law for the States with a common law legal tradition.51 In 2018, key biological disarmament and nonproliferation activities were carried out in connection with the first set of inter-sessional Meetings of Experts and the Meeting of States Parties to the BTWC. In an unanticipated development, the Meeting of States Parties was unable to reach a consensus on the deliberations of the Meetings of Experts, including on any possible outcomes.52 The BTWC Meeting of States Parties (MSP) and the First Committee of the United Nations General Assembly was held in 2019. It considered the reports of each inter-sessional Meetings of Experts (MXs), but as in 2018, the MSP report noted that no consensus was reached on the deliberations including any possible outcomes of the Meetings of Experts. However, the chair proposed and initiated a new process to circumvent the reporting impasse and feed substantive MX work into the MSP and the 2021 Review Conference. The process encouraged States Parties to establish continuity between the work of the three inter-sessional years, to synthesize the work and identify areas of convergence, and to avoid a confrontational approach. One of the developing trends in the field is the rise of civil society as a major contributor to shaping global dialogues around biological threats and appropriate responses to them. This could have significant implications for the direction of the biological disarmament and non-proliferation field in the years to come.53 Another challenge which the BTWC is facing is a financial crunch. Just prior to the Eighth Review Conference, for the first time in the treatys history, the BTWC Implementation Support Unit (ISU) distributed a document prepared by the Financial Resources Management Service (FRMS) of the UN Office at Geneva detailing the status of States parties financial contributions to the convention. This document demonstrated that 62% of the States Parties owed a combined total of US $596,519 to the treaty over the period 2001-2016 in unpaid assessed contributions.54 While the implementation of the financial rules is causing havoc across a number of disarmament treaties these rules possess a greater significance for the BTWC ISU than other similar treaty support agencies. With the next review conference scheduled for 2021, it is of utmost importance that States Parties make sure that there are sufficient funds to allow the meeting to be held.

Customary IHL Customary IHL too prohibits the use of biological and chemical weapons. Meron (1989) has acknowledged the customary character of the 1925 Geneva Protocol: The ban on the use of chemical weapons, as codified in the 1925 Protocol, is considered to constitute customary international law, applicable to all States regardless of whether they are parties to the protocol.55 The ICRC Study on Customary IHL, reaffirms the customary character of the prohibition of the use of biological and chemical weapons. According to Rules 73 and 74 of Customary IHL, which is binding on all States and on all Parties to an armed conflict, the use of biological and chemical weapons is prohibited. In addition, Rules 75 and 76 prohibit the use of riot-control agents and herbicides as a method of warfare.56 The Rome Statute The Rome Statute, which established the International Criminal Court (ICC),57 a tribunal with the power to prosecute individuals for crimes against humanity, genocide, and war crimes, did not contain the words biological weapon or chemical weapons. Two provisions found in Article 8 of the Statutewhich defines war crimesmay refer to chemical and biological weapons (CBW) implicitly, but it is unclear whether biological weapons are included at all. Subparagraph (2)(b)(xvii) bans the use of poison or poisoned weapons, a prohibition first codified in 1899.58 Article 8, subparagraph (2)(b)(xviii), derived from the 1925 Geneva Protocol, makes the use of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases a war crime, but not bacteriological weapons.

The Rome Statute was intended to encompass the most serious crimes of concern to the international community and international law shows that biological and chemical weapons fall within this category. The issue of the inclusion of chemical and biological weapons was taken up prior to the Rome Statutes First Review Conference in 2010.59 During a pre-conference meeting of the parties to the Statute, Belgium proposed an amendment to add chemical and biological weapons to the list of prohibited weapons. Although there was considerable support for the initiative, the amendment was not submitted to the Review Conference as time was limited and a number of issues had to be considered. Only the least controversial amendments were forwarded to the meeting.

Subsequent attempts were successful in making desired amendments to the Rome Statute which now explicitly prohibits the use of chemical weapons60 in both international and non-international armed conflicts. In 2017, the States Parties to the Rome Statute agreed to rectify a gap in its coverage by amending the Statute. This amendment has made the use of biological and toxin weapons, whether in international or non-international armed conflict, a war crime.61 As on 30 September 2020, six states parties (Czech Republic, Latvia, Luxembourg, Netherlanders, Slovakia and Switzerland) have ratified/accepted this amendment to the Statute.

Employing weapons, which use microbial or other biological agents, or toxins, whatever their origin or method of production, is the new war crimes inserted into the Rome Statute. However, under the amendment procedure to the Rome Statute (Art. 121(5)) this new crimes would not apply to nationals of, or conduct on the territory of, non-ratifying States Parties.62 Use of 1972 BTWC to Prevent Bioterrorism The BTWC was not an anti-terrorism treaty. When the draft for banning biological weapons was being conceived, terrorism was not an issue. Though a few key features of the BTWC could be considered useful in preventing bioterrorism, certain features of the treaty negatively affect its ability to prevent bioterrorism. If one examines the text of the treaty; it becomes difficult to ascertain exactly what is prohibited; because developing, producing, stockpiling, or otherwise acquiring or retaining biological agents is prohibited only in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes. In addition, the definition of biological agents is broad and the treaty does not include a list of specifically prohibited agents or quantities. Also, the BTWC does not prohibit the use of biological weapons.63 The UN Security Council resolution 1540 of 2004 is the binding international agreement which directly addresses the prevention of bioterrorism.64 The UN Security Council Resolution 1540 The Security Council adopted Resolution 1540 on 28 April 2004 to combat non-State actors involvement in the proliferation of WMDs. The Resolution was adopted under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, which deals with threats to international peace and security. There are 12 operational paragraphs in the resolution which collectively require States to enact more than 200 specific measures. The Resolution affirms: Its support for the multilateral treaties whose aim is to eliminate or prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and the importance for all States Parties to these treaties to implement them fully in order to promote international stability; and That prevention of proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons should not hamper international cooperation in materials, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes while goals of peaceful utilization should not be used as a cover for proliferation.

In brief, the Resolution creates binding obligations on all States to implement and enforce measures intended to combat the proliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, as well as their means of delivery to non-State actors. Specifically, it requires that States implement domestic legislative and regulatory measures that prohibit non-State actors from developing or acquiring WMDs, and punish any non-State actors that seek to do so. The measures implemented must also apply to delivery systems and materials related to the design, development, production, use, transport, or transfer of such weapons. The Resolution stipulates various domestic controls that must be enacted related to: (i) physical security measures for weapons, delivery systems, and related materials; (ii) export and transshipment controls; (iii) border and law enforcement efforts to counter illicit trading of WMDs materials; and (iv) prohibitions of proliferation financing, unauthorized transport, and any other services that would assist would-be non-State proliferators.

Resolution 1540 seeks to counter the global threat of non-State actor involvement in WMD proliferation through the implementation of national laws and related measures. Full implementation is a long-term task and there is no one-size-fits-all approach.65 However, considerable progress has been made since the Resolution adopted in 2004.

Under the 1972 BTWC, any disease-causing micro-organism (such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, or rickettsia) or toxin can potentially be used as a biological or toxin weapon. This must be kept in mind when drafting, implementing and enforcing national measures to meet the obligations of the BTWC and Resolution 1540. The BTWC and Resolution 1540 are complementary: a States effective implementation of the BTWC goes a long way toward ensuring that the obligations mandated by Resolution 1540 are met. This is true whether the implementing State is party to the BTWC or not and, indeed, there is nothing preventing a non-State Party from implementing the BTWC and adhering to the Convention.66 The BTWC States Parties are now under obligation to submit a form related to CBMs each year, which were revised at the Seventh Review Conference in 2011. Form E, obliges States Parties to report on legislation, regulations and other measures in the following areas: (i) the development, production stockpiling, acquisition or retention of microbial or other biological agents, or toxins, weapons, equipment and means of delivery specified in Article I of the BTWC; (ii) exports of micro-organisms and toxins; (iii) imports of micro-organisms and toxins; and (iv) biosafety and biosecurity.

The 1540 Committee website lists 185 states67 that have submitted national implementation reports providing insight into both their activities as well as ongoing deficiencies in combating proliferation by non-State actors. The information provided by States in these reports is analyzed by the Committees Group of Experts.68 The Committee also uses information available in public domain to develop a legislative database of measures taken by Member States. It has identified the areas where deficiencies have most commonly been encountered. These are biological weapons controls; restricting non-State actor access to WMD means of delivery and WMD precursor materials; State enforcement of national control lists; and the financing of proliferation activities. Resolution 1540 is unique in the sense that it seeks to directly protect the civil society from the threat of WMD terrorism, rather than the State from the threat of proliferation.

The UN Security Council Resolution 2325 Resolution 2325 adopted by the Security Council on 15 December 2016 reaffirmed that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well as their means of delivery constitutes a threat to international peace and security. It clarified that none of the obligations in Resolution 1540 shall be interpreted so as to conflict with or alter the rights and obligations of State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the BTWC. Further, the prevention of proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons should not hamper international cooperation in materials, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes.

The Australia Group A number of States have adopted an informal, collaborative approach to the potential transfer of biological weapons.69 This initiative, known as the Australia Group (AG), meets annually to discuss ways of increasing the effectiveness of participating countries national export licensing. The AG has developed lists of hazardous micro-organisms, toxins and equipment that could be used in a biological warfare programme, so that export controls can be targeted at known or suspected states proliferating them. The AGs Export Control Core List includes 20 viruses, 13 bacteria, four rickettsiae, 10 toxins and genetically modified micro-organisms derived from agents on the core list. In addition, a Control List of Dual-Use Biological Equipment covers a variety of items whose technical parameters make them particularly well suited for production or testing of germ weapons. The list includes stainless steel fermentation tanks, centrifugal separators, filtration equipment, freeze-drying equipment, bio-containment systems and aerosol inhalation chambers.

COVID-19 Pandemic and International Law After World War II, the emergence of an international consensus on multilateral institutions led to the creation of a series of international organizations. In 1946, the WHO was created as a specialized agency for all matters of international health. WHO has a direct mandate in the field of pandemics. Article 2 of the Constitution of WHO frames its overall function as the directing and coordinating authority on international health work. WHO enjoys extensive powers and has competence to issue regulations under Articles 21 and 22 that are binding for all the Member States without national ratification procedures.70 Information-sharing by Member States with the WHO Secretariat is the cornerstone of international disease surveillance and response. Article 6 of the International Health Regulations (IHR) obliges States to notify WHO within 24 hours of all events that might constitute a public health emergency of international concern.

After the spread of the COVID-19 virus, an allegation was made that China had failed in its duty under international law to inform WHO immediately and this later triggered a pandemic. Many governments have declared states of emergency, thereby assuming exceptional powers.71 In terms of its economic consequences, it is worse than the 2008 financial crisis. The US President Donald Trump accused the Chinese Government of a cover-up in the initial stages of the pandemic, which prevented the international community from raising the alert sooner.72 This followed several journalistic reports of initial delays by Chinese officials and their attempts to play down the severity of the outbreak.73 International law on such an issue is not streamlined since the various legal regimes follow different approaches. However, the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) are directly relevant in a pandemic scenario.

According to the International Commission of Jurists, under the ICCPR, the ICESCR and other sources of international human rights law, during a public health emergency such as the COVID-19 pandemic, States have an obligation to protect the right to life and right to health of their populations. At the same time, as in any other emergency, the States other human rights and rule of law obligations remain applicable to all institutions and organs of the State.74 The judiciary also plays an important role in the time of emergency in securing the rule of law by ensuring that the actions of the other branches of government respect the law.

In view of the exceptional situation and to preserve life, countries have no choice but to adopt extraordinary measures. This has resulted in extensive lockdowns to slow down the transmission of the virus, restricted freedom of movement and, in the process, freedom to enjoy many other human rights. During the current pandemic (public health restrictions under sub-clause (3) of Article 12) the rights relating to freedom of movement (Article 12), freedom to manifest ones religion or beliefs (Article 18), freedom of expression (Article 19), right of peaceful assembly (Article 21), freedom of association (Article 22), or the right not to be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence under Article 17(1) can be restricted without resorting to public emergency under Article 4. Such measures can inadvertently affect peoples livelihoods and security, their access to health care (not only for COVID-19), to food, water and sanitation, work, education, as well as to leisure. States have a responsibility to ensure that everyone is protected from the virus and its impact. This may require special measures and protection for particular groups who are at most risk or disproportionately impacted.75 Conclusion The BTWC was the first international treaty to effectively prohibit an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. In its Preamble, the BTWC clearly affirms the norm against the use of biology as a weapon by stating that such use would be repugnant to the conscience of mankind.

Under the BTWC, compliance obligations of the State Parties are both negative and positive. Beyond Article I obligations not to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain biological weapons, additional negative obligations included under the Article III commitment are not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever directly or indirectly  agents, toxins, weapons, equipment or means of delivery, as well as the Article X undertaking to implement the Convention in a manner that avoid hampering the economic or technological development of States Parties  or international cooperation in the field of peaceful biological activities. Under Articles IV, VII and X, the State Parties have positive obligations to undertake any necessary measures to prohibit and prevent the development of biological weapons within their territory; to assist others that have been exposed to a danger as a result of a violation of the Convention and, to take every possible action in a way that encourages the peaceful uses of biological science and technology.76 The negative and positive obligations require different approaches especially when responding to non-compliance with the BTWC. Non-compliance with the first aspect requires some kind of investigation, and if proved, sanction or punishment. Non-compliance with the positive obligation, in contrast, would necessitate incentives, assistance and greater cooperation. The effective implementation of the BTWC requires that a robust norm of biosecurity is followed at national, regional and international levels to improve laboratory biosafety and security of pathogens and toxins. There is also a need to promote education on the BTWC and the dual-use nature of biotechnology.

* * * 1 The Code of Manu (Manu Smriti ), which formed the basis for the laws, morals and customs of India and developed between BC 200 and 200 AD, also referred to the protection of war victims. Smriti means that which has to be remembered. Unlike the Vedas, which are considered of divine origin, the Smritis are of human compositions and guide individuals in their daily conduct according to time and place. They list the codes and rules governing the actions of the individual, the community, society and the nation. The laws set forth by Manu, in Manu Smriti, although followed in some form even today, are not considered divine, and may be modified by society to keep up with the times. Indeed, it has been speculated that in its current form, Manu Smriti represents laws that have been added or modified throughout history.

2 The full title reads: Project of an International Declaration Concerning the Laws and Customs of War. The Project of the Declaration was adopted on July 27, 1874, at the international conference held in Brussels convened on the initiative of the Russian Emperor Alexander II. Participating in the conference were 15 European states which discussed the project submitted by the Russian Government, which was adopted with slight amendments; D. Schindlerand J. Toman, The Law of Armed Conflicts A Collection of Conventions, Resolutions and Other Documents, (Geneva, 1973), pp. 3-23.

3 Article 23, Convention (IV) respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land and Its Annex: Regulations Concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land. The Hague, October 18, 1907.

4 The modern international humanitarian law (IHL) has been divided into two branches: one for the protection of persons at the mercy of or in the hands of their enemy, and the other intended to put certain humanitarian limits on the conduct of hostilities, especially regarding the use of certain methods and means of combat. The first branch is generally called Geneva law, because its development had its beginnings in the conventions adopted in Geneva, the very first in 1864; the second is known as Hague law, because of its rapid development after the diplomatic conferences that took place there in 1899 and 1907. The two branches are complementary and today are brought together in positive law in the form of the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions, adopted in 1977.

5 On 11 December 1868, the representatives of seventeen European States adopted Declaration Renouncing the Use, in Time of War, of Certain Explosive Projectiles.

6 Neinast William H., United States Use of Biological Warfare, Military Law Review, Vol. 24, April 1964, p. 24-25.

7 The Hague Convention Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land dated 18 October 1907. The annex article 23 provided:  In addition to the prohibitions provided by special Conventions, it is especially forbidden to employ poison or poisoned weapons.

8 In 1920s, biological weapons were not viewed as militarily credible, though French and German researchers were actively pursuing their production. The US Chemical Warfare Service asserted that bioweapons would have little effect on the actual issue of a contest in view of the protective methods which are available for circumscribing its effects. Kellman Barry, 2007, Bioviolence: Preventing Biological Terror and Crime, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 56.

9 A Polish proposal to the Conference was the first to separate biological weapons (BW) from CW. It stated that, inasmuch as the materials used for bacteriological warfare constitute an arm that is discreditable to modern civilization, the Polish delegation proposes that any decisions taken by the Conference concerning the materials used for chemical warfare should apply equally to the materials used for bacteriological warfare. Prohibiting trade in poisonous chemicals and bacteriological materials, without first rejecting their manufacture or use however, proved contentious. Banning the export of these weapons materials would not halt their manufacture in states already capable of doing so, or their use in conflicts involving those states. Quoted in: The Problem of Chemical and Biological Warfare, Volume IV: CB Disarmament Negotiation, 1920-1979, Stockholm: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), p. 60.

10 The Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, Geneva, 17 June 1925. The Protocol was adopted by the International Conference on the Control of the International Trade in Arms, Munitions, and Implements of War, which had been convened by the Council of the League of Nations and met in Geneva from 4 May to 17 June 1925. The Geneva Protocol was adopted at the insistence of the US. However, it came into force, without the USs ratification.

11 N. Sims, 1988, The Diplomacy of Biological Disarmament: Vicissitudes of a Treaty in Force, 1975-1985, New York: St. Martins Press, p. 60.

12 The 1925 Protocol has five weaknesses: (i) Over 37 signatories made reservations to the Protocol thereby weakening it; (ii) Several nations claimed that so-called non-toxic gases, such as tear gases, as well as herbicides, are not covered by the Protocol; (iii) Only the use of chemical weapons was prohibited, but nations are free to manufacture and store unlimited quantities of chemical warfare agents and arms; (iv) Some believed that only bacteriological agents are prohibited, thus viruses and fungi are not covered under the Protocol; and (v) There were no provisions for verification or for compliant procedures, nor for sanctions in case a nation breeches the Protocol. Zilinskas Raymond A., Verification of the Biological Weapons Convention, in Geissler Erhard (ed.), 1986, Biological and Toxin Weapons Today, SIPRI and Oxford University Press, p. 84.

13 Although the treaty allows States to have reservations on retaliation which renders the Protocol a no-first-use agreement, it has now become accepted as customary international law binding on all countries. M. R. Dando, 2000, Preventing Biological Warfare: The Failure of American Leadership, Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 3-4.

14 Adam Roberts, 2000, Documents on the Laws of War, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 155.

15 A number of states, including France, the Soviet Union, and the UK, also made reservations declaring that the obligations under the 1925 Protocol would cease to be binding on them if enemy states failed to respect its prohibitions, effectively making it a prohibition on the first use of chemical and biological weapons.

16 Perhaps, the fear of biological weapons and the misperception of threats inspired several states to take this step. Both, the UK and the USA were of the view that the best defensive arsenal should include offensive biological weapons. In 1942, Britain conducted tests that for the first time proved the effectiveness of bombs with biological warfare agents. Since World War II, the US continued research in the testing the lethality, survivability, and dispersal characteristics of biological agents. Chemical-biological warfare research resulted in the death of three Americans in the decade before 1960. This research was costing from 35-40 million dollars a year, or about one-tenth of one percent of the then current defence budget. At the close of World War II, the US captured Japans scientists responsible for biological weapons experiments on human. It increased Soviet suspicions of the US intentions regarding new biological weapon capabilities and set the stage for the biological weapon arms race. The Armys and the Navys manuals on the Law of Land Warfare and Law on Naval Warfare issue in 1956/1969 respectively stated that the United States is not bound by a conventional prohibition against biological warfare. Neinast William H, United States Use of Biological Warfare, Military Law Review, April 1964, pp. 1-46.

17 Weapons of Terror: Freeing the World of Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Arms . The Weapons of Mass Destruction Commission (WMDC), final report, Stockholm, Sweden, June 1, 2006, pp. 113-14. Prior to the conclusion of the BTWC and the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention, thirty-five states reserved the right to retaliate with the prohibited weapons if another state used the weapons first against them. Nevertheless, the vast majority of States Parties did not have reservations to the Protocol. The Netherlands in 1930 and the United States in 1975 made a distinction between CW and BW and limited their retaliation reservation to CW only. Both states bound themselves not to use BW under any circumstances, even if BW were to be used against them. Marie Isabelle Chevrier, History of BTW Disarmament, in Kathryn McLaughlin and Kathryn Nixdorff (eds.), 2000, Biological Weapons Reader, The BioWeapons Prevention Project (BWPP), Geneva, p. 14.

18 Resolution 2603 (XXIV)A, Question of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons, A/RES/2603 (XXIV), dated 16 December 1969.

19 The UK support for a prompt ban on the use and possession of biological weapons contained four arguments: (i) biological weapons are regarded with general abhorrence, possibly more so than any other means of waging war; (ii) it seems unlikely that development or use of biological weapons is, at the moment, regarded by any state as essential to its security; (iii) new technological developments could lead to biological weapons becoming an integral part of some states armaments; and (iv) it would be easier to achieve a ban before such armament took place than after. Marie Isabelle Chevrier, History of BTW Disarmament, in Kathryn McLaughlin and Kathryn Nixdorff (eds.), 2009, Biological Weapons Reader, The BioWeapons Prevention Project (BWPP), Geneva, p. 16.

20 Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee (ENDC)/231: Working Paper on Microbiological Warfare.

21 On 25 November 1969, under President Nixon, the US announced that it would unilaterally and unconditionally renounce all biological weapons. Following executive order, the US programme was summarily terminated, and the Department of Defence was instructed to destroy all remaining stockpiles of weapons based on biological agents. This order was extended the following year to cover toxin weapons, including biologically produced toxins. The existing American stockpiles of biological weapons were destroyed between May 1971 and May 1972. Block Stevn M., The Growing Threat of Biological Weapons, American Scientist, Vol. 89, January-February 2001, pp. 28-37.

22 Tucker Jonathan B., A Farewell to Germs: The US Renunciation of Biological and Toxin Weapons, International Security, Vol. 27(1), 2002, pp. 107-148.

23 Beard Jack M., The Shortcomings of Indeterminacy in Arms Control Regimes: The Case of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC), American Journal of International Law, Vol. 101, 2007, p. 271-321.

24 The Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction (BTWC) was signed in Washington, London and Moscow on 10 April 1972.

25 In September 1969 the Soviet Union responded to the UK Draft Convention by tabling its own Draft Convention prohibiting the development and production of both BW and CW. In contrast to the UK Draft Convention, the Soviet Draft combined CW and BW, excluded the explicit prohibition against use, and tabled the Convention at the UN General Assembly instead of at the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD). The US government meanwhile reviewed its CBW policies, and in November 1969 announced its decision to unilaterally terminate its offensive BW programme, to destroy its BW stocks, to place a moratorium on CW production and to submit the 1925 Geneva Protocol to the US Senate for ratification. The US also declared its intention to support the UK Draft BW Convention. In February 1970, the US extended its BW policy to toxins as well. Marie Isabelle Chevrier,History of BTW Disarmament, in Kathryn McLaughlin and Kathryn Nixdorff (eds.), 2009, Biological Weapons Reader, The BioWeapons Prevention Project (BWPP), Geneva, p. 17.

26 The 1972 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons (BTWC), the first multilateral disarmament treaty banning the production and use of an entire category of weapons, entered into force on 26 March 1975. Over the intervening years, increasing numbers of States joined the Convention, which currently has 164 States Parties.

27 Jozef Goldblat, The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC): An Overview, No. 318, International Review of the Red Cross, 30 June 1997, pp. 251-65.

28 Merriam Lt Col Eric, The International Legal Regime Affecting Bioterrorism Prevention, National Security Law Journal, Vol. 3, issue 1, 2014, pp. 1-46.

29 The BTWC allows participating states to raise compliance complaints with the UN Security Council and requires an accused state to cooperate with any investigation to ascertain the validity of a complaint. The Security Council would initiate any noncompliance investigation (Article VI). The drawback of this approach is that any permanent member of the Security Council can veto the launch of an investigation.

30 Under BTWC, allegations of infractions may be lodged with the UN Security Council, which may initiate inspections of accused parties; however, this provision is undermined by the veto right of the permanent members of the Security Council.

31 The UN General Assembly document A/44/561 of 4 October 1989, contains recommendations by the group of qualified experts convened pursuant to General Assembly Resolution A/RES/42/37C for guidelines and procedures for timely and efficient investigations of reports on the possible use of chemical and bacteriological (biological) or toxin weapons. The General Assembly Resolution A/RES/45/57C of 4 December 1990, endorses the proposal for guidelines and procedures for investigations of reports on the possible use of chemical and bacteriological (biological) or toxin weapons contained in document A/44/561. Available at: http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/45/a45r057.htm.

32 The Resolution provides that any State Party can lodge a complaint with the Security Council for a breach in Convention obligations on the possible use of chemical and bacteriological (biological) or toxin weapons. Such a complaint should include all possible evidence confirming its validity and a request for its consideration by the Security Council. The Security Council is to immediately consider the complaint lodged under Article VII, and it may request the UN Secretary-General for investigation. The States Parties are to cooperate with investigations undertaken by the Security Council or by the Secretary-General. The Security Council is to inform States Parties about the outcome of investigation undertaken. However, this procedure is not to prejudice the prerogative of States Parties to consider jointly cases of alleged non-compliance and to make appropriate decisions accordingly. BTWC/MSP/2004/MX/INF.3, 1 July 2004, annexure I.

33 The main problem is that most biological agents that have the potential to be used as weapons also exist in nature. Thus it may be difficult in the early stages of an outbreak to determine whether a disease has been deliberately induced or has occurred naturally. While the immediate priority following the outbreak of disease will be to respond quickly to mitigate its effects, both governments and the public need to know whether this is a natural occurrence or a man-made one for which the perpetrators must be found. Scientific advancements in biotechnology and the wide spread of facilities capable of producing biological agents make it exceedingly difficult to pinpoint potential biological threats. Weapons of Terror: Freeing the World of Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Arms. The Weapons of Mass Destruction Commission (WMDC), final report, Stockholm, Sweden, June 1, 2006, pp. 112-13.

34 Jonathan Tucker, Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) (BTWC) Compliance Protocol, 1 August 2001, available at: https://www.nti.org/analysis/articles/biological-weapons-convention-BTWC/.

35 For more details see: Daniel H. Joyner, 2009, International Law and the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Oxford: OUP, pp. 402.

36 SchmelzerCaramay, The United States and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) Protocol, Unpublished MA Thesis, 2013, p. 103.

37 Article XII of the BTWC provides: Five years after the entry into force of this Convention, or earlier if it is requested by a majority of Parties to the Convention by submitting a proposal to this effect to the Depositary Governments, a conference of States Parties to the Convention shall be held at Geneva, Switzerland, to review the operation of the Convention, with a view to assuring that the purposes of the preamble and the provisions of the Convention, including the provisions concerning negotiations on chemical weapons, are being realized. Such review shall take into account any new scientific and technological developments relevant to the Convention.

38 Pearson Graham S., Time for structural changes to make the biological and toxin weapons convention more effective, Global Security: Health, Science and Policy, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2016, pp. 23-38.

39 The First Review Conference in 1980 was overshadowed by the reports of an anthrax release at Sverdlovsk in April 1979 which had resulted in a number of deaths. However, the final declaration noted with satisfaction that 81 States ratified the Convention, 6 States acceded and a further 37 States signed but have not yet ratified the Convention. Pearson Graham S., Time for structural changes to make the biological and toxin weapons convention more effective, Global Security: Health, Science and Policy, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2016, p. 24.

40 The British government stated in 1992 that about 10 countries are assessed as having biological weapons programmes. Her Majestys Stationery Office, Statement of the Defence Estimates 1992, London, July 1992, p. 7.

41 The Final Report of VEREX concluded that there were some potential verification measures which might contribute to strengthening the effectiveness and improve the implementation of the Convention. At a Special Conference in September 1994, States Parties, on the basis of the VEREX findings, agreed to establish the Ad Hoc Group of the States Parties to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) in order to negotiate and develop a legally-binding verification regime for the Convention. Piers D. Milltee,The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC): Content, Review Process and Efforts to Strengthen the Convention, in Kathryn McLaughlin and Kathryn Nixdorff (eds.), 2009, Biological Weapons Reader, The BioWeapons Prevention Project (BWPP), Geneva, p. 23. See also Jez Littlewood, 2005, The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC): A Failed Revolution, UK: Ashgate, pp. 47-62.

42 United Nations, Special Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction: Final Report, Document BTWC/SPCONF/1, 19-39 September 1994, pp. 14-15.

43 J. Prasad, Indian Statement to the Sixth Review Conference of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, Statement, 20 November 2006.

44 Arms Control Association, The Biological Weapons Convention at a Glance, available at: https://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/BTWC, accessed 14 August 2020.

45 Seventh Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, Geneva, 5-22 December 2011, BTWC/CONF. VII/7, 13 January 2012. The Conference decided that the Eighth Review Conference shall be held in Geneva not later than 2016 and should review the operation of the Convention.

46 The participation in the Eighth Review Conference was the highest ever for a BTWC meeting, with representatives from 124 States Parties, four Signatory States and two states not party to the Convention. The number of working papers submitted by delegations was much higher than at previous Review Conferences  44 in 2016 compared with 29 in 2011 and 39 in 2006. This was in addition to the 39 working papers submitted to the Preparatory Committee earlier in 2016 and reflected the high level of interest in the BTWC and the high level of preparatory work undertaken by States Parties for the Review Conference. In addition, four regional workshops, supported by the European Union, Canada, Norway and the International Law and Policy Institute, were hosted by the African Union, Brazil, India and Kazakhstan; and Canada, China and the ISU organized an international workshop in China, in which the OIE participated. Informal meetings were also held in the United Kingdom and in Geneva itself. Feakes D., The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC), Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz., Vol. 36 (2), 2017, pp. 621-628.

47 Statement by John Kirby, Spokesperson, US Department of State, Washington DC, 30 November 2016.

48 Feakes D., The Biological Weapons Convention, Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz., Vol. 36 (2), 2017, pp. 621-628.

49 Adopted from: Littlewood Jez, The BTWC: structure and development. in Whitby Simon, Tatyana Novossiolova, Gerald Walther and Malcom Dando (ed.), 2015, Preventing Biological Threats: What You Can Do, UK: Bradford Disarmament Research Centre, pp. 446.

50 Eighth Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction, Statement by Christine Beerli, vice-president of the ICRC. Available at: https://www.icrc.org/en/document/biological-weapons-reviewconference-statement-icrc.

51 Christopher B. Harland and Angela Woodward, A Model Law : The Biological and Toxin Weapons Crimes Act: An Act to implement obligations under the 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and the 1925 Geneva Protocol, International Review of the Red Cross, Volume 87, Number 859, September 2005, pp. 573-586.

52 SIPRI Yearbook 2019 (Summary): Armaments, Disarmament and International Security, p. 14.

53 SIPRI Yearbook 2020 (Summary): Armaments, Disarmament and International Security, p. 18.

54 Millett Kathryn, Financial Woes Spell Trouble for the Biological Weapons Convention, Health Security, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2017, pp. 320-322.

55 Theodor Meron, 1989, Human Rights and Humanitarian Norms as Customary Law, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 68-69.

56 Jean-Marie Henckaerts, and Louise Doswald-Beck, 2005, Customary International Humanitarian Law, Vol. I, ICRC and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

57 The Nuremberg trials, held for the purpose of bringing Nazi war criminals to justice, the trials were declared a number of important principles of procedural and substantive law. The trials rested on two fundamental principles. First, individuals can and should be held accountable for the most serious international crimes. Second, individuals should only be punished through a fair trial which safeguards the rights of the accused. The International Criminal Court (ICC) was established through a treaty negotiated in 1998, is based on the two core principles of Nuremberg: the need for accountability for serious crimes and the importance of fair trials. The ICC has jurisdiction over individuals accountable for the most serious international crimes.

58 International Conferences (The Hague), Hague Convention (II) with Respect to the Laws and Customs of War on Land and its annex: Regulations Concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land . Article 23(a). The Hague, 29 July 1899.

59 Kara Allen, Scott Spence and Rocio Escauriaza Leal, Chemical and biological weapons use in the Rome Statute: a case for change, VERTIC Brief, 14 February 2011, pp. 12.

60 In 2010, the Rome Statute was amended to include the use of poison, poisoned weapons, and poisonous gases in non-international armed conflict as a war crime.

61 On 14 December 2017, at its 12th plenary meeting, the Assembly of State Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court adopted by Resolution ICC-ASP/16/Res.4, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 121 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, an amendment to article 8 of the statute. Amendment to be inserted as article 8-2-(b)(xxvii) and article 8-2- (e)(xvi) of the Rome Statute: Employing weapons, which use microbial or other biological agents, or toxins, whatever their origin or method of production.

62 Akande Dapo, Customary International Law and the Addition of New War Crimes to the Statute of the ICC, EJIL : Talk, 2 January 2018, available at: https://www.ejiltalk.org/customary-international-law-and-the-addition-of-new-war-crimes-to-the-statute-ofthe-icc/.

63 Merriam Lt Col Eric, The International Legal Regime Affecting Bioterrorism Prevention, National Security Law Journal, Vol. 3, issue 1, 2014, pp. 1-46.

64 According to Merriam, the Security Council Resolution 1540 is an important development in the context of bioterrorism. The Resolution is the binding international agreement which directly addresses bioterrorism prevention by focusing on non-State actors and has established a quasi-compliance body with some very limited verification and enforcement role.

65 UNSCR 1540 Ten Years On: Challenges and Opportunities, Chatham House, The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 5 November 2014, pp. 11.

66 In particular, Article III requires all States Parties to the BTWC to refrain from transferring biological weapons to anyone and from assisting, encouraging or inducing anyone to manufacture or acquire them. Article IV of the BTWC obliges States Parties, in accordance with their constitutional processes, to take any necessary measures to prohibit and prevent the development, production, stockpiling, acquisition or retention of biological weapons in its territory and anywhere under its jurisdiction or control. States must also now adopt measures for the safety and security of biological agents and toxins  also known as biosafety and biosecurity measures  to fulfill their obligations to give effect to the BTWC.

67 Available at: https://www.un.org/en/sc/1540/national-implementation/national-reports.shtml, accessed 30 June 2020.

68 Resolution 1540 has established a Committee of the Security Council to oversee its implementation and to provide periodic reports to the full Council. The 1540 Committee is composed of all sitting Member States of the Security Council. States are required by the Resolution to submit national reports on implementation to the 1540 Committee. The initial mandate of Resolution 1540 (2004) was two years, however, it has subsequently been extended four times, through Resolutions 1673, 1810, and further for ten years by Resolution 1977. The current mandate of the Committee expires in 2021. Finlay Brian, Meeting the Objectives of UN Security Council Resolution 1540: The Role of Civil Society, Stimson, December 2012, pp. 39.

69 The Australia Group (AG) is an informal group of 30 states whose mission is to impede the proliferation of biological and chemical weapons by adopting common export controls on relevant materials and production equipment and by sharing information on proliferation programs. The group was formed in 1984 in response to chemical weapons use during the Iran-Iraq War; it has no charter or constitution and operates by consensus. Current members are Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovak Republic, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United States and the European Commission (as an observer).

70 The main instruments adopted by the WHO under Article 21 are the International Sanitary Regulations, the International Health Regulations (IHR), and the Nomenclature Regulations, as adopted by the 20th World Health Assembly in 1967. The WHO has over 150 country offices and employs more than 7000 persons.

71 Bogdandy Armin von and Pedro A., Villarreal International Law on Pandemic Response: A First Stocktaking in Light of The Coronavirus Crisis, Max Planck Institute Research Paper Series No. 2020-07, pp. 25.

72 Michael Crowley, Edward Wong and Lara Jakes, Coronavirus Drives the U.S. and China Deeper Into Global Power Struggle, The New York Times, 22 March 2020.

73 Chris Buckley and Steven Lee Meyers, As New Coronavirus Spread, Chinas Old Habits Delayed Fight, The New York Times, 7 February 2020.

74 The Courts and COVID-19, International Commission of Jurists, 5 May 2020.

75 COVID-19 and Human Rights, United Nations Publication, April 2020, pp. 22.

76 Revill James, Compliance Revisited: An Incremental Approach to Compliance in the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, CNS Occasional Paper No. 31, James Martin Centre for Nonproliferation Studies, Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey, August 2017, pp. 32.

Chapter - VII The Way Ahead The 1918-1919 Spanish flu pandemic was among the most deadly events in recorded human history, having killed more than 50 million people. Knowledge gained from this and other pandemics were used to direct research and prepare plans for prevention, containment, and treatment for any future event. An example of this could be seen in the 2018 US National Defence Strategy, 2018, providing effective response to mitigate risk from natural, accidental, or deliberate biological threats. The Foreword of the strategic document states:1 It is a vital interest of the United States to manage the risk of biological incidents. In todays interconnected world, biological incidents have the potential to cost thousands of American lives, cause significant anxiety, and greatly impact travel and trade.

Biological threatswhether naturally occurring, accidental, or deliberate in originare among the most serious threats facing the United States and the international community. Outbreaks of disease can cause catastrophic harm to the United States. They can cause death, sicken, and disable on a massive scale, and they can also inflict psychological trauma and economic and social disruption. Natural or accidental outbreaks, as well as deliberate attacks, can originate in one country and spread to many others, with potentially far-reaching international consequences. Advances in science promise better and faster cures, economic advances, a cleaner environment, and improved quality of life, but they also bring new security risks. In this rapidly changing landscape, the United States must be prepared to manage the risks posed by natural outbreaks of disease, accidents with high consequence pathogens, or adversaries who wish to do harm with biological agents.

The impact of COVID-19 pandemic which took place exactly a century after the Spanish flu has shown that our planning and preparation to mitigate impact of a viral disease was inadequate and we have failed in our efforts measurably. Besides killing over one million people worldwide, this pandemic has impacted every sphere of our lives. The pandemic was caused by a virus, which a few claimed had its origin in a virology laboratory in China. While others hold the view that was it was a newly designed biological weapon which got released accidently. The truth is yet to come out.

Biological Agents are not Weapons of Choice: In the last three decades or so, various analysts have been arguing that the possibility of the use of biological agents in warfare or by the terrorists was remote due to certain inherent drawbacks of the agents. Some of the arguments put forward against the likely future use of biological weapons have been: They may affect both enemy and friendly forces.

They are generally slow-acting.

They are vulnerable to environmental and weather conditions.

Their weaponization is challenging; the health and safety of those involved in production remains at high risk.

They are beyond the reach of the terrorist since the technology of manufacturing, storage and dissemination is not available to them.

They lack the capacity of causing massive loss of life and destruction, therefore the use of these weapons in comparison to chemical and nuclear weapons, is unthinkable.

They have not been used effectively in the past; therefore, will not be successfully used in the future.

Another reason put forward for non use of biological weapon by the terrorists is that they would like to see immediate impact of their action, thus prefer a weapon causing explosion.2 In fact, such arguments prompted Cohen (2004) to suggest that the billions spent on protecting the US from attack with biological weapons would be better spent on addressing some of the reasons they claim prompt bioterrorism and promote worldwide mortality and morbidity: poverty, hunger, environmental degradation, and misallocation of resources.3 Perhaps, keeping in view the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on US, Cohen might like to reconsider his views.

Biological weapons are horrifying and indiscriminate killers. The pathogens which can be used as biological weapons include bacteria, viruses, fungi and toxins that cause infection, toxicity or other hazards to human health. More than 1,200 different kinds of potentially weaponizable bio-agents have been described and studied to date. They also pose a serious threat to economic development, social stability and even national security. The known biological agents which could be used in warfare or bioterrorism had been prioritized. In 1999, the US Centre for Disease Control (CDC) has identified 30 organisms which could be weaonized and classified them into A, B and C categories. Classification is based on ease of dissemination, morbidity and mortality, panic potential, and level of public health requirements.

A biological weapon is a complex system with four components: (i) a novel pathogen, either produced in the form of a wet slurry or dried and milled into a dry powder; (ii) mixing of chemicals to stabilize the pathogen and preserve its infectivity and virulence during storage; (iii) a container to store and transport the formulated agent; and (iv) an efficient mechanism to disseminate the formulated agent that can infect the targeted population. Finally, the agent must be released under optimal atmospheric and meteorological conditions if it is to inflict casualties over a large area.4 However, this is an old concept about biological weapons. Consider hypothetical situation that a terrorist outfit has procured a genetically modified virus which could be used as an effective lethal biological agent. The organization has motivated a group of jihadist to undertake a suicidal mission. These jihadists can be isolated, inoculated with virus and sent to various places as tourists in a target state to disseminate pathogens. Such an attack would have the potential to inflict serious consequences and collateral economic damage (e.g. by contaminating the environment and affecting animal and human health). A lethal biological weapon also offers the means to blackmail governments.5 According to Christian (2007), only nuclear weapons cause mass destruction.  biological weapons attack living tissue but do not destroy non-animate objects, and the number of casualties they cause is highly dependent on the choice of agent and the conditions under which it is disseminated.6 However, such views no longer carry any weight as COVID-19 pandemic has caused much greater number of casualties when compared to one caused by atomic bombs in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. It has done colossal economic destruction and impacted human rights of every group, be it children, women, elders, or workers.

There are a number of advantages in using a biological weapon. The first advantage is that the use of biological weapon can have a devastating psychological impact, undermining the morale of troops and impairing their combat functions. Second, even if the enemy is prepared to face biological weapons, forcing the enemy into protective equipment is a cumbersome measure that degrades military performance and slows down combat operations. Third, the biological warfare capability is much cost-effective than a nuclear programme, and biological agents properly prepared and delivered under ideal conditions could inflict damage to an extent comparable to a nuclear strike.7 The possibility of using biological weapons in the near future cannot be ruled out. In 2002, the BBC screened a documentary drama, Smallpox 2002: Silent Weapon, in which a suicide patient walking around New York City triggers a worldwide pandemic that leaves 60 million people dead.8 The characteristic of COVID-19 virus has shown that a group of religiously motivated individuals infected with such a virus may initiate an epidemic. Such biological attack could successfully be carried out, especially if the target country does not have an advanced biohazard and disease detection capabilities.

The new terror risk might come from the few jihadists duly infected/loaded with the lethal version of virus in a crowded train station, airport, market-place or a popular tourist location. Every such jihadist could infect multiple places in a couple of days. Unlike death and devastation that occur immediately after a modern terror attack, this assault would start with a cough or a sneeze. Virus could spread rapidly through the crowded cities. After an initial outbreak, it would take days for the health care workers to recognize a pattern of illness. By the time anyone could determine that the state was the victim of a bioterrorism attack, the perpetrator could disappear into anonymity or return back to their country. There is also a possibility that a biologist decides to become a terrorist.9 In addition to those with political or religious motivations, individuals with sociopathic tendencies may be prompted to seek biological weapons to harm society or individuals.10 Advances in bioengineering and biotechnology are most likely to complicate efforts to stop proliferation of bioweapons.11 Problem in Detection: A fundamental problem in countering the proliferation of biological and toxin weapons is the fact that much of the necessary know-how and technology is dual-use, with legitimate applications in the commercial fermentation and biotechnology industries. Many developing countries have acquired industrial microbiology plants for the production of fermented beverages, vaccines, antibiotics, ethanol (from corn or sugar cane), enzymes, yeast, vitamins, food colours and flavourings, amino acids and single-cell protein as a supplement for animal feeds. This global expansion of the civilian biotechnology industry, combined with the growing number of molecular biotechnologists trained in the West, has created much broader access to the expertise and equipment needed for the development of biological warfare agents. Sophisticated laboratories that might be used for the design of novel biological warfare agents are inexpensive compared with nuclear weapon plants. Moreover, biotechnology is information-intensive rather than capital-intensive, and much of the relevant data are available in the published scientific literature. For these reasons, it is virtually impossible for industrialised states to prevent the diffusion of weapon-relevant information to States suspected of proliferating biological weapons.

Impact of Technology The categorization and listing of biological agents undertaken by the CDC or other organizations12 is not sacrosanct. The scientific and technological breakthroughs in genetically engineered pathogens have already changed the future outlook of the biological weapons and its threat. Advancements in biotechnology allow the development of new, upgraded biological agents. Imagine using synthetic viruses to recreate the Spanish Flu pandemic of 1918 that killed millions of people worldwide. Presently, the knowledge and facilities to carry this kind of experiment may be beyond the abilities of most non-state actors. However, the fast pace of biotechnology has led to new findings in the world of genetic engineering. The capabilities of the non-state actors may change in the near future and we must be prepared because the scale of devastation could be massive.

In addition to the already existing pathogens, genetic engineering could convert previously harmless virus/bacteria into a lethal biological agent by introducing deadly genetic material from a highly pathogenic organism. In 1986, the US researchers isolated the gene for the lethal factor of Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax, and introduced into Escherichia coli, harmless gut bacteria. The US team reported that the lethal factor protein was active in E. coli and displayed the same deadly effects as it did when it was in its native B. anthracis state.13 The potential effectiveness of microorganisms as biological agents can be enhanced in a number of diverse ways: (i) Modifying the organism by putting a molecule on the coat of an existing pathogen that causes it to bind more efficiently to the host target cell; (ii) Inserting genetic material that encodes for a toxin; (iii) Modifying the genome of the microorganism itself to increase infectivity and virulence; (iv) Inserting DNA sequences that bind to the host so that the hosts immune reaction is suppressed; and (vi) Creating a completely artificial or abiotic pathogen.14 The genetic material for modification may be either derived from natural organisms using standard recombinant DNA techniques, or produced by DNA synthesis.15 Some of the technical objectives of genetically modifying or creating a dreaded biological warfare agent could be: (i) To increase its infectivity; (ii) To increase virulence/mortality rate; (iii) To diminish host immunity or confer antibiotic resistance; (iv) To increase survivability outside the host; and (v) To degrade detection/protection measures. These characteristics are not limited, and could be applied either singly or in combination.16 A number of sophisticated tools for increasing pathogenicity and integrating them into biological agents have been developed. These include: (i) The use of sequencing technologies to identify new agents and pathogenicity factors; (ii) Improved understanding of how pathogenicity factors spread in the wild, such as horizontal gene transfer; (iii) Computational approaches and software tools for the identification of pathogenicity islands and virulence factors; (iv) Synthetic biology approaches; (v) Bioinformatics tools for manipulating pathogenicity data; (vi) Systems biology and understanding the impacts of systems modulation on disease; (vii) Improved mechanisms for combining sequence data and structural analysis for detecting virulence factors; (viii) Whole genome directed evolution; (ix) Methodological approaches for testing the clinical and public health significance of microbe-disease associations; (x) Approaches for predicting the virulence of a pathogen from its sequence information; (xi) Recreation of a centralized repository for pathogenicity islands and resistance islands; (xii) and Model system that recapitulate in vivo viral life cycles.17 There is a fear that new synthetic biology tools could endow biohackers or a lone-wolf with the ability to design and manufacture a dangerously threatening pathogen similar to COVID-19 virus. They may also resurrect the deadliest pathogens of the past, like smallpox virus,18 to be more contagious and lethal and wreak large-scale havoc. Possible future pandemics may not depend on the chance meeting of different animal species and chance mutations, but may be deliberately designed instead. The probability of a terrorist use of genetically engineered biological agent on a given area may be low, but the consequences of such an event would be very serious.19Advance warning of an impending specific bioterrorist incident with genetically engineered pathogen would be rare, may be similar to COVID-19 pandemic. Even if the majority of scientists and countries follow existing biosafety protocols, a single non-state actor could imperil human civilization.20 Advances in biotechnology, the increasing boldness of terrorists, and the willingness of rogue nations to support terrorism, suggests that we must be prepared for the likely use of biological weapons against us in the future. The biological weapons are difficult to detect (tasteless and odorless) and can be disseminated easily. Biologic warfare agents may be dispersed by several techniques including contaminated water, aerosol sprays, direct human transmission, or even by drones. Enclosed spaces provide ideal targets, particularly those that draw large crowds such as communication hubs, sporting events, recreation grounds, religious congregations, and all those places where people gather in large numbers.21 Biological weapons provide a relatively easy method to inflict a high human and economic cost on a state. These weapons have a number of advantages for terrorists and non-state actors desirous to inflict damage on any country at low risk and cost. Biological weapons are inexpensive, can be easily transported, stockpiled, and transmitted. They may cause more deaths than an explosive or nuclear weapon. The dual-use nature of the pathogens and technology makes the process of verification of biological agents extremely difficult. The pathogens, biotechnology and equipment needed to produce biological weapons also have important civilian applications such as the production of medicine or vaccine. It is extremely difficult to establish whether a facility is producing biological agents for illegitimate or for peaceful purposes. With the availability of institutions such as DIYbio (Do-It-Yourself Biologist) and biohacking, experiments with biological weapons can be done in a kitchen or garage; and even a small quantity of agent could generate a high level of destruction. Consequently, even an extensive regime of inspections would not be able to guarantee that no biological weapons were being produced and as a result, a verification regime would give the world a false sense of security.

Legal Control The 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol has been acceded or ratified by 142 states. However, a few states have made reservations declaring that the provisions of the Protocol would cease to be binding on them if their enemies, or the allies of their enemies, failed to respect the prohibitions of the Protocol. In recent years, however, many of the reservations have been withdrawn, especially following the entry into force of the BTWC and the Chemical Weapon Convention (CWC). Countries that continue to hold reservations to the Protocol are: Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, China, Fiji, India, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Serbia, Syria, the US, and Vietnam. The UN General Assembly has adopted several resolutions in which it called for strict observance by all states of the principles and objectives of the Geneva Protocol of 1925, condemns all actions contrary to those objectives and invites all states to accede to the Protocol.22 A convergence of various events and interests in the years 1969 to 1971 resulted in the BTWC. The treaty which entered into force on 26 March 1975 is now more than 45 years old. The BTWC applies to both to pathogenic micro-organisms (bacterial, viral and other), and to biological antigens and toxins, whether naturally or artificially created. The BTWC prohibits the development, production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling, and use of biological and toxin weapons. However, this treaty has certain congenital defects and its future remains uncertain. The BTWC is severely disabled by the absence of an effective verification system. It fails to provide sanctions or punishments for its violation. In addition, the treaty has no binding force on the nations who have not signed the treaty and indulge in proliferation of biological weapons. The BTWC has apparently failed because it lacks mandatory transparency measures and monitoring system. The states parties to the BTWC have been unable to agree on any mandatory transparency measures and the US, in particular has blocked serious efforts at reform.23 The treaty is also facing significant challenges amid waning funds. The BTWC also lacks or has limited indirect coverage of the applications of emerging technologies like additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence and robotics. Another shortcoming is that, unlike the CWC, the BTWC is not supported by a scientific advisory board.24 Funding impacts not only the future implementation of the BTWC and its meetings, but also the ability of the Implementation Support Unit (ISU) to do its work. The UN Security Council Resolution 1540 imposes binding obligations on all states to adopt legislation to prevent the proliferation of biological, nuclear and chemical weapons and their means of delivery. Recent meetings around Resolution 1540 have highlighted the potential for misuse of biological agents arising from rapid advances in genetic engineering. Organisms with altered characteristics could be the next generation biological weapons. The Security Council Resolution 2325 of 2016 clarified that none of the obligations in Resolution 1540 shall be interpreted so as to conflict with or alter the rights and obligations of State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the BTWC. Further, the prevention of proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons should not hamper international cooperation in materials, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes. Hopefully, once we achieve some success in controlling COVID-19 pandemic, the international community will take positive steps to strengthen the treaty and its institutions for achieving global security. Only option that is left with the international community for protection against the biological and toxin weapons is a verification protocol to the BTWC treaty.

Biological Weapons and India The US Congressional Research Service in its report of 2003 asserted that there is a danger that India may develop a biological weapons programme. It was stated in the report that India is believed to have an active biological defence research programme as well as the necessary infrastructure to develop a variety of biological agents.25 No evidence was provided in this report which could claim that India was pursuing an offensive biological weapons programme. This was post-anthrax-attack period and the US was suspecting every country, other than its close allies, as having or developing biological weapons.

India signed the BTWC with some reservations on 15 January 1973 and ratified on 15 July 1974. Indias reservations on BTWC include: (i) The Government of India would like to reiterate in particular its understanding that the objective of the Convention is to eliminate biological and toxin weapons, thereby excluding completely the possibility of their use; (ii) The exemption in regard to biological agents or toxins, which would be permitted for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes would not, in any way, create a loophole in regard to the production or retention of biological and toxin weapons; and (iii) Any assistance which might be furnished under the terms of the Convention would be of medical or humanitarian nature and in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. India maintains that the norms against biological weapons enshrined in the BTWC must be upheld, particularly at a time of heightened threat of BW proliferation and bio-terrorism, and meaningful multilateral efforts should be pursued to strengthen these norms. India has been playing a constructive role in international efforts aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the BTWC and is committed to the ongoing process of annual meetings of experts and States Parties to the BTWC. In October 2002, Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, the President of India asserted, India will not make biological weapons. It is cruel to human beings.26 India has in place a regulatory mechanism for the maintenance of security and oversight of pathogens, micro-organisms, genetically modified organisms and toxins in production, import, export, use and research. The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 provides the mandate to the Government to lay down procedures and safeguards, as it deems necessary, for the handling of hazardous substances. In order to prevent WMD proliferation and its links with terrorism, the Government of India promulgated an Ordinance on 21 September 2004 to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. In 1989, the government notified the Rules for Manufacture, Use, Import, Export and Storage of Hazardous Microorganisms and Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells. These Rules also apply to new gene technologies.27 The Amendment Ordinance covers terrorism and its links with weapons of mass destruction.28 Financing of terrorism and the activities and channels relating to informal movement of funds and money laundering are also regulated under the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 and the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002.

As mandated under the Environment Protection Rules, 1989, the Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) under the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of Science and Technology) has updated Recombinant DNA safety guidelines, 1990; Revised Guidelines for Safety in Biotechnology, 1994 and Revised guidelines for research in transgenic plants, 1998 and prepared Regulations and Guidelines on Biosafety of Recombinant DNA Research and Biocontainment, 2017.29 These guidelines are based on current scientific information, best practices and from the experience gained while implementing the biosafety frameworks within the country. The Department of Biotechnology has specified the practices for handling (Manufacture, Use, Import, Export, Exchange and Storage) of hazardous biological material, recombinant nucleic acid molecules and cells, organisms and viruses containing such molecules to ensure an optimal protection of public health and of the environment. The guidelines provide clarity on biosafety requirements and recommendations for laboratory facilities such as facility design, biosafety equipment, personal protective equipment, good laboratory practices and techniques, waste management, etc.

Preventing access to weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery to non-State actors is long-standing national policy of the Government of India. India has developed a robust domestic law-based system of controls on the export of strategic goods and technologies, including sensitive dual-use equipment and technologies. India is also a party to all international instruments accepted as benchmarks for a States commitments to combat international terrorism.

In order to comply with UNSCR 1540, the Indian Government enacted, The Weapons of Mass Destruction and Their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act 2005 (WMD Act). The preamble states that India is committed to the objective of global nuclear disarmament; and to prevent a non-State actor or terrorist from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. The Act covers all three weapons of mass destruction. It prohibits unlawful manufacture, acquisition, possession, development, or transport of a chemical or biological weapon or their means of delivery. Section 4(a) of the Act defines biological weapons the same way as the BTWC. The Act extends to whole of India and applies to individuals as well as companies, ships and aircrafts registered in India, foreign nationals while in India and persons in service of Government of India, within and beyond India. The Act prohibits the export of any material, equipment or technology from India, if the exporter knows that such an item or technology is intended to be used in design and manufacture of a biological weapon, etc. Section 14 provides that any person who contravenes the provisions of Act related to a biological weapon or its means of delivery, as well as those involving terrorist acts, shall be punished with imprisonment for a minimum period of five years, which may extend to imprisonment for life, and fine. The punishment for unauthorized export in violation to section 13(4) of the Act is Rs 3 lakhs, which may extended to Rs 20 lakhs.30 India remains vulnerable to biological weapons. The reasons are: The public-health infrastructure is not in a good state and primary health centers in rural areas are generally non-effective. Therefore, a very small amount of biological agents can have devastating effects.

Biological agents are relatively difficult to detect. Genetically modified biological agent could be more lethal and can escape metal detectors or other devices used to detect conventional weaponry.

Biological agents selected as weapon may have a delayed onset of effects. Tracing the perpetrator of such crimes could be difficult.

Bringing pathogens into a country is easy for terrorists, since virus sensors are largely ineffective.

Lack of knowledge and experience with biological weapons among authorities manning international borders.

Shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) and policy for its use; weak laboratory services and knowledge base for forensic work.

The bureaucratic approach in any unfortunate incident. Instead of handling emergency, the approach begins with shifting blame from one authority to another.

Compared to conventional or nuclear weapons, biological weapons are easier to obtain. The pathogens may be supplied by a rogue state to non-state actors. In few countries, biological supply houses provide such organisms by mail order.

India may not be under the direct threat of the use of biological weapons from its prominent adversaries, but the same cannot be held true with the non-state actors.31 To counter this threat, Life Sciences laboratories under the Defence Research Development Organization (DRDO) are endeavouring towards the development of NBC equipment for the last two decades.32 A large number of items have been developed and inducted into the three services. NBC Suit Mk V, based on US military standards has been developed. It provides cover to protect individual soldiers from chemical vapour and droplet, biological agents and radiological dust. After successful trials, the product has been inducted into the Army.33 In addition, DRDO has also developed Nuclear, Biological, Chemical (NBC) Reconnaissance Vehicle for the use of the armed forces.34 In 2018, the former Defence Minister Manohar Parrikar, referring to reports of use of chemical weapons in terror attacks in Afghanistan stated that India should have an effective system in place to prevent potential consequences against use of chemical or biological weapons. He reiterated that India must be well-prepared to deal with chemical and biological warfare in the wake of changing threat perception and security concerns.35 For India, the danger of a use of biological agents as a weapon, in particular by terrorist groups, must be taken seriously. The relative advantage of the use of biological agents is not just in mass killings but also in economic and social disruption. A well-funded terrorist group with support from a rogue state would prefer to inflict as much death and economic losses as possible by using lethal biological weapons. Even if there is a remote possibility of the use of such weapons against India in the future, the effects of such an attack would be devastating and we must not disregard it.

Terrorist groups have also shown more interest in acquiring biological weapons than chemical or atomic weapons. In 2014, a laptop belonging to a jihadist reportedly recovered from an ISIL hideout in Syria contained a hidden trove of secret plans, including instructions for weaponizing the bubonic plague and a document discussing the advantages of a biological attack. In this regard, the biological threat is greater than the nuclear; the acquisition of deadly pathogens, and their weaponization and dissemination in aerosol form, would entail fewer technical hurdles than the theft of weapons-grade uranium or plutonium and its assembly into an improvised nuclear device.36 Besides ISIL, al-Qaeda has also worked on plans to send groups of their members, called bio-martyrs, who would purposely infect themselves with a virus to spread the disease around the world, by travelling on consecutive international flights.37 After the COVID-19 pandemic has emerged, there a strong possibility that terrorists groups like Boko Haram or al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb may have already begun the process of sending bio-martyrs to their planned destinations to spread the disease.38 Recently two Hizbul Mujahideen terrorists killed by the Indian troops in Jammu & Kashmir encounter were tested positive for COVID-19.39 At present, there is no standard mechanism in place to provide any protection from a biological warfare attack at most military installations in India. A biological attack may lower morale of the troops and slow operational capacity to unacceptable levels. There could be death tolls more similar to those experienced during COVID-19 epidemic in the country. The armed forces need to develop a counter-biological-weaponsoperation plan (CBWOP) to counter threats from biological weapons. The CBPOP have to be different for the three services, keeping in view their operational manpower requirements. The CBWOP must not be integrated with threats of chemical and nuclear weapons. The armed forces must have the freedom to operate effectively in any given environment. The BW threat is often overlooked in war plans and operations due to frequent rotation of personnel without sufficient biological warfare training. There is a need to educate each rank in the armed forces on the basics of biological warfare agent threats, their characteristics and effects, treatment, and passive defence measures. We must also deploy advanced technologies to enhance identification of biological warfare agents. Medical establishments need to cope up with this additional task of quick identification of biological warfare agents and develop medical exigency plans which must be integral part of the existing medical plans to cope up with such eventualities.

The exchange of equipment, materials, and scientific and technological information for the use of bacteriological and biological agents and toxins for peaceful purposes, such as the prevention of disease is not restricted under the BTWC. The government must ensure that these provisions are exploited for arming the members of the armed forces with suitable safety gears. For the armed forces of India, depending on the circumstances, the use of certain weapons may lower the risk of incidental harm, while offering the same or superior military advantage in neutralizing or destroying a military objective. For example, it may be advantageous for the armed forces to employ incendiary weapons in attacking an adversarys repository of biological weapons so as to prevent the biological agents from adversely affecting the civilian population.

Conclusion Nuclear warfare had been perceived by the public to be the deadliest weapon. However, it might not be true, given the fact that nuclear weapons are now regulated and cannot be deployed unless approved. The last time the world saw a nuclear bomb, 129,000- 226,000 died, and many suffered from the aftermath. Nuclear weapons may soon become redundant.40 Developments in robotics and artificial intelligence will make drones and autonomous weapon systems more accurate as well as lethal. Advances in biological engineering may further reduce the role of large armies and traditional weapons. The biological weapons of future may be designed to target a particular individual or to cause sterility in a genetically-related ethnic population.41 Militaries may not like to kill enemy when a bloodless defeat can be engineered through Internet disruption, robotics, or biological manipulation. In addition, social media will play an important role in future armed conflicts. There will not be any need of heavy bombers to destroy strategic economic targets of enemy, when a viral attack can cause much more serious impact on countrys economy.42 The low cost development of biological weapons makes them an attractive option for terrorists.

In the past two decades the world has changed in the areas of international politics and international security. We must accept that as an international treaty, BTWC is not perfect and the actions of its states parties are not above criticism. However, a large number of states parties have shown their vigorous determination over the time to negate the possibility of the use of biological agents and toxins as weapons. Individual scientists and scientific communities have also played an influential role in the evolution of the BTWC. The states parties, scientists, and the institutions engaged in disarmament have to come forward to reinforce the norm against the use of disease as a weapon and ensure that the Convention remains valid and robust in the face of biotechnological advancements.

The views expressed by John P Caves (2014) that, Nuclear weapons are likely to play a more significant role in the international security environment, and current constraints on the proliferation and use of chemical and biological weapons could diminish, may not be true in the near future.43 Even if there are no instances of the bioterrorism in the time to come, threat of the use of biological weapons will always be there. The possibility of the use of biological weapons is likely to be more by the non-state actors due to lower barriers to the acquisition of pathogens and easy accessibility to the emerging biotechnologies. The states have to anticipate and prepare suitable defences against reemergence of bioterrorism over the next decade.

For an ideal world, the disarmament, non-proliferation and national implementation obligations contained in the BTWC are adequate and clear, and the BTWC does not require verification regime. The states parties to BTWC have their legally binding obligations to destroy any stockpiles of biological weapons and ensure proliferation does not occur. They are expected to have in place effective procedures to prohibit and prevent the development, production and stockpiling of biological and toxin weapons. But we are not living in an ideal world. States try to wriggle out of their international obligations on various excuses. However, we are now facing an unprecedented serious pandemic since the United Nations came into being. It has affected over 2230,000 people across every territory and nation in the world, and the count is going on.44 Therefore, we have to unite and reconsider solution to issue of verification and proliferation of biological warfare agents.

An analysis of events in Afghanistan, China, Iraq, North-Korea, Pakistan and Syria demonstrates that interest in biological weapons by state-sponsored programmes, terrorists or non-state elements is likely to continue. In order to have an effective defence against biological weapons attacks, India must identify potential threats and prepare for possible biological attacks by maintaining a knowledge base and by actively developing and testing novel medical countermeasures. In order to maximize efficient utilization of limited resources, India must integrate biological defence and public health programmess. The effects of many biological warfare agents are preventable or can be mitigated with proper precautions. The general population in India must be educated and made aware of the threats and risks associated with biological agents.

Although the BTWC is not in danger of facing an exodus of parties like the Rome Statute, the problems continue to pose challenges to the Convention; most important is its implementation at the national and international levels. Biological weapons may remain outside the arsenals and war plans of most states, but this may not be the case with rogue states and violent non-state actors.

There is no internationally accepted legal definition of biological weapon, as well as bioterrorism and also there is no authoritative list of prohibited biological agents. Unlike the nuclear and chemical weapons arenas, there is no independent verification mechanism in the biological weapons convention. Without a verification mechanism, states and non-state actors alike can act with relative impunity, so long as their activities remain relatively hidden from international scrutiny. Unfortunately, there is very little political will among the major stakeholders in the international scenario, mainly the United States for establishing verification mechanism under the BTWC. The US will never accept that under such verification scheme in future, an inspector from Iraq or Iran checking biotechnological facilities in the US. A commentator writes, The BTWC has been relegated to the status of an infirm elderly relative worthy of affection and respect yet not really expected to provide meaningful answers to current challenges.45 The BTWC was born with congenital defects, neglected to highest degree by the powerful states that were expected to nurture it, and now it can be a forum only for discussions, and not a legal instrument of enforcement. Its neglect can be judged from the state of affairs that there are serious shortages of funds at the United Nations to conduct future meetings under the BWTC regime. Therefore, in an era of ever-expanding biological technological research and the growth of dual-use technology, the fear of bioterrorism will continue to grow and the imperative to address the same will become more and more relevant.

In a statement to the Eighth Review Conference of the BTWC in November 2016, the ICRC stated that the States parties should not become complacent; it remains their collective and individual responsibility to ensure that the treaty is implemented effectively to reduce the risks to life and health posed by biological weapons. The States parties must remain updated with modern scientific and technological developments to prevent the development and use of biological weapons, while ensuring that biological research for peaceful and beneficial purposes is not impeded.46 States parties, particularly from the developing nations and civil society groups, need to work hard to negotiate so as to establish a legally binding verification provisions for the BTWC in 2021 conference. In post-COVID-19 situation, perhaps this will be the best approach in ensuring biological disarmament and non-proliferation.

* * * 1 The 2018 National Biodefence Strategy of the United States was drafted by the Departments of Defence, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, and Agriculture. In addition, the National Security Council Staff coordinated the review and finalization of the National Biodefence Strategy with the Departments of State, Treasury, Justice, Interior, Commerce, Labor, Transportation, Energy, and Veterans Affairs, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Office of Management and Budget, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the Office of Science and Technology Policy, the US Agency for International Development, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

2 The Europol TE-SAT report for 2016 stated To date terrorists and criminals seem to remain interested in using weapons that are easily available, not too complex to operate, and which have direct and lethal effects. These three factors  availability, uncomplicated knowledge and effectiveness - encourage terrorists to use conventional firearms and explosives. European Union Terrorism Situation and Trend Report 2016, Europol, TESAT 2016; also see: P Gill P. et. al., Malevolent Creativity in Terrorist Organizations, Journal of Creative Behaviour, Vol. 47, 2013, p. 125.

3 Cohen H.W., Gould R.M. and Sidel V.W., The pitfalls of bioterrorism preparedness: The anthrax and smallpox experiences, American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 94(10), 2004, pp. 16671671.

4 Raymond A. Zilinskas and Jonathan B. Tucker, Workshop Report: Limiting the Contribution of the Open Scientific Literature to the Biological Weapons Threat, Centre for Non-proliferation Studies, Monterey Institute of International Studies, December 2002, pp. 16.

5 Dinu Elena, Reassessing CBRN terrorism threats, in Su Fei and Ian Anthony (ed.), 2019, Reassessing CBRN Threats in a Changing Global Environment, Stockholm: SIPRI, pp. 66, at p. 9.

6 Christian Enemark, 2007, Disease and Security, New York: Routledge, p. 79.

7 Ibid, p. 84-85.

8 A one-off drama by BBC news and current affairs shot in documentary style about a fictional bioterrorist attack in which the weapon is one of humankinds most infectious diseases - smallpox. In this docu-drama, a fictitious attack is made by terrorists using the smallpox virus. Starting in New York the virus is ruthlessly carried out by one man travelling around the city, culminating into a pandemic. Smallpox 2002 raises the question: Are we prepared? For more details: http://www.bbc.co.uk/drama/smallpox2002/.

9 One of the possible scenarios for the deliberate misuse of synthetic biology involves a lone operator, such as a highly trained molecular biologist who develops an obsessive grudge against certain individuals or groups (or society as a whole). Further, the most likely misapplication of synthetic biology for hostile purposes involves the recreation of known pathogenic viruses in the laboratory. Tucker, Jonathan B. and Raymond A. Zilinskas, The Promise and Perils of Synthetic Biology, The New Atlantis, 14 October 2010, p. 17-18.

10 A threat of biological weapon attack from insider cannot be ruled out. For instance, the FBI was convinced that Bruce Ivins, a microbiologist and senior biodefence researcher at the US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), was responsible for the anthrax letters of 2001 in the United States. Ivins committed suicide in July 2008, just before he could be arrested.

11 Security Implications of Synthetic Biology and Nanobiotechnology: A Risk and Response Assessment of Advances in Biotechnology, United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI), 2012, pp. 142.

12 Please refer introductory chapter.

13 Robertson D.L. and Leppla S.H., Molecular cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of the lethal factor gene of Bacillus anthracis, Gene, Vol. 44(1), 1986, pp. 71-78.

14 A large number of multinational suppliers now produce kits containing reagents, enzymes and step-by-step instructions to conduct many of the basic lab techniques life scientists use, including nucleic acid and protein expression, purification, detection and analysis. Commercial services are also available for tasks like sequencing, DNA and protein synthesis, microarray construction, mass spectrometry analysis and others. FilippaLentzos, Biologys Misuse Potential, Connections QJ, Vol. 15, No. 2, 2016, pp: 48-64.

15 DNA synthesis is one of the key enabling technologies of synthetic biology. There are now a number of commercial companies that provide DNA synthesis services, so the process can be outsourced: a client can order a DNA sequence online and receive the synthesized DNA material by post within days or weeks. The price charged by these companies has greatly reduced over the last 15 years and the service is now within reach of a broad range of actors. This has led to routine statements suggesting that it is now cheap and easy to obtain a synthesized version of any desired DNA sequence. FilippaLentzos, Biologys Misuse Potential, Connections QJ, Vol. 15, No. 2, 2016, pp: 48-64.

16 Warner Jerry, et.al., Analysis of the Threat of Genetically Modified Organism for Biological Warfare, Centre for Technology and National Security Policy, Washington DC: National Defence University, May 2011, pp. 37.

17 The Biological and Toxin Weapon Convention: Implications of advances in science and technology; Summary of Workshop, The Global Network of Science Academies, IAP, 2015, pp. 105.

18 Smallpox could be the perfect bioweapon due to widespread population vulnerability and the absence of an adequate therapy. The viruss lethality, the absence of any cure, and the fear and loathing it has always inspired in human beings combine to suggest that few biowarfare agents could succeed in terrorizing a community as viciously as smallpox. Koplow David A., That Wonderful Year: Smallpox, Genetic Engineering, and Bio-Terrorism, Med. L. Rev ., 2003, p. 417-514.

19 Ainscough Michael J., Next Generation Bio-weapons: The Technology of Genetic Engineering Applied to Bio-warfare and Bioterrorism, Future Warfare Series No. 14, Alabama: Air War College, 2002, pp. 50.

20 Bressler R Daniel and Chris Bakerlee, Designer bugs: how the next pandemic might come from a lab, 6 December 2018, available at:https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/2018/12/6/18127430/superbugs-biotech-pathogens-biorisk-pandemic.

21 Mahendra Pal, et. al., An Overview on Biological Weapons and Bioterrorism, American Journal of Biomedical Research, Vol. 5, No. 2, 2017, pp. 24-34.

22 The UN General Assembly Resolutions 2162 B (XXI) of 5 December 1966, 2454 A (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, and 2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970). Resolution 2603 A (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 gives an interpretation of the Geneva Protocol of 1925.

23 Beard Jack M., The Shortcomings of Indeterminacy in Arms Control Regimes: The Case of the Biological Weapons Convention, American Journal of International Law, Vol. 101, 2007, p. 271-321.

24 The Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)the CWCs implementing bodyprovides regular reports on relevant developments in science and technology and gives further advice on request. In addition, it prepares a larger report for the quinquennial CWC Review Conferences. The SAB is composed of 25 experts who serve in their personal capacities and it can also establish temporary working groups to bring in broader expertise.

25 Feickert Andrew, CRS Report for Congress, Missile Proliferation and the Strategic Balance in South Asia, 17 October 2003, p. CRS-10, quoting: Chemical and Biological Weapons at a Glance, Arms Control Association Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, September 2002.

26 India Not To Make Biological Weapons: President, Press Trust of India, 28 October 2002.

27 The Rules for Manufacture, Use, Import, Export and Storage of Hazardous Microorganisms and Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells, 1989, are applicable for the sale, offer for sale, storage for the purpose of sale, any kind of handling of hazardous micro-organisms and the export and import of genetically engineered cells organisms. The Rules also provide the Government with the authority to regulate micro-organisms which have not been presently known to exist in the country or have not been discovered so far [Section 3 (v)]. The Rules prohibit unauthorized deliberate release of genetically engineered organisms/hazardous micro-organisms or cells into the environment or nature (Section 9).

28 Sections 10 and 23 (1) and (2) of the Amended Act provide for enhanced penalties for unauthorized possession of any bomb, dynamite or hazardous explosive substance or other lethal weapon or substance capable of mass destruction or biological or chemicals substance of warfare. Sections 23 (1) and (2) provide for punishment with imprisonment for a term not less than five years but which may extend to life imprisonment for unauthorized possession with the intent to aid any terrorist. Section 15 defines a terrorist act as involving the use of bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological or otherwise) of a hazardous nature. This definition covers terrorism aimed against India as well as other countries. Section 16 provides for a minimum punishment of five years, which may extend to life imprisonment, for committing terrorist acts, including involving weapons of mass destruction. Death penalty may also be imposed where such act has resulted in the death of a person. Sections 17, 18, and 19 criminalize and provide for minimum punishment for funding such acts; conspiring to commit, or aiding and abetting such activities or any act preparatory to the commission of a terrorist act; and harbouring and concealing, including the attempt to do so, persons engaged in such activities.

29 Regulations and Guidelines on Biosafety of Recombinant DNA Research & Biocontainment, 2017, pp. 148, available at: https://rcb.res.in/upload/Biosafety_Guidelines.pdf.

30 For the text of the Weapons of Mass Destruction and Their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005, refer Appendix to this book.

31 Dr. Yunis Khushi reports: The recruitments for ISIS have been going on in Pakistan for the past more than 3 years, but the Foreign and the Interior Ministries of Pakistan have been constantly denying the presence and activities of ISIS in Pakistan. Law Enforcement agencies have very recently arrested many people from Lahore, Islamabad, Karachi and Sialkot who were associated with ISIS networks. Men have been recruited as jihadis or mujahids and women as jihadi wives to provide sexual needs of fighters who are fighting in Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. Women are brain washed that they will go straight to heaven by participating in jihad through becoming a jihadi wife of a mujahid. Many women, impressed and convinced through brainwashing with the concept of Jihad-Bil-Nikah, got divorce from their Pakistani husbands and went to marry a Mujahid of ISIS for a certain period, came back gave birth to the child of Mujahid, and remarried their former husband. Some decide to continue that marriage for rest of their lives. All of this is being done to obtain worldly wealth and later eternal life in Heaven because a job offered by ISIS at RS. 50,000 per month is a very attractive for a young man dying with poverty and hunger. Most secret and law enforcement agencies have behaved like a silent bystander to the activities of ISIS in the country. The politicians, Foreign Ministry, Interior Ministry, and Law Enforcement Agencies are singing different tunes regarding the presence, recruitments and migration of jihadis or mujahids and jihadi wives from Pakistan to Syria to join the ISIS. Khush Yunis, ISIS in Pakistan: A Critical Analysis of Factors and Implications of ISIS Recruitments and Concept of Jihad-Bil-Nikah, Arts and Social Sciences Journal, Vol. 8, Issue 3, 2017, pp. 13.

32 The six DRDO laboratories that work on life sciences are: Defence Bioengineering and Electro-medical Laboratory in Bengaluru, Defence Institute of Bio-Energy Research in Haldwani, Defence Food Research Laboratory in Mysore, Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences in Delhi, Defence Institute of High Altitude Research in Leh, and Defence Institute of Psychological Research in Delhi.

33 Defence Research Development Organization, Ministry of Defence, Government of India, CBRN defence, available at:https://www.drdo.gov.in/cbrn-defence.

34 The DRDO has developed a new unmanned tank for surveillance missions, mine detection and reconnaissance in areas with nuclear and bio threats. The tank called Muntra has three variants. While Muntra-S is Indias first tracked ground vehicle developed for unmanned surveillance missions Muntra-M is for detecting mines. Muntra-N is for operation in areas where there is a nuclear radiation or bio weapon risk. Meet Muntra, Indias first unmanned tank, The Economic Times, 29 July 2017, available at:https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/all-you-need-to-know-aboutkargil-war/kargil-vijay-diwas/slideshow/59772216.cms.

35 India must be prepared for biological warfare: Manohar Parrikar, The Economic Times, 11 July 2018, available at: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/indiamust-be-prepared-for-biological-warfare-manohar-parrikar/articleshow/57435338.cms.

36 Biological Terrorist Attack on US an Urgent and Serious Threat, Homeland Security Today, 23 April 2015, available at: https://www.hstoday.us/channels/federal-state-local/biological-terrorist-attack-on-us-an-urgent-and-serious-threat/.

37 Pakistan poses the biggest threat for India from a biological weapons perspective. In the last three decades, Pakistan has attempted various strategies to destabilize India, which include overt war, covert war and proxy wars in J&K, Punjab and the rest of India. The political leadership has no control over the Pakistans ISI or the non-State actors such as the al Qaeda, LeT and JeM. Though these groups have been supported by the ISI, today, the latters control over the former is negligent. These non-State actors have become independent over the years and are likely to use biological weapons in India. Biological Weapons and India: Sources and Nature of Threats, available at: https://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/78199/5/05_chapter%201.pdf.

38 Bio-Martyrs: A Very Real Threat at Unique Moment in Time, Homeland Security Today, 28 August 2014, available at: https://www.hstoday.us/channels/global/exclusive-bio-martyrs-a-very-real-threat-at-unique-moment-in-time/.

39 Two Hizbul Mujahideen terrorists, including a foreigner, who were killed in an encounter with security forces in Jammu and Kashmirs Kulgam district on Saturday 4 July 2020, have tested positive for COVID-19. The samples of the two terrorists were taken for COVID-19 test during medico-legal formalities and their reports came back positive on 5 July 2020. In a first, two slain Hizbul terrorists test positive for coronavirus, The Times of India, New Delhi, 6 July 2020.

40 The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW), 2017, has been ratified by 45 states. Under the TPNW, it will be illegal to hold nuclear weapons, and the parties will have to dismantle any in their possession. Also se: Kelley Robert, Starve nuclear weapons to death with a tritium freeze, SIPRI Backgrounder, 28 August 2020.

41 Black biology is the name given to the dark art of employing modern techniques in molecular biology to create new and improved varieties of biological weapons. For example, one such possibility includes the creation of a binary biological weapon, in which a virulence plasmid is separated from its bacterial host, thus allowing weapons manufacturers to work safely with the components (which are harmless on their own). The cloned bacteria and amplified plasmids can be placed in separate chambers within a device. When the contents of the chambers are mingled together with certain drugs or chemicals, a small fraction of the bacteria are induced to take up the plasmid, which confers antibiotic resistance. Subsequent regrowth of the bacteria, in the presence of the antibiotic, ensures that only recombinant, infectious cells carrying the virulence plasmid are produced. In the modern time, there are number of ways to use advances in biotechnology to create particularly effective bioweapons. Block Stevn M., The Growing Threat of Biological Weapons, American Scientist, Vol. 89, January-February 2001, pp. 28-37.

42 Brooks Rosa, Can there be war without soldiers? Foreign Policy, 15 March 2016.

43 Caves John P. and Carus W. Seth, The Future of Weapons of Mass Destruction: Their Nature and Role in 2030, Occasional Paper 10, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defence University, June 2014, p. 4-5.

44 The World Health Organization response as on 18 July 2020 to be updated.

45 Kellman Barry, 2007, Bioviolence: Preventing Biological Terror and Crime, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 193.

46 Eighth Review Conference of the States Parties to the BTWC, statement by Christine Beerli, vice-president of the ICRC, dated 8 November 2016, available at: https://www.icrc.org/en/document/biological-weapons-review-conference-statement-icrc.

Appendices Appendix A Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, 17 June 1925.

The Undersigned Plenipotentiaries, in the name of their respective Governments: (Here follow the names of Plenipotentiaries) Whereas the use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of all analogous liquids, materials or devices, has been justly condemned by the general opinion of the civilized world; and Whereas the prohibition of such use has been declared in Treaties to which the majority of Powers of the world are Parties; and To the end that this prohibition shall be universally accepted as a part of International Law, binding alike the conscience and the practice of nations; Declare: That the High Contracting Parties, so far as they are not already Parties to Treaties prohibiting such use, accept this prohibition, agree to extend this prohibition to the use of bacteriological methods of warfare and agree to be bound as between themselves according to the terms of this declaration.

The High Contracting Parties will exert every effort to induce other States to accede to the present Protocol. Such accession will be notified to the Government of the French Republic, and by the latter to all signatory and acceding Powers, and will take effect on the date of the notification by the Government of the French Republic.

The present Protocol, of which the English and French texts are both authentic, shall be ratified as soon as possible. It shall bear to-days date.

The ratifications of the present Protocol shall be addressed to the Government of the French Republic, which will at once notify the deposit of such ratification to each of the signatory and acceding Powers.

The instruments of ratification of and accession to the present Protocol will remain deposited in the archives of the Government of the French Republic.

The present Protocol will come into force for each signatory Power as from the date of deposit of its ratification, and, from that moment, each Power will be bound as regards other Powers which have already deposited their ratifications.

In witness whereof the Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Protocol.

Done at Geneva in a single copy, the seventeenth day of June, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-Five.

Appendix B Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, 10 April 1972 The State Parties to this Convention, Determined to act with a view to achieving effective progress towards general and complete disarmament, including the prohibition and elimination of all types of weapons of mass destruction, and convinced that the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons and their elimination, through effective measures, will facilitate the achievement of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control.

Recognizing the important significance of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on June 17, 1925, and conscious also of the contribution which the said Protocol has already made, and continues to make, to mitigating the horrors of war, Reaffirming their adherence to the principles and objectives of that Protocol and calling upon all States to comply strictly with them, Recalling that the General Assembly of the United Nations has repeatedly condemned all actions contrary to the principles and objectives of the Geneva Protocol of June 17, 1925, Desiring to contribute to the strengthening of confidence between peoples and the general improvement of the international atmosphere, Desiring also to contribute to the realization of the purposes and principles of the United Nations, Convinced of the importance and urgency of eliminating from the arsenals of States, through effective measures, such dangerous weapons of mass destruction as those using chemical or bacteriological (biological) agents, Recognizing that an agreement on the prohibition of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons represents a first possible step towards the achievement of agreement on effective measures also for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons, and determined to continue negotiations to that end, Determined for the sake of all mankind, to exclude completely the possibility of bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins being used as weapons, Convinced that such use would be repugnant to the conscience of mankind and that no effort should be spared to minimize this risk, Have agreed as follows: Article I Each State Party to this Convention undertakes never in any circumstances to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain: (1) Microbial or other biological agents, or toxins whatever their origin or method of production, of types and in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes; (2) Weapons, equipment or means of delivery designed to use such agents or toxins for hostile purposes or in armed conflict.

Article II Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to destroy, or to divert to peaceful purposes, as soon as possible but not later than nine months after entry into force of the Convention, all agents, toxins, weapons, equipment and means of delivery specified in article I of the Convention, which are in its possession or under its jurisdiction or control. In implementing the provisions of this article all necessary safety precautions shall be observed to protect populations and the environment.

Article III Each State Party to this Convention undertakes not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever, directly or indirectly, and not in any way to assist, encourage, or induce any State, group of States or international organizations to manufacture or otherwise acquire any of the agents, toxins, weapons, equipment or means of delivery specified in article I of this Convention.

Article IV Each State Party to this Convention shall, in accordance with its constitutional processes, take any necessary measures to prohibit and prevent the development, production, stockpiling, acquisition, or retention of the agents, toxins, weapons, equipment and means of delivery specified in article I of the Convention, within the territory of such State, under its jurisdiction or under its control anywhere.

Article V The States Parties to this Convention undertake to consult one another and to cooperate in solving any problems which may arise in relation to the objective of, or in the application of the provisions of, the Convention. Consultation and Cooperation pursuant to this article may also be undertaken through appropriate international procedures within the framework of the United Nations and in accordance with its Charter.

Article VI (1) Any State Party to this convention which finds that any other State Party is acting in breach of obligations deriving from the provisions of the Convention may lodge a complaint with the Security Council of the United Nations. Such a complaint should include all possible evidence confirming its validity, as well as a request for its consideration by the Security Council.

(2) Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any investigation which the Security Council may initiate, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, on the basis of the complaint received by the Council. The Security Council shall inform the States Parties to the Convention of the results of the investigation.

Article VII Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to provide or support assistance, in accordance with the United Nations Charter, to any Party to the Convention which so requests, if the Security Council decides that such Party has been exposed to danger as a result of violation of the Convention.

Article VIII Nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as in any way limiting or detracting from the obligations assumed by any State under the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on June 17, 1925.

Article IX Each State Party to this Convention affirms the recognized objective of effective prohibition of chemical weapons and, to this end, undertakes to continue negotiations in good faith with a view to reaching early agreement on effective measures for the prohibition of their development, production and stockpiling and for their destruction, and on appropriate measures concerning equipment and means of delivery specifically designed for the production or use of chemical agents for weapons purposes.

Article X (1) The States Parties to this Convention undertake to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the use of bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins for peaceful purposes. Parties to the Convention in a position to do so shall also cooperate in contributing individually or together with other States or international organizations to the further development and application of scientific discoveries in the field of bacteriology (biology) for prevention of disease, or for other peaceful purposes.

(2) This Convention shall be implemented in a manner designed to avoid hampering the economic or technological development of States Parties to the Convention or international cooperation in the field of peaceful bacteriological (biological) activities, including the international exchange of bacteriological (biological) and toxins and equipment for the processing, use or production of bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins for peaceful purposes in accordance with the provisions of the Convention.

Article XI Any State Party may propose amendments to this Convention. Amendments shall enter into force for each State Party accepting the amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Convention and thereafter for each remaining State Party on the date of acceptance by it.

Article XII Five years after the entry into force of this Convention, or earlier if it is requested by a majority of Parties to the Convention by submitting a proposal to this effect to the Depositary Governments, a conference of States Parties to the Convention shall be held at Geneva, Switzerland, to review the operation of the Convention, with a view to assuring that the purposes of the preamble and the provisions of the Convention, including the provisions concerning negotiations on chemical weapons, are being realized. Such review shall take into account any new scientific and technological developments relevant to the Convention.

Article XIII (1) This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.

(2) Each State Party to this Convention shall in exercising its national sovereignty have the right to withdraw from the Convention if it decides that extraordinary events, related to the subject matter of the Convention, have jeopardized the supreme interests of its country. It shall give notice of such withdrawal to all other States Parties to the Convention and to the United Nations Security Council three months in advance. Such notice shall include a statement of the extraordinary events it regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests.

Article XIV (1) This Convention shall be open to all States for signature. Any State which does not sign the Convention before its entry into force in accordance with paragraph (3) of this Article may accede to it at any time.

(2) This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. Instruments of ratification and instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.

(3) This Convention shall enter into force after the deposit of instruments of ratification by 22 Governments, including the Governments designated as Depositaries of the Convention.

(4) For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification or accession.

(5) The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature, the date of deposit or each instrument of ratification or of accession and the date of entry into force of this Convention, and of the receipt of other notices.

(6) This Convention shall be registered by the Depositary Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.

Article XV This Convention, the English, Russian, French, Spanish and Chinese texts of which are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly certified copies of the Convention shall be transmitted by the Depositary Governments to the Governments of the signatory and acceding states.

Appendix C The Weapons of Mass Destruction and Their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 An Act to prohibit unlawful activities, in relation to weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Whereas India is determined to safeguard its national security as a Nuclear Weapon State; And Whereas India is committed not to transfer nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, or to transfer control over such weapons or explosive devices, and not in any way to assist, encourage, or induce any other country to manufacture nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; And Whereas India is committed to prevent a non-State actor and a terrorist from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems; And Whereas India is committed to the objective of global nuclear disarmament; And Whereas India is committed to its obligations as a State Party to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction; And Whereas India is exercising controls over the export of chemicals, organisms, materials, equipment and technologies in relation to weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems under other relevant Acts; And Whereas it is considered necessary to provide for integrated legal measures to exercise controls over the export of materials, equipment and technologies and to prohibit unlawful activities in relation to weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- 1. Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be called the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Act in addition to other laws Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to any other relevant Act for the time being in force in relation to any matter covered under this Act.

3. Extent and application: (1) It extends to the whole of India including its Exclusive Economic Zone.

(2) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Act for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he is held guilty in India.

(3) Any person who commits an offence beyond India, which is punishable under this Act, shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this Act in the same manner as if such act had been committed in India.

(4) The provisions of this Act shall also apply to: (a) citizens of India outside India; (b) companies or bodies corporate, registered or incorporated in India or having their associates, branches or subsidiaries, outside India; (c) any ship, aircraft or other means of transport registered in India or outside India, wherever it may be; (d) foreigners while in India; (e) persons in the service of the Government of India, within and beyond India.

(5) Notwithstanding the applicability of the provisions of any other Central Act relating to any activity provided herein, the provisions of this Act shall apply to export, transfer, re-transfer, transit and trans-shipment of material, equipment or technology of any description as are identified, designated, categorised or considered necessary by the Central Government, as pertinent or relevant to India as a Nuclear Weapon State, or to the national security of India, or to the furtherance of its foreign policy or its international obligations under any bilateral, multilateral or international treaty, Covenant, Convention or arrangement relating to weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery, to which India is a Party.

4. Definitions: In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) Biological weapons: are- (i) microbial or other biological agents, or toxins whatever their origin or method of production, of types and in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes; and (ii) weapons, equipment or delivery systems specially designed to use such agents or toxins for hostile purposes or in armed conflict; (b) Brought in transit means to bring goods from any country into India by land, air, or amphibious means of transportation, where the goods are to be taken out from India on the same conveyance on which they are brought into India without any landing in India, but does not include a conveyance in innocent passage through Indian territory, Indian territorial waters or Indian airspace of a foreign conveyance carrying goods.

Explanation I.-A conveyance is a foreign conveyance if it is not registered in India.

Explanation II.-A conveyance is in innocent passage if it is not engaged in relevant activity and passes through or above Indian territorial waters or airspace without stopping or anchoring in India; (c) Chemical weapons means- (i) The toxic chemicals and their precursors, except where intended for- (a) industrial, agricultural, research, medical, pharmaceutical or other peaceful purposes; (b) protective purposes, namely those purposes directly related to protection against toxic chemicals and to protection against chemical weapons; (c) military purposes not connected with the use of chemical weapons and not dependent on the use of the toxic properties of chemicals as a method of warfare; or (d) law enforcement including domestic riot control purposes; as long as the types and quantities are consistent with such purposes; (ii) the munitions and devices, specifically designed to cause death or other harm through the toxic properties of those toxic chemicals specified in sub-clause (i), which would be released as a result of the employment of such munitions and devices; and (iii) any equipment specifically designed for use directly in connection with the employment of munitions and devices specified in sub-clause (ii), together or separately; (d) Export shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992); (e) Fissile material and radioactive material shall have the meanings assigned to these expressions in the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962); (f) Item means materials, equipment, and technology, of any description, notified under this Act or any other Act related to relevant activity; (g) Non-State actor is a person or entity not acting under the lawful authority of any country; (h) Nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device means any nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device as may be determined by the Central Government, whose determination in the matter shall be final; (i) Public domain means domain that has no restrictions upon dissemination of information within or from it; the existence of any legal rights to intellectual property in that information does not remove such information from being in public domain; (j) Relevant activity means,- (i) the development, production, handling, operation, maintenance, storage or dissemination of a nuclear, chemical or biological weapon; or (ii) the development, production, maintenance, storage or dissemination of missiles specially designed for delivering any such weapon; (k) Re-transfer means transfer of any item notified under this Act from any country or entity to which it has been exported from India, to yet another country or entity; (l) Technology means any information (including information embodied in software) other than information in the public domain, that is capable of being used in- (i) the development, production or use of any goods or software; (ii) the development of, or the carrying out of, an industrial or commercial activity or the provision of a service of any kind.

Explanation.-When technology is described wholly or partly by reference to the uses to which it (or the goods to which it relates) may be put, it shall include services which are provided or used, or which are capable of being used, in the development, production or use of such technology or goods; (m) Terrorist shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967); (n) Trans-shipment means to remove goods from the conveyance on which they were brought into India and to place the goods on the same or another conveyance for the purpose of taking them out of India, where these acts are carried out on a through bill of lading, through airway bill or through manifest.

Explanation: Through bill of lading, through airway bill and through manifest means respectively a bill of lading, airway bill and manifest, for the consignment of goods from a place outside India to a destination which is also outside India without a consignee in India; (o) Uunlawful means without the authority of the Central Government and the expression unlawfully shall be construed accordingly; (p) Weapons of mass destruction means any biological, chemical or nuclear weapons.

5. Power to identify, designate, categorise or regulate certain activities: (1) The Central Government may identify, designate, categorise or regulate, the export, transfer, re-transfer, trans-shipment, or transit of any item related to relevant activity in such manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, designate or notify any item related to relevant activity for the purposes of this Act.

6. Power to appoint Advisory Committees For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint such Advisory Committees as it deems fit, and may appoint to them persons to exercise such powers and perform such duties as the Central Government may, by rules, prescribe.

7. Delegation of powers (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for the time being in force, related to relevant activity, the Central Government shall have the power to direct or assign to any authority, in such manner as it may deem appropriate, such powers as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Act.

(2) The Central Government may appoint a Licensing Authority and an Appellate Authority and make provisions relating to such authority and for licensing in such manner and in such form, as the Central Government may, by rules, prescribe.

(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in this Act, the authorities and mechanisms provided under other relevant Acts shall continue to deal with matters covered under those Acts: Provided that in case of any doubt as to whether a matter falls within the scope of such relevant Acts or under this Act, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.

8. Prohibition relating to weapons of mass destruction (1) No person shall unlawfully manufacture, acquire, possess, develop or transport a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device and their means of delivery.

(2) No person shall unlawfully transfer, directly or indirectly, to any one a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device, or transfer control over such a weapon, knowing it to be a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device.

(3) No person shall unlawfully manufacture, acquire, possess, develop or transport a biological or chemical weapon or their means of delivery.

(4) No person shall unlawfully transfer, directly or indirectly, to any one biological or chemical weapons.

(5) No person shall unlawfully transfer, directly or indirectly, to any one missiles specially designed for the delivery of weapons of mass destruction.

9. Prohibition relating to non-State actor or terrorist No person shall, directly or indirectly, transfer to a non-State actor or terrorist, any material, equipment and technology notified under this Act or any other Act related to relevant activity: Provided that such transfer made to a non-State actor shall not include a transfer made as such to any person acting under lawful authority in India.

10. Prohibition as regards intimidating acts No person shall transfer, acquire, possess, or transport fissile or radioactive material, which is intended to be used to cause, or in a threat to cause, death or serious injury or damage to property for the purpose of intimidating people or a section of the people in India or in any foreign country, or compelling the Government of India or the Government of a foreign country or an international organisation or any other person to do so or abstain from doing any act.

11. Prohibition on export No person shall export any material, equipment or technology knowing that such material, equipment or technology is intended to be used in the design or manufacture of a biological weapon, chemical weapon, nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device, or in their missile delivery systems.

12. Prohibition on brokering No person who is a resident in India shall, for a consideration under the terms of an actual or implied contract, knowingly facilitate the execution of any transaction which is prohibited or regulated under this Act: Provided that a mere carriage, without knowledge, of persons, goods or technology, or provision of services, including by a public or private carrier of goods, courier, tele-communication, postal service provider or financial service provider, shall not be an offence for the purposes of this section.

13. Regulation of export, transfer, retransfer, transit and transshipment (1) No item notified under this Act shall be exported, transferred, retransferred, brought in transit or transhipped except in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any other relevant Act.

(2) Any transfer of technology of an item whose export is prohibited under this Act or any other relevant Act relating to relevant activity shall be prohibited.

(3) When any technology is notified under this Act or any other relevant Act, as being subject to transfer controls, the transfer of such technology shall be restricted to the extent notified thereunder.

Explanation.-The transfer of technology may take place through either or both of the following modes of transfer, namely:- (a) by a person or from a place within India to a person or place outside India; (b) by a person or from a place outside India to a person, or a place, which is also outside India (but only where the transfer is by, or within the control of, person, who is a citizen of India, or any person who is a resident in India).

(4) The Central Government may notify any item as being subject to the provisions of this Act, whether or not it is covered under any other relevant Act; and when such item is exhibited, sold, supplied or transferred to any foreign entity or a foreigner who is resident, operating, visiting, studying, or conducting research or business within the territorial limits of India, or in its airspace or Exclusive Economic Zone, it shall constitute an offence.

14. Offences and penalties Any person who contravenes, or attempts to contravene or abets, the provisions of section 8 or section 10 of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

15. Punishment for aiding non-State actor or terrorist (1) Any person who, with intent to aid any non-State actor or terrorist, contravenes the provisions of section 9 of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

(2) Any person who, with intent to aid any non-State actor or terrorist, attempts to contravene or abets, or does any act preparatory to contravention of sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have contravened that provision and the provision of sub-section (1) shall apply subject to the modification that the reference to imprisonment for life therein shall be construed as a reference to imprisonment for ten years.

(3) While determining the punishment under this section, the court shall take into consideration whether the accused had the knowledge about the transferee being a non- State actor or not.

16. Punishment for unauthorized export (1) Any person who knowingly contravenes, abets or attempts to contravene, the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 13 of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees and which may extend to twenty lakh rupees.

(2) If any person is again convicted of the same offence under subsection (1), then he shall be punishable for the second and every subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.

17. Punishment for violation of other provisions of the Act (1) Where any person contravenes, or abets or attempts to contravene, any provision of this Act other than the provisions under sections 8, 9, 10 and sub-section (4) of section 13 of this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.

(2) If any person is again convicted of the same offence under subsection (1), then he shall be punishable for the second and every subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.

18. Penalty for using false or making forged documents, etc Where any person signs or uses, or causes to be signed or used, any declaration, statement or document submitted to the competent authority knowing or having reason to believe that such declaration, statement or document is forged or tampered with or is false in any material particular, and relates to items notified under this Act or any other relevant Act, including those related to relevant activity, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees or five times the value of the materials, equipment, technology or services, whichever is more.

19. Punishment for offences with respect to which no provision has been made Whoever contravenes any other provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder for which no specific punishment is provided, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

20. Offences by companies: (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section:- (a) Company means any body corporate and includes a firm and other association of individuals; and (b) Director, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

21. Cognizance of offences No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act without the previous sanction of the Central Government or any officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf.

22. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts No action or proceedings taken under section 5 and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 7 of this Act by the Central Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf shall be called in question in any civil court in any suit or application or by way of appeal or revision, and no injunction shall be granted by any civil court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred under those provisions.

23. Effect of other laws: (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any other instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.

(2) Where any act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act and also under any other relevant Act, then the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable to be punished under that Act which imposes a greater punishment.

24. Protection of action taken in good faith No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or authority of the Central Government or any other authority on whom powers have been conferred pursuant to this Act, for anything which is in good faith done or purported to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

25. Special provisions as to Central Government Nothing in this Act shall affect the activities of the Central Government in the discharge of its functions relating to the security or the defence of India.

26. Power to make rules: (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) Manner of regulating any item related to relevant activity under sub-section (1) of section 5; (b) Appointment of Advisory Committees, their powers and duties under section 6; (c) Appointment of Licensing and Appellate Authority and the manner of licensing under sub-section (2) of section 7; and (d) Any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

27. Power to remove difficulties: (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

Appendix D Principles of International Law Recognized in the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and in the Judgment of the Tribunal, 1950 Principle I Any person who commits an act which constitutes a crime under international law is responsible therefor and liable to punishment.

Principle II The fact that internal law does not impose a penalty for an act which constitutes a crime under international law does not relieve the person who committed the act from responsibility under international law.

Principle III The fact that a person who committed an act which constitutes a crime under international law acted as Head of State or responsible Government official does not relieve him from responsibility under international law.

Principle IV The fact that a person acted pursuant to order of his Government or of a superior does not relieve him from responsibility under international law, provided a moral choice was in fact possible to him.

Principle V Any person charged with a crime under international law has the right to a fair trial on the facts and law.

Principle VI The crimes hereinafter set out are punishable as crimes under international law: (a) Crimes against peace: (i) Planning, preparation, initiation or waging of a war of aggression or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements or assurances; (ii) Participation in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of the acts mentioned under (i).

(b) War crimes: Violations of the laws or customs of war which include, but are not limited to, murder, ill-treatment or deportation to slave-labour or for any other purpose of civilian population of or in occupied territory, murder or ill-treatment of prisoners of war, of persons on the seas, killing of hostages, plunder of public or private property, wanton destruction of cities, towns, or villages, or devastation not justified by military necessity.

(c) Crimes against humanity: Murder, extermination, enslavement, deportation and other inhuman acts done against any civilian population, or persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds, when such acts are done or such persecutions are carried on in execution of or in connection with any crime against peace or any war crime.

Principle VII Complicity in the commission of a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity as set forth in Principle VI is a crime under international law.

Bibliography A New Biology for the 21st Century, National Research Council of the National Academies, Washington DC: The National Academies Press, 2009, pp. 113.

A more secure world: Our shared responsibility, Report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, United Nations, 2004, pp. 154.

A world at risk: Annual report on global preparedness for health emergencies, Global Preparedness Monitoring Board, Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019, pp. 48.

Abrol Sumeet, Countering Bioterrorism Threat to India: Employing Global Best Practices and Technology as Force Multiplier, India Quarterly, Vol. 72, issue 2, 2016, pp. 142-162.

Ackerman Gary and Jeremy Tamsett (ed.), 2009, Jihadists and Weapons of Mass Destruction, London: CRC Press, p. 489.

Ainscough Michael J., Next Generation Bio-weapons: The Technology of Genetic Engineering Applied to Bio-warfare and Bioterrorism, Future Warfare Series No. 14, Alabama: Air War College, 2002, pp. 50.

Ainscough Michael J., Next generation Bio-weapons: Genetic Engineering and Biological Warfare, Future Warfare Series No. 14, Alabama: Air War College, 2002, pp. 38.

Aken Jan van and Edward Hammond, Genetic engineering and biological weapons, EMBO Reports, Volume 4 (special issue), 2003, pp. S57- S60.

Alibek Ken, 1999, Biohazard: The Chilling True Story of the Largest Covert Biological Weapons Program in the World--Told from Inside by the Man Who Ran It, New York: Random House, pp. 319.

Almosara Joel O., Biotechnology: Genetically Engineered Pathogens, US Air Force Counterproliferation Centre: Future Warfare Series, No. 53, Air University Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, 2010, pp. 43.

Anderson Burt, Herman Friedman and Mauro Bendinelli, 2006, Microorganism and Bioterrorism, USA: Springer, pp. 240.

Annas George J., Blinded by Bioterrorism: Public Health and Liberty in the 21st Century, Health Matrix, Vol. 13, 2013, pp. 33-70.

Anthrax in Humans and Animals, 2008, World Health Organization, pp. 208.

Atlas Ronald M., Combating the Threat of Bio-warfare and Bioterrorism, Bio-Science, Vol. 49, No. 6, June 1999, pp. 465-477.

Atlas Ronald M., Bioterrorism: From Threat to Reality, Annual Review of Microbiology, Vol. 56, 2002, pp. 167-186.

Barras V. and G. Greub, History of biological warfare and bioterrorism, Clinical Microbiology and Infection, Vol. 20, 2014, pp. 497502.

Berger Kavita M., Emerging and Enabling Technologies in Biodefence, in Singh S.K. and Kuhn J.H. (ed), 2019, Defence Against Biological Attacks, USA: Springer, pp. 253-281.

Bhargava Pushpa, Ethical Issues in Modern Biological Technologies, Reproductive Biomedicine, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 176-285.

Blair John D, Myron D. Fottler and Albert C. Zapanta (ed.), 2004, Bioterrorism, Preparedness, Attack and Response, Advances in Healthcare Management, Vol. 4, pp. 366.

Bozue Joel, Christopher K. Cote and Pamela J. Glass (Ed.), 2018, Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare: Text Book of Military Medicine, Office of the Surgeon General: US Army Medical Department Centre and School, pp. 938.

Broad William J., Gene-engineered anthrax: is it a weapon? New York Times, 14 February 1998.

Brown David, The Role of the Media in Bioterrorism, in Lutwick L.I. and S.M. Lutwick (Eds.), 2009, Beyond Anthrax: The Weaponization of Infectious Diseases, Springer: Humana Press, pp. 295-316.

Burt Anderson, Herman Friedman and Mauro Bendinelli (ed.), 2006, Microorganisms and Bioterrorism: Infectious Agents and Pathogenesis, Springer, pp. 240.

Caitriona McLeish and Paul Nightingale, Bio-security, bioterrorism and the governance of science: The increasing convergence of science and security policy, Research Policy, Vol. 36, 2007, pp. 1635-1654.

Calisher Charles H., Lets Get Something Straight: Bioterrorism or Natural Disasters: What Shall We Worry about Next? Croat Med. J ., Vol. 48, 2007, pp. 574-578.

Camacho Angelina, The Microscopic Threat to the United States: Biological Weapons, Biological Terrorism and their Multifaceted Implications for the US Security, Unpublished Master thesis, Johns Hopkins University, 2014, pp. 112.

Carus W. Seth, 2017, A Short History of Biological Warfare: From Pre-History to the 21st Century, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Washington DC: National Defence University, pp. 68.

Carus WS, The history of biological weapons use: what we know and what we dont, Health Security, Vol. 13, No. 4, 2015, pp. 219255.

Carus W. Seth., 2012, Defining Weapons of Mass destruction, Centre for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Washington DC: National Defence University, pp. 90.

Carus W. Seth., 2001, Bioterrorism and Biocrimes: The Illicit use of biological agents since 1900, Centre for Counter-proliferation Research, National Defence University, Washington DC, pp. 219.

Cenciarelli Orlando, et. al., Bioweapons and Bioterrorism: A Review of History and Biological Agents, Defence S&T Tech Bull ., Vol. 6(2), 2013, pp. 111-128.

Chansoria Monika, Is China Producing Biological Weapons? Look at Its Capabilities and International Compliance, Japan Forward, 5 March 2020, pp. 4.

Cheatham Sharon, Bioterrorism in the Homeland: The Impact of acts of Bioterrorism on American Culture, Georgetown University Washington, unpublished thesis, 2013, pp. 88.

Chyba Christopher F., and Alex L. Greninger, Biotechnology and Bioterrorism: An Unprecedented World, Survival, Vol. 46, No. 2, Summer 2004, pp. 143162.

Cogliati S, Costa JG, Ayala FR, Donato V, Grau R, Bacterial Spores and its Relatives as Agents of Mass Destruction, Journal of Bioterrorism and Biodefence, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2016, pp. 12.

Cordesman Anthony H., 2001, Defending America: Asymmetrical and Terrorist Attack with Biological Weapons, Washington DC: Centre for Strategic and International Studies, pp. 86.

Cordesman Anthony H. and Adam C. Seitz, 2008, Iranian Weapons of Mass Destruction: Biological Weapons Programs, Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, pp. 37.

Cornish Paul, The CBRN System: Assessing the threat of terrorist use of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear weapons in the United Kingdom, Chatham House, The Royal Institute of International Affairs, February 2007, pp. 31.

Countering Bioterrorism: The Role of Science and Technology, Committee on Science and Technology for Countering Terrorism, Institute of Medicine, National Research Council, Washington DC: The National Academies Press, 2002, pp. 93.

Dando Malcolm, 2006, Bioterror and Biowarfare: A beginners guide, Oxford: One-world Publications, pp. 191.

Das S. and Kataria V.K., Bioterrorism: A Public Health Perspective, MJAFI, Vol. 66, No. 3, 2010, pp. 255-260.

DaSilva Edgar J., Biological Warfare, bioterrorism, biodefence and the biological and toxin weapons convention, Journal of Biotechnology, Vol. 2, No. 3, 15 December 1999, pp. 31.

David Chandler and India Landrigan, A Journalists Guide to Covering Bioterrorism, 2004, pp. 57.

Davis Jim A., and Barry Schneider (Ed.), 2002, The Gathering of Biological Warfare Storm, USAF Counter-proliferation Centre: Air War College, Alabama, pp. 313.

Davis Jim A. and Anna Johnson-Winegar, The Anthrax Terror: DODs Number-One Biological Threat, in Davis Jim A., and Barry Schneider (Ed.), 2002, The Gathering of Biological Warfare Storm, USAF Counter-proliferation Centre: Air War College, Alabama, pp. 67-94.

Decker Janet, 2008, Deadly Diseases and Epidemics: Anthrax, Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publishers, pp. 122.

Douglas Lawrence, Pandemic Disease, Biological Weapons and War, in Sarat Austin, Lawrence Douglas and Martha Merrill Umphrey (ed.), 2014, Law and War, Stanford University Press, pp. 248.

Dworkin M.S., Xinfang Ma and Roman G. Golash, Fear of bioterrorism and implications for public health preparedness, Emerging Infectious Disease, Vol. 9, No. 4, April 2003, pp. 503-505.

Edgar J. DaSilva, Biological warfare, bioterrorism, bio-defence and the biological and toxin weapons convention, EJB Electronic Journal of Biotechnology, Vol. 2, No. 3, December 1999, pp. 109-139.

Ellison D. Hank, 2008, Handbook of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents, New York: CRC Press, pp. 762.

Emenark Christian, 2007, Disease and Security: Natural plagues and biological weapons in East Asia, London: Routledge, pp. 229.

Enemark, Christian. Biological Weapons: An Overview of Threats and Responses, Canberra: The Australian National University, 2003.

Ensuring Effective Interagency Interoperability and Coordinated Communication in Case of Chemical and/or Biological Attacks, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, New York, 2017, pp. 78.

Erenler Ali Kemal, Murat Guzel and Ahmet Baydin, How Prepared Are We for Possible Bioterrorist Attacks: An Approach from Emergency Medicine Perspective, The Scientific World Journal, Vol. 2018, pp. 4.

Eric Merriam, The International Legal Regime Affecting Bioterrorism Prevention, National Security Law Journal, Vol. 3, 2014, pp. 1-45.

Fidler, David P., Bioterrorism, Public Health, and International Law, Chicago Journal of International Law, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2002, pp. 7-26.

Fong I.W. and Karl Drlica (ed.), 2008, Antimicrobial Resistance and Implications for the 21st Century, USA: Springer, pp. 407.

Fong I.W. and Ken Alibeck (ed.), 2007, New and Evolving Infections of the 21st Century, USA: Springer, pp. 375.

Fong I.W. and Ken Alibek (ed.), 2009, Bioterrorism and Infectious Agents: A New Dilemma for the 21st Century, USA: Springer, pp. 273.

Genetic Engineering and Biological Weapons, GeneWatch UK, Briefing Number 6, June 1999, pp. 3.

Goel Ajay Kumar, Anthrax: A Disease of biowarfare and public health importance, World Journal of Clinical Cases, Vol. 3(1), 16 January 2015, pp. 20-33.

Geissler Erhard (ed.), 1986, Biological and Toxin Weapons Today, SIPRI and Oxford University Press, pp. 207.

Gordon Steven M., The threat of bioterrorism: A reason to learn more about anthrax and smallpox, Cleveland Clinic Jour of Medicine, Vol.66, No. 10, 1999, p. 592-597.

Gostin Lawrence O., The Model State Emergency Health Powers Act: Public Health and Civil Liberties in a Time of Terrorism, Health Matrix, Vol. 13, Issue 3, Health Matrix: The Journal of Law-Medicine, 2013, pp. 3-32.

Grafstein Eric, Bioterrorism: An emerging threat, CJEM: JCMU, Vol. 1(3), October 1999, pp. 205-209.

Green Manfred S., James LeDuc, Daniel Cohen, and David R Franz, Confronting the threat of bioterrorism: realities, challenges, and defensive strategies, The Lancet Infectious Disease, Vol. 19, January 2019, pp. 12.

Gronvall Gigi Kwik, 2012, Preparing for Bioterrorism, US: Centre for Biosecuirty of UPMC, pp. 285.

Guillemin Jeanne, 2005, Biological Weapons: From the Invention of State-Sponsored Programs to Contemporary Bioterrorism, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 258.

Harris Sheldon H. 1994, Factories of Death: Japanese biological warfare, 193245, and the American cover-up, New York: Routledge, pp. 297.

Heather A. Dagen, Bioterrorism: Perfectly Legal, Catholic University Law Review, Vol. 49, Issue 2, Winter 2000, pp. 535-573.

Henderson Donald A. et. al., Smallpox as a biological weapon: Medical and public health management, JAMA, Vol. 281, No. 22, 9 June 1999, pp. 2127-2137.

Hoyt Kendall and Stephen G. Brooks, A Double-Edged Sword: Globalization and Biosecuirty, International Security, Vol. 28, No. 3, Winter 2003/04, pp. 123148.

Hughes J.M., The Emerging Threat of Bioterrorism, Emerging Infectious Diseases, Vol. 5, No. 4, July-August 1999, pp. 494-495.

Jansen H. J., F. J. Breeveld, C. Stijnis and M. P. Grobusch, Biological Warfare, Bioterrorism and Biocrime, Clin Microbiol Infect, Vol. 20, 2014, pp. 488-496.

Kalupa, Nicole H., Black Biology, Wisconsin International Law Journal, Vol. 34, No. 4, 2017, pp. 952-980.

Karwa Manoj, Bioterrorism: Preparing for the impossible or the improbable, Crit Care Med, Vol. 33, No. 1 (Suppl.), 2005, pp. S75-95.

Kelle Alexander and Annette Schaper, Terrorism using biological and nuclear weapons: A critical analysis of risks after 11 September 2001, Peace Research Institute Frankfurt, Reports No. 64, pp. 33.

Kelle Alexander, 2014, Prohibiting Chemical and Biological Weapons: Multilateral Regimes and Their Evolution, USA: Lynne Rienner Publishers, pp. 286.

Kellman Barry, 2007, Bioviolence: Preventing Biological Terror and Crime, Cam-bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 357.

Kellman Barry, An International Criminal Law Approach to Bioterrorism, Harv. J.L. & Pub. Poly, Vol. 25, 2001-2002, pp. 721-742. S-21.

Kemper Ryan R., Responding to Bioterrorism: An Analysis of Titles I and II of the Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act of 2002, Washington University Law Review, Vol. 83, Issue 1, January 2005, pp. 385-316.

Kendall Ronald J., Steven M. Presley, Galen P. Austin and Philip N. Smith (Ed.), 2008, Advances in Biological and Chemical Terrorism Countermeasures, New York: CRC Press, pp. 280.

Khurshid Syed Javid, Novel Coronavirus (nCoV-2019): Is it a Bioweapon? Journal of Bioterrorism and Biodefence, Vol. 11, No. 1, 2020, pp. 2.

Khurshid Syed Javid, Bioterrorism-A Threat to National Security, Journal of Bioterrorism and Biodefence, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2019, pp.3.

Koblentz Gregory D., Pathogens as Weapons: The International Security Implications of Biological Warfare, International Security, Volume 28, Issue 3, Winter 2003/04, pp. 84-122.

Koplow David A., That Wonderful Year: Smallpox, Genetic Engineering, and Bio-Terrorism, Med. L. Rev ., 2003, p. 417-514.

Kort Michael, 2010, Weapons of Mass Destruction: Global Issues, New York: Facts On File, Inc., pp. 366.

Krishnan Kewal, Baljinder Kaur and Anshula Sharma, Indias preparedness against bioterrorism: biodefence strategies and policy measures, Current Science, Vol. 113, No. 9, 10 November 2017, pp. 1675-1682.

Lam Sai-Kit, Nipah virusa potential agent of bioterrorism? Antiviral Research, Vol. 57, 2003, pp. 113119.

Langston Stacy M., The Threat of Domestic Bioterrorism: Fact or Fiction? Unpublished Master thesis, The University of Texas at El Paso, 2013, pp. 65.

Leitenberg Milton, Assessing the Biological Weapons and Bioterrorism Threat, The Strategic Studies Institute, December 2005, pp. 125.

Leitenberg Milton, Biological weapons and Bioterrorism in the First Years of the 21st Century, Paper prepared for Conference on the Possible Use of Biological Weapons by Terrorists Groups: Scientific, Legal, and International Implications, Italy, April 2003, pp. 115. S-139.

Lindler Luther E., Lebeda Frank J. and Korch George W., 2005, Biological Weapons Defence: Infectious Diseases and Counter-bioterrorism, New Jersey: Humana Press, pp. 597.

Lutwick L.I. and S.M. Lutwick (Eds.), 2009, Beyond Anthrax: The Weaponization of Infectious Diseases, Springer: Humana Press, pp. 295-316.

Mair Michael and Julie Samia Mair, A Complementary Approach to Bioterrorism Prevention, The Nonproliferation Review, Fall-Winter 2003, pp. 1-11.

Malad Syra S., Bioterrorism: An Emerging Global Health Threat, Journal of Bioterrorism & Biodefence, Vol. 5, issue, pp. 6.

Masthan K.M.K, Shanmugam K.T, Aravindha Babu N and Tathagata Bhattacharjee, Virus as a biological-weapon, Vol. 2(6), International Research Journal of Microbiology, June 2012, pp. 237-239. S-79.

Mayor Eleanor E., Prepare for the Worst: Protecting Civil Liberties in the Modern Age of Bioterrorism, Journal of Constitutional Law, Vol. 11, No. 4, April 2009, pp. 1051-1076.

Meghana Rastogi and Singh Sunit K.,Advances in Molecular Diagnostic Approaches for Biothreat Agents, in Singh Sunit K. and Jens H. Kuhn (Ed.), 2019, Defence Against Biological Attacks, Vol II, Switzerland: Springer, pp. 281-310.

Melnick Alan L., 2008, Biological, Chemical and Radiological Terrorism: Emergency Preparedness and Response for the Primary Care Physician, USA: Springer, pp. 255.

Menon Raja (Ed.), 2004, Weapons of Mass Destruction: Options for India, New Delhi: Sage Publications, pp. 278.

Merriam, Eric, The International Legal Regime Affecting Bioterrorism Prevention, National Security Law Journal, Vol. 3, 2014, pp. 1045.

Millett Peirs (Ed.), 2011, Improving Implementation of the Biological Weapons Convention: The 2007-2010 Intercessional Process, Geneva: UNIDR and UNODA, pp. 330.

Moghaddasi H, Shokrizadeh Arani L and Zarghi A., Features of Bioterrorism Information System, Journal of Bioterrorism & Biodefence, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 6.

Moorchung N., AK Sharma and SR Mehta, Bioshock: Biotechnology and Bioterrorism, MJAFI, Vol. 65, No. 4, 2009, pp. 359-363.

Morse Stephen A. (ed), 2012, Bioterrorism, Croatia: InTech, pp. 202.

Moser Royce, Preparing for Expected Bioterrorism Attack, Military Medicine, Vol. 166, No. 5, 2001, pp. 369-374.

Murphy Sean, Alastair Hay and Steven Rose, 1984, No Fire, No Thunder: The Threat of Chemical and Biological Weapons, USA: Murphy Review Press, pp. 80.

Murray G. Sagsveen and Sarah M. Bird Nelson, Bioterrorism: A Potential Existential Threat, Foreword, Vol. 6, No. 3, University of St. Thomas Law Journal, 2009, pp. 517-522.

Musson, Gail C., Smallpox as a Bioweapon Should We Be Concerned, California: Naval Postgraduate School, 2012, pp. 146.

National Strategy for Countering Biological Threats: Diplomacy and International Programme: Hearing before the Sub-Committee on Terrorism, Non-Proliferation and Trade, One Hundred Eleventh Congress, 18 March 2010, Serial No. 111-91, Washington: US Government, pp. 93.

Ndubuisi Chinemerem Ejike, Bioterrorism Hardening: An Exploratory Study of EMTs Preparedness and Practices, Doctoral Dissertation, Walden University, 2019. S-54.

Nicholas J Beeching, David A B Dance, Alastair R. O. Miller and Robert C Spencer, Biological warfare and bioterrorism, BJM, Vol. 324, 9 February 2002, pp. 335-338.

Nor Anita Abdullah and Rohani binti Abdul Rahim, An Introduction of Bioterrorism in Malaysia: A Legal Approach, UUM Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 3, 2012, pp. 23-49.

Okonkwo Victor Okey and Udeze Henry Ejidike, The Role of Zoonotic and Parasitic Agent in Bioterrorism: The Need for Bio-security and Bio-safety Standards and Compliance in Nigeria, Animal Research International, Vol. 4(1), 2017, pp. 2666-2671.

Parker Lauren, Bioterrorism and Intelligence, Golbal Security Studies, Vol. 4, Issue 3, Summer 2013, pp. 53-63.

Pearson Graham S., 2005, The Search for Iraqs Weapons of Mass Destruction, New York: Palgrave: Macmillan, pp. 338.

Pita Rene and Rohan Gunaratna, Revisiting Al-Qaidas Anthrax Program, CTC Sentinel, Vol. 2, Issue 5, May 2009, pp. 1-4.

Plessis Gitte du, Microbial Geopolitics: Living with danger and the Future of Security, Ph D Thesis, University of Hawaii, August 2017, pp. 119.

Plianbangchang Samlee, Strategies of Preparedness against the threat of Biological Warfare and Bioterrorism in South-East Asia, Asian Biotechnology and Development Review, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2005, pp. 77-98.

Popescu Saskia, Infection Prevention and Control: A Biodefense Measure, in Singh Sunit K. and Jens H. Kuhn (Ed.), 2019, Defence Against Biological Attacks, Vol. I, Switzerland: Springer, pp. 145-169.

Richards, Ewdard. P., OBrien, Terry & Rathbun, K. C., Bioterrorism and the Use of Fear in Public Health, The Urban Lawyer, 34(3), 2002, pp. 685  726..

Riedel Stefan, Biological Warfare and Bioterrorism: A Historical Review, Baylor University Medical Centre Proceedings, Vol. 17, October 2004, pp. 400-406.

Ritwik Raj, Ananya Saxena and Ritcha Saxena, Vulnerability to a Bioterrorism Attack and the Potential of Directed Evolution as a Countermeasure, Electronic Journal of Biology, Vol.13(2), 2017, pp. 125-130.

Schneider Barry R., US Bio-defence Readiness: Thoughts after September 11th, in Davis Jim A., and Barry Schneider (Ed.), 2002, The Gathering of Biological Warfare Storm, USAF Counter-proliferation Centre: Air War College, Alabama, pp. 1-8.

Sebastian Lucas, Bioterrorism, in Guy N. Rutty (Ed.), 2008, Essentials of Autopsy Practice: Topical Developments, Trends and Advances, London: Springer-Verlag, pp. 135-166.

Shoham Dany, 2001, Chemical and Biological Weapons in the Arab Countries and IranAn Existential Threat to Israel? Israel: The Ariel Center for Policy Research, pp. 119.

Short, Air Vice Marshal Bruce, Bioterrorism: Menace of Microbial Science, United Service, Vol. 59(3), September 2008, pp. 12-16.

Smith Tara C., 2011, Ebola and Marburg Viruses: deadly Diseases and Epidemics, New York: Chelsea House, pp. 103.

Smithson Amy E., Ugly Truths: Saddam Hussein and Other Insiders on Iraqs Covert Bioweapons, CNS Occasional Paper No. 17, Middlebury Institute of International Studies, March 2013, pp. 36.

Somerville Margaret A. and Ronald M. Atlas, Ethics: A Weapon to Counter Bioterrorism, Science, Vol. 307, Issue 5717, March 2005, pp. 1881-1882.

Spiers Edward M., 2000, Weapons of Mass Destruction: Prospects for Proliferation, New York: St. Martin Press, pp. 223.

Stern Jessica, Dreaded Risk and the Control of Biological Weapons, International Security, Vol. 27, No. 3, Winter 2002/03, pp. 89123.

Steven M. Block, The Growing Threat of Biological Weapons, American Scientist, Vol. 89, Issue. 1, January-February 2001.

Stolar Alex, Bioterrorism and US Policy response assessing the threat of mass casualty, Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies Special Report 31, October 2006, pp. 7.

Sutton Victoria, Emerging Biotechnologies and the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention: Can it Keep Up with the Biotechnology Revolution? Vol. 2, Tex. A&M Law Review, 2015, pp. 695-718.

Sutton Victoria, 2003, Law and Bioterrorism, North Carolina: Carolina Academic Press, pp. 302.

Sutton Victoria, Precarious Hot Zone- The Presidents Plan to Combat Bioterrorism, Military Law Review, Vol. 164, Spring 2000, pp. 135-154.

Sutton Victoria, Bioterrorism Preparation and Response Legislation--The Struggle to Protect States Sovereignty While Preserving National Security, Vol. 6, The Georgetown Public Policy Review, 2001, pp. 1-15.

Svab Martin, 2017, Biological Weapons, Bioterrorism, and Worlds Preparedness against them, Bachelor Thesis, Mendel University in Brno 2017, pp. 82.

The Biological and Toxin Weapon Convention: Implications of advances in science and technology; Summary of Workshop, The Global Network of Science Academies, IAP, pp. 105.

The International Legal Framework against Chemical, Biological, radiological and Nuclear Terrorism, UN Office of Drugs and Crime, 2016, pp. 89.

Thomas Kratz, Bruria Adini, August Stich, and Rene Gottschalk, Clinical Management of Patients Infected with Highly Pathogenic Microorganisms, in Singh Sunit K. and Jens H. Kuhn (Ed.), 2019, Defence Against Biological Attacks, Vol. I, Switzerland: Springer, pp. 171-194.

Thompson Christopher M., Bioterrorism Threat by Non-state Actors: Hype or Horror? Thesis, Naval Post-Graduate School, California, December 2006, pp. 109.

Tucker Jonathan B., Historical Trends Related to Bioterrorism: An Empirical Analysis, Emerging Infectious Diseases, Vol. 5, No. 4, July-August 1999, pp. 498-504.

UK Biological Security Strategy, HM Government, July 2018, pp. 48.

Vargo Marc E., 2017, The Weaponizing of Biology: Bioterrorism, Biocrime and Biohacking, McFarmland & Co, pp. 252.

Vogel Kathleen M., Expert Knowledge in Intelligence Assessment: Bird Flu and Bioterrorism, International Security, Vol. 38, No. 3, Winter 2013/2014, pp. 39-71.

Warner Jerry, et.al., Analysis of the Threat of Genetically Modified Organism for Biological Warfare, Centre for Technology and National Security Policy, Washington DC: National Defence University, May 2011, pp. 37.

Wheelis Mark and Malcolm Dando, New Technology and Future Developments in Biological Warfare, Disarmament Forum, Vol. 4, 2000, pp. 43-50.

Wheelis Mark L., Lajos Rozsa and Malcolm R. Dando (ed.), 2006, Deadly Cultures: Biological Weapons since 1945, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 479. S-120.

Whitby Simon, Tatyana Novossiolova, Gerald Walther and Malcom Dando, 2015, Preventing Biological Threats: What You Can Do, UK: Bradford Disarmament Research Centre, pp. 446.

Whitby Simon M., 2002, Biological Warfare Against Crops, Cambridge: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 271.

White Scott G., It Happened Here: Biological Terrorism in the United States, in Haberfeld M.R. and Agostino von Hassell (Ed.), 2009, A New Understanding of Terrorism: Case Studies, Trajectories and Lessons Learned, New York: Springer, pp. 59-86.

Winzoski, K. J., A plague on both our houses: Canada, the United States, and biological Terrorism, Unpublished thesis, University of Calgary, 2001, pp. 226.

Wright Susan, Terrorists and biological weapons, Politics and the Life Sciences, Vol. 25(1), pp. 57-115.

Ziegler Michelle, The Black Death and the Future of the Plague, The Medieval Globe, Vol. 1, 2014, pp. 259-283.

Zilinskas Raymond A., A brief history of biological weapons programmes and the use of animal pathogens as biological warfare agents, Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz., Vol. 36 (2), 2017, pp. 415-422.

Zilinskas Raymond, The Soviet Biological Weapons Program and its Legacy in Todays Russia, Washington DC: National Defence University Press, 2016, pp. 60.

Index A Al Hakam 62 Anthrax vii, 6, 7, 8, 15, 21, 25, 29, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 38, 43, 46, 51, 56, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 69, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 92, 107, 109, 125, 126, 131, 133, 137, 138, 139, 140, 155, 173, 189, 200, 211, 233, 235, 237, 242, 278, 280, 281, 283, 285 Arenavirus 85 Argentine hemorrhagic fever 9 Armys Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) 69 B Biocrime 3, 282, 287 Biohackers 187, 189 Biohazard 3, 138, 277 Biological Agents 2, 7, 48, 82, 187, 232, 279 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) vii, 4, 156, 203, 204, 208, 209, 210, 212, 217 Biological Warfare 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 12, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 44, 46, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 60, 63, 64, 69, 80, 92, 95, 98, 99, 107, 111, 128, 131, 133, 134, 136, 139, 169, 178, 196, 198, 199, 200, 203, 237, 277, 278, 279, 280, 282, 283, 285, 287 Biological Weapons v, 1, 2, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 72, 77, 79, 87, 109, 119, 131, 139, 142, 155, 169, 177, 178, 179, 180, 185, 187, 193, 194, 195, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 212, 216, 218, 221, 233, 239, 240, 241, 242, 247, 249, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 286, 287, 288 Biopreparat 42, 44, 64, 111, 125, 131, 138 Biosafety 4, 9, 243 Biosecurity 4, 66, 174, 175, 176, 185, 187, 190 Bioterrorism 3, 7, 22, 29, 34, 35, 39, 48, 55, 61, 79, 80, 82, 83, 87, 92, 100, 107, 110, 111, 115, 126, 127, 130, 131, 132, 133, 155, 160, 190, 204, 223, 224, 238, 239, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287 Bioterrorist 3, 281 Black biology 5, 249 Bolivian hemorrhagic fever 9 Botulinum Toxin 134, 137, 139, 141 Botulism 6, 15, 133, 134, 135, 136, 140, 141 Brucellosis 8, 39 Bunyaviridae 83, 84, 85 C Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 6, 72, 89, 92, 103, 132, 146, 182 Chemical and Biological Weapons Control Act 58 Chemical Weapon Convention (CWC) 240 Chikungunya fever 9 Cholera 8 Coronavirus 120, 142, 143, 144, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 162, 164, 165, 167, 189, 190, 248 COVID-19 vii, viii, ix, 5, 11, 14, 15, 53, 69, 70, 71, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 177, 188, 191, 192, 227, 228, 229, 232, 233, 234, 235, 238, 241, 247, 248, 252 Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever 9, 85 Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) 85 CRISPR viii, 170, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 180, 193 D Daura Foot and Mouth Disease Institute 61 Defence Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) 181 Defence Research Policy Committee (DRPC) 36 Dengue fever 9 E Ebola 6, 9, 15, 72, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 149, 189, 286 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) 228 Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee (ENDC) 201 Encephalitis viruses 7 Epidemic typhus 8 Epsilon toxin 7, 8 F Filoviruses 7, 84, 89 Flaviviruses 86 Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) 243 Frederick Banting 26, 137 G Geneva Protocol 16, 22, 28, 30, 34, 37, 58, 60, 61, 67, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 203, 204, 218, 220, 221, 222, 240, 255 Ghazi Research Institute 61 H Hague Convention, 1907 21, 22, 197, 222 Hannibal 18 Hantavirus 7, 8, 49, 83, 84, 85, 86 Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses 83, 86, 97 Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome (HFRS) 85 Hizbul Mujahideen 248 I Influenza 9, 172, 183 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) 219 International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) 228 International Health Regulation (IHR) 163 International Monetary Fund (IMF) 143 J Jiang Zemin 52 Joint Statement on Biological Weapons Convention 52 K Korean hemorrhagic fever 9 Korean Peoples Army (KPA) 49 Kyasanur Forest Disease 86 L Lassa 9, 15, 83, 84, 85, 86, 93, 94, 95, 96 Lassa fever 83, 93, 94, 95, 96 M Marburg virus disease (MVD) 92 Marburg viruses 83, 87 Melioidosis 8 Middlebury Institute of International Studies 50, 230, 286 N Nidovirales 145 Nipah virus 7, 283 O Omsk hemorrhagic fever 9, 86, 96 Operation Harness 36 Orthopoxvirus 99, 110 P Palytoxin 9 Pandemic 5, 117, 119, 147, 149, 167, 168, 227, 228, 280 Pathogens v, ix, 5, 27, 28, 32, 72, 93, 96, 141, 179, 277, 283 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 4, 245 Plague ix, 3, 6, 7, 8, 15, 19, 25, 44, 49, 56, 64, 65, 66, 72, 74, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 131, 134, 200, 247, 287, 288 Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) 243 Psittacosis 8 Q Q fever 6, 8, 64, 66, 133 R Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) 243 Ricin 7, 8, 9 Ricin toxin 7, 8 Rift Valley fever 9, 85, 96 Roid Rage 188, 189 Roodeplaat Research Laboratories (RRL) 55 Russian spring-summer encephalitis 9 S Saddam Hussein 60, 62, 63, 77, 139, 286 SARS-CoV-2 virus vii, 150 Saxitoxin 9 Scrub fever 8 Sepp Institute 61 Shitala Mata 103, 114 Smallpox 5, 6, 7, 9, 15, 19, 20, 25, 34, 49, 62, 64, 66, 72, 78, 92, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 125, 126, 131, 134, 155, 173, 181, 200, 233, 234, 235, 238, 281, 282, 283, 284 Smallpox Vaccine Emergency Stockpile (SVES) 112 South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) 57 Spanish flu (H1N1) 173 Staphylococcal enterotoxins 9 T The 1899/1907 Hague Conventions 197 The 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol 239 The 1925 Geneva Protocol to the Hague Convention 197 The 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention 203 The Rome Statute 222 The St. Petersburg Declaration of 1868 196 The UN Security Council Resolution 1540 224, 241 The UN Security Council Resolution 2325 226 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 241 Trojan Horse 188, 189 Tularemia 6, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134 Typhus fever 8 U United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) 105 United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) 60, 63, 139 United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) 60 US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 72, 132, 146 US Commission on Prevention of WMD Proliferation and Terrorism (Graham-Talent Commission) 159 US Congressional Research Service 48, 241 V Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers 7, 83, 94 Arenaviridae 83, 84, 94 Bunyaviridae 83, 84, 85 Filoviridae 83, 84, 88, 89 Flaviviridae 83, 84 W Weaponization of pathogens vii, 64 Weapons of Mass Destruction Commission (WMDC) 200, 208 World Health Organization (WHO) vii, 11, 89, 98, 142, 204 World War II 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 43, 45, 75, 76, 123, 131, 137, 138, 160, 199, 200, 227 Wuhan Jiyintan Hospital 158 Y Yanan bacteriological factories 53 Yellow fever virus 7 Z Zika virus 180