Published in the United Kingdom by Hart Publishing Ltd 16C Worcester Place, Oxford, OX1 2JW Telephone: +44 (0)1865 517530 Fax: +44 (0)1865 510710 E-mail: mail@hartpub.co.uk Website: http://www.hartpub.co.uk Published in North America (US and Canada) by Hart Publishing c/o International Specialized Book Services 920 NE 58th Avenue, Suite 300 Portland, OR 97213-3786 USA Tel: +1 503 287 3093 or toll-free: (1) 800 944 6190 Fax: +1 503 280 8832 E-mail: orders@isbs.com Website: http://www.isbs.com  Caroline Morris and Cian Murphy 2011 Caroline Morris and Cian Murphy have asserted their right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, to be identified as the authors of this work. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission of Hart Publishing, or as expressly permitted by law or under the terms agreed with the appropriate reprographic rights organisation. Enquiries concerning reproduction which may not be covered by the above should be addressed to Hart Publishing Ltd at the address above. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Data Available ISBN: 978-1-84113-306-5 Typeset by Compuscript Ltd, Shannon Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall GETTING A PhD IN LAW Getting a PhD in Law is a unique guide to obtaining the degree of Doctor of Philosophy of Law in the UK. While there is a wide range of study guides for PhD students in the social sciences and other science-based disciplines, there is very little information available on the process of obtaining a PhD in law. Research degrees in law share some attributes with those in related disciplines such as the humanities and social sciences. However, legal methodology and the place of the PhD in law in the young lawyers career create unique challenges that have not been addressed by existing guides. Getting a PhD in Law fills this clear gap in the market, providing an accessible guide to the PhD process from topic selection to thesis publication. This readable and informative guide draws on interviews and case studies with PhD students, supervisors and examiners. Getting a PhD in Law will be essential reading for the growing numbers of PhD students in the UKs many law schoolsand those internationally who wish to learn from UK best practice. Acknowledgements Writing a book is very much a collaborative endeavour. This book would probably not have been written and is very much improved thanks to the input of the following people. For their time, and their willingness to share their ideas and their experiences we are very grateful. Of course any errors are ours and ours alone. The following friends and colleagues read some of the book in draft form and offered useful advice and suggestions: Diego Acosta, Mark Bennett, Penny Green, Piet Eeckhout, Bevan Marten, Noel McGrath, Harry Nikolaidis, Federico Ortino, Eloise Scotford and Rachael Walsh. We also benefited from the questions and suggestions of the participants of the Getting a PhD in Law seminar at Kings College London in the summer of 2010. Thanks are also due to Elimma Ezeani, Becca Franssen, Marta Iljadica and Anastasia Lee who allowed us to include their thesis titles in chapter two. We owe particular thanks to those who took the time to contact us through our website and offer us their thoughts on their PhD experience. They cannot, due to space restrictions and the desire for anonymity, be listed herebut you know who you are and we are grateful for your candour. Richard Hart and his colleagues at Hart Publishing supported this project from the outset and have proven time and again to be wonderful people to work with. We very much appreciate the support Hart Publishing has shown this and our other book projects in recent years. The last and most heartfelt thanks must go to Richard and Sarah, for their support while we were completing our own theses and their tolerance as we revisited the experience while writing this volume. This book is dedicated to their patience. Table of Contents Acknowledgements Table of Contents Introduction: About this Book 1. Why Do a PhD in Law? The PhD and Other Degrees The Value of a PhD in Law The PhD and Your Career To PhD or not to PhD? 2. Preparing for the PhD The Thesis Choosing a PhD Topic Types of PhD Programme Choosing an Institution and Supervisor Making Your Application The F-word (Funding) Conclusion 3. Legal Research Methodologies The Importance of Methodology Types of Legal Research Methodologies Choosing the Most Appropriate Methodology Developing the Research Project Conclusion 4. Researching an Original Thesis The Research and Writing Process Developing an Original Thesis Ethical Issues in Legal Research Research Aids Conclusion 5. Supervision The Supervisory Relationship Making the Best of Your Supervisor Supervision Problems Conclusion 6. PhD Problems Someone Else Wrote My PhD! Boredom and Lack of Motivation Financial Problems Writers Block Health Problems Conclusion: Getting Help and Solving Problems 7. Writing-up Knowing When to Write-up Turning a Collection of Chapters into a Thesis Good Legal Writing Producing the Final Draft Conclusion 8. Examining the PhD The Viva The Examiners Preparing for the Viva In the Examination After the Viva Conclusion 9. Publishing Your Work Why You Need to Publish What to Publish During Your PhD Where to Publish Your Work Publishing From Your Thesis Conclusion 10. Building A Career Teaching and Research The Need to Network Presenting Your Work at a Conference Conclusion Appendix A: Useful Resources Appendix B: Funding Organisations in the UK Appendix C: Blawgs Short Bibliography Index Introduction: About this Book This book seeks to provide a readable and informative guide to the research degree process. The doctoral degree can still be treated as something of an oddity among lawyers. If youre that clever, doctoral researchers are often asked, why arent you in practice? Nonetheless modern law schools are more and more coming around to the idea of their doctoral cohorts as key parts of the life of the school and you should find that the degree is better understood now that it was a decade ago. Other academic disciplinesin particular the social sciencesare well-served with how-to guides. During our own degrees we drew on the wisdom of Phillips and Pughs How to get a PhD: A Handbook for Students and Their Supervisorsa book which has gone through four editions since its first publication in 1987. Dunleavys Authoring a PhD: How to Plan, Draft, Write & Finish a Doctoral Thesis or Dissertation provides further sage adviceespecially for the more humanities-oriented parts of our theses. However, during our studies we felt keenly the absence of a book aimed at us as academic lawyers. Though we could learn from guides for social scientists and humanities researchers, they did not capture the unique nature of the law doctorate. Law cannot be pigeon-holed as a social science or arts and humanities disciplinewhile it borrows from both it cannot be considered a sub-discipline of either. It was our own difficulty in obtaining good advice on the process of getting a PhD in law which more than anything else sparked this book into life. A PhD in law is, naturally, unique. We have written this book to address that experience undertaken by hundreds of doctoral candidates across the world every year. While the experiences we have drawn on are largely from those in universities in Britain and Ireland we believe there are lessons here for doctoral researchers throughout the common law world and even farther afield. We use a wide range of anecdotes throughout this book to illustrate the points we make. These have been gleaned from our own experiences and those of colleagues, from the many doctoral students weve met at conferences and seminars and through various online and offline communities. Weve changed facts here and there to protect identities and in places weve combined two tales into one. But at the heart of each anecdote is the story of someone elses problem or solutionwe hope you find inspiration or at least comfort in dealing with your own. If you have a story that we havent told then be sure to get in touch! We continue to be interested in the whole doctoral research experience and it is through sharing experiences that the whole process can be demystified for those still undergoing it. The anecdotes are marked out by italicised text throughout the book and are intended to help you appreciate that you are not the first person to experience the challenges of the doctoral research process. We have covered the PhD experience from the initial idea of undertaking the degree right through to publication and early career building. As a result, while we hope the book makes an interesting cover-to-cover read, it is likely that some chapters will become more relevant than others at different stages of the research degree process. The first, second and tenth chapters provide some useful background information and guidance on the PhD process and early career issues that will be helpful throughout your degree. At the outset of your research project you may find it useful to read these chapters in detail and skim through the book to get an idea of what advice can be found in which chapters. Then, as you approach different points in your progress, you can re-read those chapters as appropriate. Chapters three to seven deal with the heart of the law PhD experience from design through to research and writing and the problems you might encounter along the way. Chapter eight addresses the PhD viva; chapter nine the questions about what and where to publish during and after the PhD. In the appendices we have gathered together some resources and information about funding bodies which we hope you will find useful. We wish you the very best as you embark on your research degree. It is an incomparable experience but one which, if successful, will be amongst the most rewarding in your life. We hope this book helps a little with the ups and downs that lie ahead. Good luck! Caroline Morris Cian Murphy 8 February 2011 1 Why Do a PhD in Law? An article in the 18 December 2010 issue of The Economist was entitled The disposable academic and argued that the system for research degrees was exploitative of some of the most talented young minds of a generation. It opened by observing: In most countries a PhD is a basic requirement for a career in academia. It is an introduction to the world of independent researcha kind of intellectual masterpiece, created by an apprentice in close collaboration with a supervisor. The requirements to complete one vary enormously between countries, universities and even subjects. Some students will first have to spend two years working on a masters degree or diploma. Some will receive a stipend; others will pay their own way. Some PhDs involve only research, some require classes and examinations and some require the student to teach undergraduates. A thesis can be dozens of pages in mathematics, or many hundreds in history. As a result, newly minted PhDs can be as young as their early 20s or world-weary forty-somethings. Despite the disheartening tone of the article, this opening salvo certainly captures the disparate nature of the PhD community. There may be a typical PhD student but if there is we certainly havent met him or her. Even within law schools there is a great variety of nationalities, ages, professional backgrounds and, of course, research interests. But how do you end up as a doctoral student? Deciding what to do when you graduate can be one of the most difficult choices you face in the later years of your degree. For many, the choice is simple. The budding lawyer will complete a professional training course and seek a pupillage at chambers or a training contract with a firm. Others will take different routes, as a degree in law can be a useful foundation for a career in journalism, business or politics. However, not all students seek employment in the legal or other professions. Some remain in university and further their studies. Others who do begin their careers in practice later decide they would like to pursue an academic career and so return to university. For a few brave souls, the university experience will lead to doctoral studiesthree or four years of independent research leading to the award of the universitys highest degree. This chapter addresses several preliminary issues that you should think about before seriously considering a PhD in law. It sets out the options for further study in law after graduation and explores the answers to several common questions about the PhD in law. These questions include:  What is a PhD and how does it relate to other postgraduate degrees?  What is the intrinsic value of completing a PhD?  How will having a PhD help your career? Once you have answered these questions you will be in a better position to decide whether or not the PhD in law is the degree for you. THE PhD AND OTHER DEGREES A PhD is a type of university degree. The abbreviation, PhD (sometimes DPhil), is derived from the Latin phrase philosophiae doctor which means Doctor of Philosophy. The term PhD may also be used to describe the doctoral thesisa body of work produced in the course of the degreewhich we will explore in further detail in chapter two. The PhD as we know it was first awarded in 1828 by the Friedrich Wilhelm University, an institution that is now known as the Humboldt University in Berlin. From there, the degree spread across the world. In time the doctoral degree arrived in the UK where today there are thousands of researchers undertaking doctoral studies across the country. Despite having philosophy in the title, a PhD can be obtained in most, if not all, academic disciplines, with the Doctor of Philosophy in Law the subject of our book. The PhD has traditionally been considered a form of apprenticeship for life in the academy. However, in recent years universities and governments have begun to acknowledge that not all who complete a research degree will wantor be ableto obtain a post in a university. As a result there is increasing emphasis on transferable skills and the ability to work across disciplines. While these developments may improve the overall training provided by research degrees, they put greater pressure on doctoral candidates who must not only produce a defensible thesis, but also engage in an often-intensive training programme. A PhD today looks different from one completed a decade agoand it may look very different again in 10 or 20 years time. Deciding whether or not to pursue a doctorate requires an examination of the research degree alongside other options. The PhD is only one of several types of postgraduate degrees available in law. Many, if not most PhD students will already have completed a Masters degree in law or a related subject before embarking on a doctorate. Consider the admissions criteria for three UK law schools PhD programmes: The candidate should have achieved, or be expected to achieve, at least a strong Merit in a Masters degree in law or a related discipline, with strong evidence of research and writing ability. This will normally involve achieving a strong Merit in a dissertation component of the Masters degree. Candidates who do not meet these criteria will only be admitted if the prospective supervisor makes a case for admission based on the candidates broader work experience. (Kings College London) Our minimum standard for admission is a good Upper Second Class honours or equivalent. For those applying to read for an MPhil or PhD, we have a strong preference for a recognised Masters degree for which we normally expect an average grade of at least 65% (or equivalent). Those without a Masters degree are expected to provide alternative evidence of ability to successfully undertake high quality written research. (University of Durham) A minimum classification of 2.1 in their first degree (or equivalent) and, preferably, a Masters degree (or Masters degree pending). (University of Westminster) Its clear from these excerpts that many universities will require you to have not just a good undergraduate degree but also a relevant Masters degree. The Master of Laws degree typically takes the form of an LLM (from the Latin, Legum Magister), although one may alternatively receive an MA, MSc, MRes, MLitt, MPhil, MJur or BCL. Whatever the degree title, Masters degrees usually fit one of two models: taught Masters degrees and Masters degrees by research. A taught Masters degree usually involves the student completing several modules of advanced legal study in addition to a research dissertation. On the other hand a Masters degree by research involves a large research project and fewer, if any, taught courses. Whether you choose to undertake a taught or research Masters degree before your PhD will depend in part on what you are trying to achieve. If you wish to further your knowledge in a broad, but still somewhat specialised area of law while keeping the option of further study available then a taught degree may be right for you. If you are more confident about your existing knowledge and would like to see if you enjoy research then an MRes or LLM by research may be more appropriate. We discuss how you can prepare for your PhD in detail in chapter two. However, even before you consider writing a research proposal and contacting potential supervisors, it is possible to prepare yourself for a doctorate. So, how should you go about setting yourself up to complete a doctorate? If you are a final year undergraduate student and you wish to pursue a doctorate, you should seriously consider first completing an LLM that includes a strong research component. Good research universities encourage their students to consider their Masters degree as direct preparation for the PhD. A key point to a Masters that is preparation for a doctorate is to choose a dissertation topic that may serve as a background study for more detailed doctoral research. Another aspect of preparation concerns the subjects you choose to study (if you decide to take some taught components). As doctorates require you to engage with the theoretical underpinnings of the law, it will be worthwhile taking some theory-based subjects as part of your Masters. This doesnt necessarily mean you have to spend a year reading Aristotle, Locke, Kant, Marx and Habermas. A theoretically-engaged Masters doesnt have to be an LLM in Legal Theory. Rather, it is about choosing modules or courses that go beyond doctrinal analysis and dig a little deeper into the law. The skills that such courses teachwhether they are in the areas of constitutional or company law, tort or tax lawwill help you to be a more successful doctoral student. In addition to writing a strong dissertation and choosing theoretically-engaged subjects you should also take any opportunities you are presented with to develop research skills. If you hope to conduct empirical research as part of your PhD then you will certainly benefit from appropriate methods training at Masters level. Of course, for many doctoral researchers the idea of doing a PhD only arises during the Masters degree and so it is not possible to tailor that degree for doctoral preparation. But if you happen to be planning in advance then making the right choices at Masters level can save you a lot of time and effort during your doctoral studies. For the lawyer emerging from the world of undergraduate study, or the practitioner who is considering resuming study, there are several choices to be made before embarking on a PhD. If you are simply seeking to broaden or deepen your knowledge of particular legal subjects, then you may wish to cease your academic inquiries after a Masters degree. If you have completed a Masters degree and believe you want to further your studiesor if you think you can bypass the Masters degree stage altogetherthen you may want to consider the value of a PhD. THE VALUE OF A PhD IN LAW At a very superficial level, there are some enjoyable perks to holding a doctorate. You have the satisfaction of knowing that you hold one of the highest qualifications in the country. You can ask your friends to call you Doctor without having to worry about being expected to deal with medical emergencies. And you can replace your tired student Jane Doe debit card with a snazzy new Dr Jane Doe (hopefully with an appropriately-increased overdraft!). Notwithstanding the obvious enjoyment to be derived from these perks, embarking on a research degree simply to change your title on a bank card is obviously a fools errand. Completing a PhD requires a high degree of motivation and dedication and so the prospective PhD candidate will need to be fully committed to their research project. Shane was a successful practitioner in his field in a medium-sized firm. He had always enjoyed education and so he decided to begin a PhD. He registered at a nearby university for a part-time research degree on a topic close to his practice interests. However, it soon became clear that he had neither the aptitude nor inclination to complete a research degree. After a year of sporadic reading and writing his supervisor suggested they discuss Shanes progress and future plans. Shane ended up withdrawing from the programme after 15 months. His failure to complete wasnt a reflection on his intelligence or ability as a lawyerthe degree just wasnt for him. He had insufficient motivation and limited interest in the subject and so, in all likelihood, he would have been better off not starting it in the first place. Vitae is an organisation that describes itself as championing the personal, professional and career development of doctoral researchers and research staff in higher education institutions and research institutes. In a 2010 Vitae study of doctoral graduates, 78 per cent of respondents agreed that their course had been good value for money. In general, satisfaction levels amongst doctoral graduates were higher than those amongst graduates of lower degrees (Vitae 2010). When asked what their motivations were for completing a PhD, the top five reasons offered by those in the social sciences (which included law) were:  Interest in the subject (90.1 per cent)  Interest in research (84.0 per cent)  Desire for an academic career (51.9 per cent)  Broaden career prospects (50.6 per cent)  Awarded a scholarship (48.1 per cent) Thus, the overwhelming majority of doctoral graduates began the degree due to an interest in both research and the particular subject, while roughly one out of every two graduates sought either an academic career in particular or better career options in general. Almost half of respondents had some form of scholarship to support their studies. Contrary perhaps to popular belief, only 8.4 per cent of respondents claimed to have wanted to postpone job hunting. The typical doctoral graduate therefore started their PhD as a highly motivated individual for whom the intrinsic value of researching their subject was even more important than the instrumental value of having the doctorate. A further benefit of completing a PhD is gaining experience in designing, carrying out and writing up the findings from a large research project. Most university degrees now require some kind of research project to be completed as part of the programme. However, as this project will only be part of your overall education you will only be expected to dedicate a portion of your time to it. Training may be minimal and certainly will not be equivalent to what you should receive as a doctoral candidate. A PhD allows you to dedicate three to four years of your life to a research project. The skills gained through carrying out this degree will stand you in good stead for the rest of your life. In addition to the skills developed through the research project, completing a research degree will also allow you to become an expert in a particular area of law. This will obviously benefit your career, but if you have a passion for a particular subject it can be gratifying to become an expert in it. Reading and writing about one topic for three years requires both commitment and stamina, but the outcome is a truly deep knowledge of a particular field. One of the most common pieces of advice offered to those about to defend a thesis is to remember that you know it better than anyone else. While its often little consolation to the worried candidate entering the exam of their life, it is quite rewarding when its proven to be true at the end of the process. THE PhD AND YOUR CAREER The doctorate is an important part of the career of most PhD candidates and at least some will have set out on the PhD to further a particular career goal. This aspect of the PhD has undergone much development in recent years. In light of the benefits of a highly-skilled workforce to the economy there has been much investment in this area (though future investment was in doubt at the time of writing). Furthermore, as there are only a limited number of opportunities to work in universities and other parts of the education sector it is necessary for doctoral graduates to have skills they can bring to bear in different walks of life. Whether you have a career path in mind, or are more interested in the PhD as a learning process, it is important to think about where you want to end up afterwards. Because of the mystique of the legal profession, the role of the PhD in law in the career of the lawyer can be something of a mystery to the uninitiated. One of the authors was once asked whether the completion of his PhD would lead to his being entitled to serve as a judge? The answer, alas, is no. However, some recent research will help us to dispel the myths and better understand the career destinations of law PhD graduates. In 2008 Vitae conducted a study into the career destinations of doctoral graduatesand the results are enlightening. The study found that between 2003 and 2007 there were 320 UK domiciled doctoral graduates in law. Almost 70 per cent of these had entered work in the UK at the time the research was carried out. Others had entered work and study, others again were studying and training. Only 0.5 per cent of respondents were believed unemployed. Some comparisons with other disciplines make for interesting reading. Doctoral graduates in law were the least likely cohort to be unemployed. Of those who were employed in the UK, the overwhelming majority were working in the education sector, with 56 per cent of law doctoral graduates employed as lecturers in higher education institutions. The next largest category of employers was other professions, which included the legal profession. One in 10 graduates worked in public administration. What does this mean for the prospective PhD applicant? The most likely career path upon graduation is in academiateaching and/or researching law in a university. Other likely options include working in the public sector, or in the law and law-related professions. Its worth exploring these in a little more detail before continuing our consideration of the PhD in law. Teaching and Researching in a University The most obvious benefit of having a research degree in law is that it significantly increases your chances of being hired to teach law in a UK university. While having a PhD in law or a related subject is not yet listed as essential requirement in all academic job advertisements in the UK, it is increasingly difficult to launch a successful academic career without one. The work carried out by universities can be crudely divided into teaching and research and more and more law schools are requiring their academic staff to contribute to both strands of work. A good research degree provides much-needed training in the skills and techniques of advanced legal research and completion of the degree is seen as evidence that the job applicant can contribute to the schools research profile. In addition, the increasing number of applicants for teaching posts who do hold research degrees puts any candidate without a PhD at a serious disadvantage. The PhD is now being considered indispensible even in areas such as tax law, company law and land law, where real-world experience is often just as important to effective teaching and research (Tiley 2006). Nonetheless, the role of a PhD in the career of a young academic may vary between jurisdictions. Writing in 2009 about the differences between European and US law schools, the European constitutional lawyer Matthias Kumm argued as follows: In the top US law schools, on the other hand, the ideal candidate is someone who has studied some other subject as an undergraduate for four years; studied law in a postgraduate professional degree program for three years; spent a couple of years in high-level practice, preferably including a high-level judicial clerkship; and then gone on to do a PhD not in law but in another discipline. The most obvious way to learn to engage law seriously as part of a sustained intellectual inquiry, it seems, is to learn the methodology of a discipline other than law. Conversely, the American PhD in law (the SJD or JSD) plays a negligible role in the training of academics in elite law schools. There are perhaps as many JSD holders with tenure in the top ten American law schools as there are professors without a law degree. Both exist, but they are rare. The JSD serves primarily as a credential of value for foreigners in their home jurisdictions (particularly, aspiring academics from Israel, the Commonwealth, and perhaps South America, though, generally, not Continental Europe). In the US, law as an intellectual discipline that has its own internal point of view and methodology to be studied as part of a serious doctoral program is apparently not widely accepted. (Kumm 2009) If one of your key reasons for obtaining a PhD is related to a desire to pursue a career in academia then it is worth examining where you want to work and what the standard career route is in that jurisdiction. Speak to the head of your law school and ask her what role she sees a research degree playing in the career of an early career academic. Legal Practice and Beyond Throughout this book, for the most part, weve assumed that readers are interested in pursuing a career in academia. But not all PhD graduates wanted to go into academia in the first place, and some people go into their PhDs thinking thats what they want and then realise that the skills acquired during the doctorate can be applied to a variety of careers in law. If this applies to you, then you can use your time as a doctoral student wisely. You can also inquire as to the benefit of a PhD to your career in practice before you commit to three years of research. One place to (re)acquaint yourself with the professional side of the law is the annual university law fair, where firms and chambers come together to woo the best and brightest law students to their workplaces. Although these events are mostly targeted at undergraduates, here you can discuss your study plans with prospective employers, ascertain whether they are interested in people with postgraduate qualifications, and make some useful contacts in private practice for the future. Another possible destination for law doctoral graduates is public administration. Law doctoral graduates may work directly for government as part of the civil service or they may work for other public bodies such as the Law Commission or the Electoral Commission. Vitae statistics indicate that one in 10 law doctoral graduates work in public administration. These are merely the most likely destinations. As we saw in the above data, doctoral graduates in law have a wide range of careers. If you are interested in exploring career options outside of academia, either before or during your PhD, you may want to consider completing an internship or engaging in consultancy. Internships are often advertised through your universitys postgraduate email lists. Its also worth looking on the websites of particular organisations youre interested in. Theres usually an application form to complete and some organisations will only take interns at certain times of the year. If no formal internships are advertised, theres no harm in putting yourself forward: it may not have occurred to the organisation that an internship is a solution to their work overload problem. Although they are usually unpaid (if youre lucky, the organisation may cover travel and lunch costs), internships are nonetheless worthwhile pursuingthe experience you gain is invaluable. Internships can open your eyes to the wide variety of ways lawyers use their skills and to what ends: monitoring companies compliance with human rights, researching counterfeiting and piracy activities, and reporting on fair trial standards for the accused in war crimes trials are but a few examples of whats on offer. Internships usually involve working for a defined period for an organisation (usually a charity or non-governmental organisation (NGO)) on a particular project. Make sure you research the body offering the internship carefully before you apply. You dont want to be exploited for your free labour. Maintaining some legal practice through a consultancy arrangement could be an appealing option and may offer a new career option after you graduate. One way of doing this is to see whether your firm is interested in retaining your services on an ongoing basis while you study. Another option is to keep an eye on legal recruitment websites for short-term posts in your area. These can be combined with your studies where theres a convenient breakpoint. Cold-calling can also work, but the reception of your inquiry is often dependent on the nature of the field youre involved in: if its a field where the workflow is constant youre likely to receive a better response than one where the work ebbs and flows. Consultancies enable you to keep your legal skills fresh and your professional contacts up to date. John had completed the first draft of his thesis when he saw an advertisement on an online legal recruitment site for a lawyer in the exact area of his thesis: As it was a short-term maternity cover, I thought why not? I applied and got the job. With my supervisors blessing, I interrupted my studies for the six months of the contract. This proved to be a great decision. I sharpened up my professional skills, made lots of new contacts in my area, earned quite a bit of money, and got access to hard-to-find information that I was then able to incorporate into my thesis. Years later, I still provide legal opinions for them every so oftennow as an expert! Exploring the options outside academic life can be a very valuable exercise in their own right too. Practical legal work can be a refreshing change from the long-term focus of the doctorate, and you generally get to practise a wider range of skills day-to-day than you do as a PhD student. The core work of a lawyer: research and writing on the law remains the same, but you can also find yourself advising clients in person, instructing counsel, drafting internal policies, presenting evidence to parliamentary committees and having conferences with barristers. TO PhD OR NOT TO PhD? Like the Danish prince contemplating his options you are now likely to be considering that difficult question: to PhD or not to PhD? If youve read this far and are still interested in completing a PhD in Law, there are several questions you should ask yourself:  Why do I want to do a PhD? Would a different postgraduate degree be sufficient for my goals?  Am I sufficiently motivated by my subject to conduct a (minimum) three-year research project?  Have I thought about how my PhD will fit with my overall career plan?  What do I want from my doctorate? Its worth remembering that most doctoral graduates listed an interest in research and their particular subject as motivations for undertaking the degree. On long days in the library when you are trying to unpick the finer points of the EU Treaties or understand Razs Authority of Law youll need to be able to remind yourself why youve brought this work on yourself. Keep your goals in mind and the difficult days will be more bearable.