Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster ebook.

Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.

To Tess Chapter 1: The Way of the World I am sorry guys but I have scammed you. I am not going to try to justify it with my reasons, I am just a terrible person. I am sorry for each and every person affected. I am ashamed about the way I have deceived so many people for my own personal gain. For what it is worth, the money is not going to stupid lifestyle enriching purposes. Even though I could likely go on for a few more days making fake promises and feedback I have reached my goal and will lock myself out of my account.

For anyone interested. This started on 1922 December. After that I have not had a single gram of weed or hash in stock. That is all I had to say.

That was the message received by customers of 9THWONDER, an online drug dealer on a marketplace known as Evolution when they logged on in January 2015 to check why their merchandise hadnt arrived. The apology and confession were unusual but the scam wasnt. The unlisted websites where contraband is bought and sold over confidential web browsers (known as dark markets, because online criminals are addicted to science-fiction language) have been absolutely rife with frauds from the start.

On the one hand, this might be seen as predictableif you are looking for ideal targets to steal from, participants in illegal drug markets have the attractive property that they cant report you to the police without raising lots of awkward questions about themselves. On the other hand, this obvious fact was not lost on the original designers of the Silk Road (the first such site to get real traction) and its competitors, and the aim of these entrepreneurs was to build fraud protection into the architecture of the system. Many of them produced long and windy political manifestos on this very point, claiming that their virtual online realm was a techno-libertarian paradise that did not need conventional laws.

So how did they all get ripped off?

Pleased to meet you Actually, at this point I should probably explain why Im so interested in these things. And maybe reassure you that Im not a criminal and this book isnt going to end with a superficially plausible invitation to join in with a pyramid scheme. About half a dozen friends forwarded the news stories about 9THWONDER to me when they came out, and as soon as I read the opening lines, I could guess what had happened, because Im extremely familiar with the pattern. This particular fraud has been around since the Ancient Greeks, in fact, although Im personally most familiar with it from autobiographies of gangsters in Swinging London of the 1960s. I collect fraud stories, because they fascinate me. And they fascinate me because theyre a sort of counter-template. All the things that you miss out on by studying normal economics come sharply back into focus if you take a moment to think about its criminal counterpart.

I made my living for twenty years on the fringes of bank regulation. Early on, while I was young and innocent (and broke), I was a junior economist for the Bank of England, helping to analyze the loopholes and unintended consequences of the ferociously complicated international banking rulebook. Later on, I was older, considerably less innocent, and a lot better paid to help investors make money out of exactly those loopholes. But early on in my career, I noticed that although you might expect something like bank regulation to be one of those gray areas where economics and criminology meet each other, theres actually no overlap at all.

If youve ever had the misfortune to read a lot of bank regulation, youll see that its made of numbersmeasures of capital, measures of risk, probability distributions, and ratios. On the other hand, if youve ever had the misfortune to be involved with a bank going spectacularly bust, youll probably notice that the reasons why everything went wrong usually have very little to do with those numbersthey tend to be very human in nature and made up of varying proportions of incompetence, dishonesty, and bad luck. The reasons for this disconnect took me years to understandtheyre very deep in both psychological and economic terms. Unfortunately, while I wasnt able to understand the problem, nor was I able to keep my mouth shut about it, and before long, me and the Bank of England decided to seek our fortunes separately.

As soon as I got another job, I quickly grew to realize that I would never be all that good at forecasting stock prices or calculating probabilities. So I decided that if I was going to have a career in the competitive world of stock market trading, it would have to be based on things which were impossible to forecast and which werent part of any probability distribution. Luckily for me, shortly after I made that decision Russia defaulted on its debt, the internet bubble popped, and Enron went bankrupt. Also, Nassim Taleb started publishing books that gave a sort of intellectual respectability to the whole project of looking at the implications of unpredictable events.

For my part, and with the support of a couple of far-sighted bosses, I spent the next decade gathering details and stories and trying to build a mental toolkit for living through those strange historical episodes when everything you thought you knew turns out to be untrue. It involved a lot of digging through out-of-print books and reading up on unfashionable management theorists, looking for the gaps between theories and the awkward things that people didnt like to talk about.

Did any of this help, when 2007 arrived and it turned out that the previous decades prosperity had been built on a mountain of lies? Yes and no. Later in the book Ill discuss some of the big frauds where I had front-row tickets. I think my record in spotting them was better than random chance, but maybe not much better. But anyway, back to 9THWONDER and the online drugs fraud.

Money for nothing The mechanics of the dark market scam are almost so simple as to need no explanation: you take money (in this case, electronic money such as bitcoin) on the basis of a promise to send someone illegal drugs, and then you dont send the drugs. The interesting bit is that the controls that were put into the system to rule out this absurdly obvious possibility didnt work.

The way that things were meant to happen is that payments were meant to go through escrow. You sent your bitcoins to a central address associated with the marketplace itself, so that the vendor could see that you had paid. Then, when your goods arrived, you sent a confirmation message and released the payment, allowing it to be sent on to the vendor. Or, if your goods didnt arrive, you submitted a complaint to the marketplace, which, via its (surprisingly efficient) dispute arbitration service, took evidence from you and the vendor about who was likely to be lying, and if it thought you were in the right, gave you your money back. All of this signing and acknowledgment was carried out on an anonymous basis via clever cryptographic protocols that dont need to be discussed here because for the most part they workedthere was no technical weakness worth speaking of.

The escrow system would seem to be a pretty solid protection against fraud, and it was available even for quite small deals, whereas normal trading companies only use the comparatively expensive services provided by lawyers and banks when the size of the transaction warrants doing so. And for the most part, the escrow service worked. The vulnerability came in because people didnt use it.

Why didnt they use it? Thats the best kind of questionits relatively easy to answer, and the answer not only tells us something useful, but sets us off on a train of thought that ends up with a much deeper understanding of fraud in general, and of its relation to the honest economy of which it is the mirror image. The simple answer here is that the failure of the Silk Road escrow system was a specific instance of a general problem in computer securitythat if something is a pain in the ass, it will not provide any protection because people will not use it.

It turns out that there was not (and is not yet) a technological solution powerful enough to overcome an elementary fact of businessthat the conventions of who pays cash and who gets credit reflect the relative power of buyers and suppliers in the market. The escrow system was highly inconvenient for vendors. They had the normal cash-flow problems associated with extending trade credit, in that they had to finance their inventories before getting paid. Against this, they had a degree of protection from deadbeat customers through the escrow system. But they could still be made the victim of fraudulent or frivolous customer disputes; it was not uncommon for unscrupulous dealers to send in dozens of orders to a rival and then dispute them all, to drive one of their enemies out of business.

The biggest problem for the vendors, though, was that the online payments were all made in bitcoin and its equivalents. The ways in which the financial system has been recruited as a tool of law enforcement are interesting in themselves (we talk about them at length in Chapter 11), but for the time being its just important to note that bank accounts are always linked to named people, and their transactions are monitored and can be subpoenaed by the cops. So if you do business with a variety of drug dealers using cash transferred to and from a bank account (or a PayPal account, or any other legitimate means), youve effectively started the clock ticking for when one of them gets busted and the narcs start following all the trails of banking data, one of which will lead to you.

Thats why street drug dealers use cash, and why the online markets didnt take off until an electronic equivalent of cash was invented. Bitcoin, to oversimplify mightily, is a technology that creates magic numbers that can be sent back and forth, via a computer program that keeps checking that they arent forgeries and they are only associated with one particular bitcoin account. Unlike bank accounts, bitcoin accounts dont have to be associated with an identifiable person; a bitcoin account is effectively not much more than a magic number itself. Theres a load of clever cryptography in the background making sure it all works and nobodys anonymity is compromised,1 but the overall effect is that the supply of magic numbers can be used as if they were coins, so long as people are prepared to exchange them for valuable goods like drugs.

So bitcoin was used as the currency for the drug market, with the dealers converting their bitcoin proceeds into US dollars in whatever way they chose. This meant that they were faced with a typical small-business dilemmarevenues in one currency (bitcoin) and costs in another (mainly US dollars). Since the market was competitive and transparent, markups on the drugs were somewhat less than those available to street dealers, and could easily be wiped out by weekly fluctuations in the bitcoin/dollar exchange rate. Various means of allowing the vendors to hedge these currency movements were attempted, but they were all quite expensive and none of them worked very well.

The escrow system made the problem significantly worse for the drug dealers, because it imposed a delay during which the currency movements could be substantial. So they used their market power to get around it. Large dealers, with a reputation for reliability, would ask to be paid via finalize early (or fast execution, in either case usually abbreviated to FE), a feature of the Silk Road market that allowed the customer to forgo the protection of the escrow system. If you wanted to get the best quality and the most competitive prices, you paid via FE, effectively allowing the market to determine an implicit price that the customers were willing to pay to be certain that they were protected against being ripped off.

That implicit price is pretty important; its the basis of fraud considered as an economic phenomenon. The trade-off is always there, whether or not the victims realize that theyre making it. The optimum level of fraud in a system is rarely zero, and as well see later, can often be surprisingly high. And in many cases, the level of fraud seems to be determined by the market. If the overall level of dishonesty is high, people take more precautions and bring down the level of fraud (if its really high, the market itself might disappear as nobody is willing to do business). In an environment where nearly everyone is trustworthy, the implicit value of fraud protection is low, so fewer people pay it.

In the case of Silk Road, the implicit price was indeed low. There was significant honor among thieves, and the Silk Road marketplace had an elaborate feedback system (not unlike that of eBay) that allowed consumers to carry out their own credit analysis. As in the normal economy, vendors were able to build up a trading name, and to establish that they were good credit risks, encouraging buyers to deal with them without using escrow. So although the technology was there to do without it, the dark market ended up reinventing most of the apparatus of conventional small-business credit.

A key difference between the online drug trade and the normal economy, though, is that not all that many people are interested in building a career in online drug dealing and passing the firm down to their children. People grow up, leave college, or have the kind of short interaction with the legal system that suggests to them that a lifestyle change is in order. Businesses often tended to close down.

And having built up valuable goodwill on a dark market, it seems like a shame to just throw it all away when you disappear. The ethical thing to do would be to simply decline to take new orders, but when people are literally emailing you untraceable money, this would require quite a bit of moral fiber. And so the exit scam began to become a feature of Silk Road. A large vendor would start taking lots of FE payments (perhaps suggesting that this had been made necessary because he was being attacked by rival dealers using the escrow scam described above). There might even be a big sale to attract the maximum possible volume of orders. And then disappear with the money. The bitcoins that had been sent to the defaulting vendor could not be reclaimedthats not the way the system works. The disappointed customers tended not to have any details or address for the vendor, just an online screen name that wasnt being used anymore. The exit scammer would even be free to set up a brand-new business, building up goodwill from the ground floor, and there would be no easy way of finding out that this was being done.

By the time Silk Road was shut down by the law authorities and its market share taken by a number of smaller competitors, exit scams had become enough of a problem to materially affect the economics of the online marketplace, and to be a subject of lurid warnings to newcomers to the darknet economy. However, the suggested remedy of paying the price premium and dealing only via escrow turned out to have its own problems. The customers of 9THWONDER might have avoided his exit scam by using the Evolution markets escrow service, but this would not have protected them against the fact that Evolution turned out to be run by scammers itself. One day it disappeared, taking roughly $12 million of bitcoin that had been deposited in its escrow accounts.

This was a somewhat extreme example of darknet fraud, and in principle there is a technological solution to itan extension to the bitcoin protocol to allow multisignature escrow, so that bitcoins cant be spent by someone who is only holding them on behalf of another. Darknet researchers,2 however, seem to more or less despair of this technology ever catching onits too inconvenient for users, most of whom cant even be convinced to pass up the price discounts you get for dealing via FE.

The lesson from the darknet frauds is that you can build technical controls into the system, but fraud will work around them. Precautions are expensive, or inconvenient, or both, and trust is free. This means that people will substitute trust for precautions up until the point at which the shadow cost of trustthe expected fraud lossbegins to exceed the direct cost of precautions. Since this trade-off is likely to involve a mixture of both, there will always be trust and therefore there will always be scams. When the same features of a system keep appearing without anyone designing them, you can usually be pretty sure that the cause is economic.

And they do keep reappearing. There are always blind spots; in many ways there have to be. From the beginnings of modern capitalism, there have been people engaged in the business of stealing by lying. Seeing the forest for the trees is a difficult thing to do. People have failed to do it much more spectacularly than the online drug buyers.

The Cazique of Poyais It is common for young men in a hurry to make rash career decisions. Few of us, though, have screwed it up quite as badly as a London banker by the name of Gauger. In 1822, he was making a career in the City. A good chap from a good family though he was, nevertheless promotion was arriving slowly in the house of Thomas, Jenkins & Co., and so Gauger decided to do what bankers have done for generations: jump a few rungs up the ladder by taking a higher-risk opportunity in an emerging market. The job in question was the role of general manager of the Bank of Poyais, a new British colony in Central America being established by Sir Gregor MacGregor, the war hero and minor Scottish nobleman. Gauger paid a considerable sum of his familys money to purchase this commission. His trust seemed to have been reciprocated when he took delivery of a chest full of $5,000 worth of newly printed Poyais dollars to transport to the colonys capital, the fair city of St. Joseph.

Several weeks later, up to his knees in a foreign swamp, Mr. Gauger must have been having second, if not third thoughts. He would never be the man to run the central bank of Poyais, for there was no such country as Poyais. Despite the engraved pictures of it that had decorated all of MacGregors marketing material, there was no city of St. Joseph. There wasnt even a trading post. The Poyais dollars in his chest werent completely worthless: the local Miskito children quite liked the pretty pictures on them. But that wouldnt have been much comfort to Gauger, who had encouraged many other colonists to exchange this absurd scrip for their valuable English and Scottish currency. He had been made the victim of, and party to, one of early capitalisms first and most audacious investment frauds.

Similar disappointments were felt by the other passengers of the Honduras Packet and Kennersley Castle, which between them had carried around 250 families from Britain to the mouth of the Black River, located in modern Honduras. The voyagers included cobblers (who were never going to be official shoemakers to the Princess of Poyais), musicians (never going to direct the national opera of Poyais), and soldiers (never going to take up their officers commissions in the army of Poyais). In an even worse plight were the unskilled and agricultural colonists, who quickly realized that their dreams of an idyllic retirement running sugar plantations farmed by Native American labor were unlikely to be realized without significant unplanned work on a patch of land known as the Mosquito Coast. There was real land, but Poyais was not a real countryno capital city, no fertile plains, not much of anything except swamp and thick local rain forest.

The colonists did not take the revelation well. Those who could hitched lifts to Belize. Mr. Gauger headed off to seek his fortune in the USA, where he disappears from the records; it is not known what subsequently happened to him, but if he stayed in America, he did not live long enough to appear in the 1850 census. Many of the other colonists just died from heat, malnutrition, bad rum, and suicide.

In London, meanwhile, the self-styled Cazique (from a local native American word meaning chief) of Poyais was hard at work, hustling with his bankers for a bond issue on behalf of the government of Poyais. Sir Gregor MacGregor was in fact preparing for the second London flotation of an issue of Poyais bonds, the proceeds of a previous issue already having been largely wasted. The Cazique was a descendant of Rob Roy who had, like many ambitious officers after the Napoleonic Wars, joined in the independence struggles of Spains South American colonies and failed to gain either fortune or honor. He returned to London with a fake knighthood, a highly embellished account of his service, and the claim that he had been asked by the Poyais tribe of Native Americans to become their king. On this basis, he appointed brokers to raise sovereign debt and started selling parcels of land and passages on the Kennersley Castle and Honduras Packet.3 We havent heard the last of him. For now, though, we need to ask the question: How did this fantasist manage to take anyone in?

The shallow answer explains the Poyais fraud historically. In fact, there were plenty of countries raising money on the London market, which didnt, in the modern sense, exist. It was the early 1800s and the Spanish possessions in the Americas (which, at the time, still included modern Florida) were going through a series of independence struggles. The revolutionary governments of New Granada and Venezuela, among others, had not been recognized by the British Crown. Their loans were sold at significant discounts to speculators who could expect a windfall if the state lasted long enough to redeem the principal. These were high-risk, high-return investments, generally bought by gamblers who knew what they were getting into.

So much for the financial backers. But even the colonists deserve some slack, incredible as their navet sounds at first. If they had checked in the library, they would have found a book called Sketch of the Mosquito Shore in which the fertile plains of Poyais and its bustling capital were describedMacGregor had faked it, under the pseudonym Thomas Strangeways, copying out all the most favorable bits from almanacs of the West Indies and Latin America and then exaggerating them. He claimed that the soil was so fertile that three or four plantings of rattan would have to be made before it was sufficiently impoverished to be good for sugarcane, and that the Miskito tribe wanted nothing more in the world than to work for British settlers, preferring to be paid in cheap textiles rather than cash. Presumably in order to sound credible, he restricted himself to saying that the Black River was full of golden nuggets, rather than claiming they grew from the trees.

If they had gone to the Court of Chancery, they would have found official documents certifying the ownership of the landMacGregor had sworn false affidavits to have the claim inrolled there, based on a much more limited letter of intent (which did not include the granting of any titles of nobility like Cazique, by the way) that he had extracted from the tribal leader of all the Mosquito Coast peoples including the Poyais, King George Frederick, whom he had treated to copious amounts of whiskey one night while on the run from a previous adventure.4 The Poyais bonds were sold and traded on the London Stock Exchange and quoted in the newspapers alongside those of the Bank of England.

Even the usual protection against scamsthat if something seems too good to be true, it iswould not necessarily have protected anyone. The small territories of Latin America were at the time often giving substantial incentives to attract settlers, particularly Europeans with capital and skills. If it seems fanciful that you could buy valuable land for a pittance and then commandeer nearly costless labor to get incredibly rich developing it, bear in mind that this is exactly what the plantation fortunes of Jamaica and the United States were based on. So it wasnt as easy to see through this mirage as one might think. It was just more difficult to find things out in those days.

That, in my view, is the shallow explanation of how it happened. And the reason I think its shallow is that with all the advantages of the internet era, the exact same scam is being carried out today.

ICOs and cryptocurrency As we mentioned when talking about the Silk Road payment system, bitcoin is a system of magic numbers plus a system for keeping track of them so that you can use the magic numbers as if they were a currency. But, of course, theres nothing intrinsically special about the strings of digits that constitute bitcoins; theyre only made to be magic numbers because the bitcoin algorithm identifies them so. A different algorithmor even the bitcoin algorithm itself with the parameters tweakedwould identify a different set of ordinary numbers as being magic. And the thing about numbers, of course, is that there are lots of them.

So, if you were to make up your own magic number system along the lines of the bitcoin one, you could create your own personal cryptocurrency. Lots of people have actually done this; there are even platforms that will make one for you automatically. Once you have your set of magic numbers, you have a potential currency, and the question then becomes one of whether youre going to be able to exchange it for something valuable. How do you do that?

The answer lies in the bit of bitcoin that isnt the magic numbers themselves. A cryptocurrency delivers on its promise of anonymity because there is no centralized repository of information; the record of transactions is kept in a distributed fashion, with every user keeping a record of all the transactions, and clever communication among the various ledgers to allow them to check up on each other and prevent someone from defrauding the system.5 Effectively, every time you create a cryptocurrency, youre creating a network of computers running a database.

And you might want to use that database to do something useful. Like, for example, keep a record of predictions that people have made about the future, and reward them for getting it right (Gnosis). Or register internet domain names so they can be traded more easily (Domraider). Or trace the copyright ownership of digital photographs, while also making use of some vintage intellectual property you picked up cheaply (KODAKCoin6). Or, somewhat less comprehensibly, store customer surveys and a loyalty card scheme for dentists (Dentacoin). The point is that participating in your shared database can only be done by people who have the magic numbers, and the only person who can generate the magic numbers is you, and so you might be able to get people to send you US dollars in return for your magic numbers.

This process is the Initial Coin Offering (ICO), where you sell tokens (magic numbers) for cash. The done thing is to market the tokens with a white paper describing the technology you plan to use and the case for believing that your database will be useful. The promise to people buying the tokens is that you will use the money raised to build the technology thing, and that at some future date everyone will want to use it and need to buy magic numbers in order to do so. The people who bought tokens in the ICO will then either be able to use the system themselves, at a cheaper price than johnny-come-latelies, or sell their tokens at a profit to the users.

One might expect that the majority of people buying into any given ICO would therefore be prospective users of the system, or technologists who were attracted by the detail of the white paper. One would surely be wrong in this expectation. In fact, the majority of cryptocurrency buyers have been speculators, hoping to make a quick percentage return on their cash by selling their coins on. In general, cryptocurrency investors are not well placed to have opinions on whether a technical solution is viable or whether the business case for any given blockchain database system is genuine. Their expertise is in spotting which ICOs look hot or well marketed, and which are therefore likely to rise in value. If it looks a bit like a wholly unregulated7 securities market, thats because it is one.

And, well, what happens in an unregulated securities market? Yep. Doing tech things on a blockchain is difficult (particularly if you want them to be quick or efficient, as the processing overhead associated with keeping all the distributed copies consistent is considerable). Its also difficult and uncertain work to establish a new product with enough people to justify the costs of setting up the network. But just writing a white paper full of technobabble and wishful thinking is comparatively easy and cheap, and if most of the potential investor base are credulous speculators with no long-term interest in the project beyond the quick turn they hope to make, its roughly as effective.

Some ICOs have been proven to be definitely fraudulent, in the sense that there was never any intention to build the promised technology. Benebit, for example, promised that it would use a distributed database to keep track of frequent flier miles, and spent a marketing budget of at least $500,000 on assembling a team of nine thousand promoters and followers. It was surprisingly late in the day, after around $3 million had been raised by selling tokens to the public, that it was noticed that the portrait of John Laverty, co-founder and CEO on the Benebit website was in fact the deputy headmaster of Tower House Boys School in East Sheen, a suburb of London. The other key employees of Benebit were also stolen from the schools staff photo page; as far as anyone can work out, the true controllers of the Benebit scam were based in Mumbai.

This is structurally a similar fraud to that of Gregor MacGregor. We have a group of promoters who are unconstrained by the normal protections of securities regulation, and who are able to spin fantasy visions of new possibilities without being held down by having to make concrete and auditable financial statements. There is an investment community, like the traders in Latin American bonds of the 1820s, who are largely uninterested in the reality of the things they trade, except insofar as it affects their value as gambling chips. And there are a few true believers, who are prepared to put their trust in a prospectus full of confusing but optimistic hype. All of these things come together in an environment where misinformation is easy to find and aggressively promoted while skepticism is rare and hard to find.

And the near-term feedback is all in exactly the wrong direction; just as the Poyais colonists were led to believe in the possibility of free land and labor by the experience of the Caribbean plantation fortunes, the ICO community has the example of the bitcoin millionaires to mislead them. If we think that modern financial markets are much too sophisticated to allow the large-scale misdirection of investment capital into a laughable fiction, were wrong.

So the shallow explanation of what went wrong in Poyaisthat the world was different then and it was more reasonable to be fooled by a fictional countryseems wrong. The deeper explanation is that Poyais only looks ridiculous to us because we have different blind spots today than the ones that people had at the start of the nineteenth century. And the troubling corollary of that is: there are always blind spots.

The Canadian Paradox Some places in the world are what they call low-trust societies. The political institutions are fragile and corrupt, business practices are dodgy, debts are rarely repaid, and people, rightly, fear being ripped off on any transaction. In the high-trust societies, conversely, businesses are honest, laws are fair and consistently enforced, and the majority of people can go about their day in the knowledge that the overall level of integrity in economic life is very high. With that in mind, given what we know about the following two countries, why is it that the Canadian financial sector is so fraud-ridden that Joe Queenan, writing in Forbes magazine in 1985, nicknamed Vancouver the Scam Capital of the World, while shipowners in Greece will regularly do multimillion-dollar deals on a handshake?

We might call this the Canadian Paradox.8 There are different kinds of dishonesty in the world. The most profitable kind is commercial fraud, and commercial fraud is parasitical on the overall health of the business sector on which it preys. It is much more difficult to be a fraudster in a society in which people do business only with relatives or where commerce is based on family networks going back for centuries. It is much easier to carry out a securities fraud in a market where dishonesty is the rare exception rather than the everyday rule.

The existence of the Canadian Paradox suggests that there is a specifically economic dimension to a certain kind of crime of dishonesty. Trustparticularly between complete strangers, with no interactions besides relatively anonymous market transactionsis the basis of the modern industrial economy. And the story of the development of the modern economy is in large part the story of the invention and improvement of technologies and institutions for managing that trust. In other words, many things about the way the business world is organized make a lot more sense when you realize that they exist because of the constant drive for countries to become less like Greece and more like Canada.

And as industrial society develops, it becomes easier to be a victim. In The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith described how prosperity derived from the division of laborthe eighteen distinct operations that went into the manufacture of a pin, for example. While this was going on, the modern world also saw a growing division of trust. In previous eras, when people set out across continents to discover new worlds, they had known that they were stepping out into the unknown, but Mr. Gauger was at the cutting edge of a new reality. Already, he belonged to a class of people whose natural assumption was to take things on trust, to assume that the fact that an offer was extended publicly meant that it was probably legitimate. Nearly two hundred years later, his equivalents in the ICO craze were no more likely to expend personal effort on checking things for fraud than to throw their own pots and sew their own trousers. The more a society benefits from the division of labor in checking up on things, the further you can go into a financial fever swamp before you realize that youre in one.

Trust and its abuses The thread that links all these frauds together across space and time is that the blind spots are built into the system, and only become glaringly apparent once the whole thing has collapsed and people are watching the sun set over a pestilent swamp where a capital city ought to be. The problem is that whenever youre creating an economic institution like Silk Road or the colonial system of the nineteenth century, you have to make decisions about what checks and balances you need to put into the system. And every decision about what youre going to check up on is also a decision about what youre not going to check up on. And when youve decided what youre not going to check up on, then those are the things youre going to have to take on trust.

We can see now that one of the truisms about corporate crimethat white-collar executives are given the benefit of the doubtis not necessarily something we should regret or regard as an invidious fact about social class. Its pretty much the definition of what it is to be a high-trust society. If you want to be like Canada, you more or less have to accept that youre going to be the kind of place where people assume that a guy in a suit is probably honest. If youre going to build the kind of society that Britain grew into in the nineteenth century, you might have to accept that every now and then youre going to send hundreds of colonists and investors to a country that doesnt exist.

The way we might describe this is to go back to the lesson about trade-offs that we learned from the online drug market, and say that fraud is an equilibrium quantity. We cant check up on everything, and we cant check up on nothing, so one of the key decisions that an economy has to make is how much effort to spend on checking. This choice will determine the amount of fraud.9 And since checking costs money and trust is really productive, the optimal level of fraud is unlikely to be zero.

This, then, is a book about trust and betrayal. But not all kinds of trust and not all kinds of betrayal. In popular culture, the fraudster is the confidence man, somewhere between a stage magician and the trickster gods of mythology. In films like The Sting and Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, they are master psychologists, exploiting the greed and myopia of their victims, and creating a world of illusion. People like this do exist (albeit rarely), and we will meet some of them later on. But they are not typical of white-collar crime.

The interesting questions are never about individual psychology. There are plenty of larger-than-life characters. But there are also plenty of people like Enrons Jeff Skilling and Barings Nick Leeson: aggressively dull clerks and managers whose only interest derives from the disasters they caused. And even for the real craftsmen the actual work is, of necessity, incredibly prosaic. Even a master fantasist like Sir Gregor spent a lot of his time calculating agricultural yield tables and dealing with land claim documentation. The way in which most white-collar crime works is by manipulating institutional psychology. That means creating something that looks as much as possible like a normal set of transactions. The drama comes later, when it all unwinds.

Fraudsters dont play on moral weaknesses, greed, or fear; they play on weaknesses in the system of checks and balances, the audit processes that are meant to supplement an overall environment of trust. One point that will come up again and again as we look at famous and large-scale frauds is that in many cases, everything could have been brought to a halt at a very early stage if anyone had taken care to confirm all the facts.10 But nobody does confirm all the facts. There are just too bloody many of them. Even after the financial rubble has settled and the arrests have been made, this is a huge problem. It is a commonplace of law enforcement that commercial frauds are difficult to prosecute. In many countries, proposals have been made, and sometimes passed into law, to remove juries from complex fraud trials, or to move the task of dealing with them out of the criminal justice system and into regulatory or other nonjudicial processes. Such moves are understandable. There is a need to be seen to get prosecutions and to maintain confidence in the whole system. However, taking the opinions of the general public out of the question seems to me to be a counsel of despair.

When analyzed properly, there isnt much that is truly difficult about the proverbial complex fraud trial. The underlying crime is often surprisingly crude; someone did something dishonest and enriched themselves at the expense of others. What makes white-collar trials so arduous for jurors is really their length, and the amount of detail that needs to be brought for a successful conviction. Such trials are not long and detailed because there is anything difficult to understand. They are long and difficult because so many liars are involved. And when a case has a lot of liars, it takes time and evidence to establish that they are lying.

This state of affairs is actually quite uncommon in the criminal justice system. Most trials only have a couple of liars in the witness box. The question is a simple one; when a vault is blown, its obvious what happened and the mystery is who did it. When a bank goes bust, though, its the other way round. Theres only the CEO who could possibly have been responsiblethe difficult question is to find out if a crime happened.

In order to promote an innocent explanation, a crooked businessman might employ the services of crooked lawyers, crooked accountants, even crooked bankers. Crucial documents will turn out to be ambiguously worded or lost altogether. And the question of guilt may turn on having to judge what was in the businessmans mind at the timewas this an unfortunate series of deals, or an attempt to steal? The goal of the prosecution in a fraud case is to construct a straightforward framework, fitting all the disputed deals into a pattern. The goal of the defense is usually to insist on looking at every piece of evidence individually and burying the pattern in a mass of contradictory detail.

Not everyone accused of fraud is guilty. But if you want to understand how white-collar crime worksto protect yourself, enrich yourself, or just to understand the way of the worldyou need to think like a prosecutor. Financial frauds might be presented as masses of overlapping documents and witnesses, but they are created from simple plans following basic principles. Stick to the broad sweep. Dont get bogged down in the detail.11 Under the blizzard of paperwork, the chances are that youre dealing with one of four basic maneuvers.

The four types of white-collar crime The most basic kind of fraud is simply to borrow some money and not pay it back, or alternatively buy some goods and not pay for them. In a modern economy, businesspeople are forced to trust each other to pay invoices and deliver goods as promised. This feature of real-world commerce is surprisingly absent from economics textbooks, but it is absolutely fundamental. Most industries would be very differentalmost unrecognizable, and certainly unable to operate at their actual scaleif all transactions had to take place on a cash-on-delivery basis. Every single stage in the production of this book, from the authors advance to the printers payment terms to the retailers sale-or-return, depends on the fact that businesses extend credit to each other to let payment be made when the money has arrived to make it.

Strangely, the credit extended between businesses, from suppliers to their customers and vice versa, is not systematically measured in official statistics. Yet any sensible estimate of it would dwarf the size of the banking systemprobably less than 10 percent of commercial credit is directly financed by a bank loan. And it is the practice of intentionally running up a lot of credit, and then defaulting on it (as in the 9THWONDER case), that is the basis of the fraud known as a long firm. This is our first lesson in commercial crime. It also introduces the key problem of detecting and prosecuting frauds. Even after it has been completed and the money stolen, a long firm often looks just like an honest business that went bust. Unlike most other kinds of criminal, white-collar fraudsters do exactly the same basic stuff as their honest counterparts. What makes the crime is the intent to deceive.

Another way of stealing money through commercial fraud is to abuse peoples trust in the ways by which ownership and value are verified. Again, the fraudster exploits the fact that a world in which every single document was checked, every claim of ownership verified, and every certificate of quality audited would be a world in which a huge proportion of the business worlds time and effort was wasted by checking up on each other. The only practical way to do many types of business is to trust that, for the most part, documents are what they appear to be, and that they prove what they claim to prove. Abusing this trust by creating false documents to verify false claims is counterfeiting. We can see at this stage that, just as different types of trust relationships reinforce each other to make commerce profitable, different types of fraud can also reinforce each other. In order to carry out a long-firm fraud, for example, you might want to counterfeit a document that shows you to be more financially sound than you actually are.

As an economy gets more sophisticated, it tends to separate the function of providing capital to a business from the activity of managing one. In such an economy, it is usually impossible (or at least highly inefficient) for the ultimate owners and creditors of a company to monitor everything that is done by the managers they have employed. Like everyone else, they have to rely on trust. And this trust opens up the possibility of a control fraud. A control fraud differs from the simpler kind because the means by which the value is extracted to the criminal is generally legitimatehigh salaries, bonuses, stock options, and dividends, but the legitimate payments are made on the basis of fictitious profits and unreal assets, and the manager tends to take vastly higher risks than those that would be taken by an honest businessman.

It is also unique in that it is, at least potentially, a subjunctive crimeif things turn out well for the underlying business, and the wild risks that the control fraudster takes pay off, the victims never know they have been had and the crime never exists. It is even possible to create a distributed control fraud, in which the mechanism of fake profits, high risk, and value extraction arises without the necessary involvement of a single legally culpable actor, by assembling a set of perverse, criminogenic incentives that make the distortions happen independently.

Finally, we reach the highest level of abstraction. These frauds exploit the general web of trust that makes up a modern economy, rather than a single relationship. There are plenty of actions that are not even really crimes at all in the traditional sensethey are not obviously or intrinsically dishonest activities. Nevertheless, experience has shown us that a market economy works better if people are able to assume that they wont be done. Cartels, for example, or insider dealing rings, might be examples of market crimes, where the victim is the market itself rather than a particular person who has lost an identifiable sum of money. Market crimes can be very lucrative, but they make other users of the market more reluctant to extend the trust that makes the system work. More than any other, this kind of crime is a matter of judgment, local convention, and practice, rather than one of cut-and-dried criminality. A blatant market crime in one jurisdiction could be considered aggressive but legal practice in another and the definition of good business somewhere else. A long firm clearly falls under Thou shalt not steal, and a counterfeit under Thou shalt not bear false witness, but wheres the commandment Thou shalt not trade securities while in possession of material nonpublic information? The investigation of market crimes takes us into some profound questions about the workings of the modern economy itself. It also takes us to some of the biggest frauds: because market crimes can only arise in a market big and important enough to need its own legal framework, the sums of money are often eye-watering.

Dont get too hung up on the terminology in any of these casesin particular, dont expect it to match up too closely to the criminology literature. Were less interested at this stage in the details than in the broad structure and the type of breach of trust thats involved. This gets more abstract at every stage. A long firm makes you question whether you can trust anyone. A counterfeit makes you question the evidence of your eyes. A control fraud makes you question your trust in the institutions of society, and a market crime makes you question society itself. Since its impossible to run a modern economy without all four levels of trust, fraud is an insidious crime.

Diversionary tactics So how does this book work? We will alternate stories of famous frauds (with digressions into the underlying structures that they exploited) and examinations of the trust mechanisms that underpin the modern world (with digressions into how some famous fraudsters exploited them). Commercial fraud is the evil twin of the modern economy. Understanding one gives us powerful insights into the other.

By the end of this journey into corruption, you will be better placed to understand how frauds work, and even to manageone can never quite eliminatethe risks to your own business or employer. You will also get a useful glimpse into the way that the honest commercial system works. Like the human brain, the market economy is an information processing system. Like the human brain, we get our best looks at its hidden mechanisms when it breaks down. Just as neurologists study the consequences of head injuries, we can learn about the economy by looking at currency forgers and pyramid schemes.

You might, of course, choose to use this book instead as an instruction manual. There are enough case studies and schematics for you to work out how to do one. But bear this in mind. Almost all of the fraudsters discussed in this book got caught. Some of them enjoyed a high lifestyle before they did. But many of them greeted their inevitable discovery with tears of joy that the whole wretched, stressful business had come to an end. The time, effort, and commercial acumen that goes into almost any fraud would nearly always have been better spent on doing something productive.

Nearly always.

1. Or at least, not compromised very much. If you dont take care with the way you manage your bitcoin account (and nobody does, because to do so would be a massive pain in the ass), then you can probably be linked to some of your transactions. But to do so would take more time and effort than the average overworked drug cop is prepared to expend, so the protection was good enough for the users of Silk Road.

2. Oh yes, they exist, albeit pseudonymously. Bloggers, mainly, but performing the recognizable functions of banking consultants and money brokers, writing research either for payment via bitcoin, or to promote their own markets and escrow services.

3. It is more complicated than this. In fact, as far as anyone can tell, MacGregor provided so many assisted places to colonists and advances against their wages in the nonexistent thriving Poyaisian economy that he probably lost money on sales to colonists, which was partly what the funds raised by the sovereign loans were meant to cover. It was not wholly clear, either to his contemporaries or to us with the benefit of hindsight, what he thought he was playing at.

4. This also was not necessarily as weird as it seems. Tribal societies did make land deals, and these sometimes involved the granting of royal or equivalent status in the tribal society to foreign land promoters. The ability to sell ones land is an important benefit of owning it, and in the absence of a developed society with land registries and law courts, strange things sometimes have to be done. This sort of consideration was a major part of the motivation for the Treaty of Waitangi, for example, as agreed between colonists and the Mori of New Zealand. By establishing that property rights in land were assigned to chiefs, and that transactions between Mori and colonists would be governed by statute law (at the time, that of New South Wales), the treaty aimed to tackle what was becoming a fairly serious problem whereby small Mori family groups would draw up sale agreements for huge tracts of land with passing opportunistic explorers, who would then demand that the colonial administration enforce their claims.

5. That is, to prevent anyone from defrauding the system by making fake entries in the database. As with Silk Road, all the technical fraud protections seem to work pretty well. The trouble is that the kind of frauds you can protect against with technology arent always the important kind.

6. A trusted brand is a useful thing to have. The KODAK name was, at the time of writing, last seen attached to a stock that went up by more than 2,000 percent on the news that it would be given a federal loan to develop a COVID-19 vaccine. Both the loan and the stock price move are under investigation.

7. Unregulated here is a statement of fact rather than law. In actual fact, its quite likely that most of these ICOs are illegal, but the SEC hasnt at the time of writing really gotten around to enforcing the law on their issuers. The more cautious and savvy ICO promoters try to emphasize that the tokens they are selling are for the future purchase of technological services and to disavow the speculative motive, but the law on what constitutes issuing securities is widely drafted.

8. Am I being unfair to the Canadians? Is this kind of fraud really more prevalent in Canada than in other countries? Criminological and statistical issues with respect to defining, detecting, and categorizing fraud as a crime more or less guarantee that a proper answer to this question is impossible. But Canada, and particularly its regional stock exchanges, does have a reputation. While writing this book, I got scammed precisely once, and it was by a fake website selling Canadian business visas for ten times their true price.

9. Although probably not in any particularly predictable way. Antifraud protections arent like sausage machines or steam looms with a straightforward relationship between input and output, and fraudsters have their own decisions to make, too. But all we really need is for there to be a broad relationship that more control most likely means less fraud, and a broad assumption that people will make decisions that work for them and ensure the long-term stability and viability of the overall system.

10. Another thing that will come up again and again is that it is really quite rare to find a major commercial fraud that was the fraudsters first attempt. An astonishingly high proportion of the villains of this book have been found out and even served prison time, then been placed in positions of trust once again. Sir Gregor MacGregor had tried a version of his land and currency scam in Amelia Island, previously a Spanish possession off the coast of Florida.

11. I will occasionally admit its more complicated than that in a footnote when Im doing something really horrific in terms of skating over detail.

Chapter 2: The Basics The aim of crime as a business is to acquire wealth. There are broadly two ways of doing this: by taking it without the owners consent, or by persuading him to part with it voluntarily even if afterwards he does not want you to keep it. The first kind accounts for most of what people think of as crime but it is a self-limiting business. It cannot be disguised. A blown safe cant be passed off as a safe the accountant lost his temper with.

Leslie Payne, The Brotherhood: My Life with the Krays Were going to be the General Motors of the carpet cleaning industry. Quite a pitch, particularly given that this was 1985 and GM was a widely admired company. Obviously, since this is a book about commercial fraud, sharp-thinking readers will have guessed that the story of Barry Minkow and ZZZZBest Incorporated wont end well for the investors, but come on, if the idea of getting in on the ground floor of the General Motors of carpet cleaning doesnt stir your interest even a little bit, your capitalist soul might be missing something.

Once he had drawn you in with the high concept, Barry would let you in on the secretcarpet cleaning was a terrible industry. He was a twenty-year-old bodybuilder with stylishly bouffant hair who had set up ZZZZBest (pronounced Zee Best, preferably with a Southern Californian drawl) before graduating high school and then built it into a chain of locations with the help of a bunch of oddballs, flakes, gym rats, alcoholics, mafiosi, and Nazis.1 That cast of characters in itself gives you a clue about what the problem with the industry was. It was just too easy to set up a carpet cleaning business and that was why the profit margins were, to use the language of the time, grody. The only way you got business was to quote a very low price, then upsell the homeowner like crazy on curtain cleaning, treatments, and assorted extras to make the job pay. It was a business that tended to attract fast talkers with loose ethics, and companies went bust all the time.

Where the money was, was in restoration jobs. If a whole building had been damaged by fire or water, the buildings insurer was responsible for making its customer whole, and that meant handing back the keys to a building with clean walls and carpets (fire, and also the carefree spirit of firefighters when let loose with water and foam, is hell on your carpets). Since people dont tend to get into the financial services industry because they have a deep enthusiasm for getting dirt under their fingernails, the job of making good tended to be contracted out to specialist companies. The insurers would hand out these jobs to a small list of contractors they trusted, on a fixed price basis, and with a tendering process that was set up to minimize the hassle and complaints rather than to get the keenest cost. For that reason, if you had a good relationship with a claims department, and if you were really sharp and entrepreneurial when it came to getting bargains on new carpet and managing your cleanup teams, you could make profit margins three or four times as big as the norms for the industry.

That was the idea. Depending on the mood youre in, it might sound pretty convincing, or it might sound a little bit too good to be true. When Barry had explained how great these restoration jobs were, though, he would pat you on the shoulder (or knee or any other available body part, usually with a hand recently removed from the groin of the sweatsuit pants he wore every day) and start on the explanation of a really important economic fact. His company got paid for the restoration jobs when they were completed to the satisfaction of the insurer. But in order to do the job, he needed to pay his suppliers and workers. Because the cash flows didnt arrive all at the same time, he needed a loan. That is it; the fundamental building block, the elementary particle of commercial fraud. The whole structure of the carpet cleaning and restoration industry was determined by the relationships between the buyers and sellers, which were reproduced in the pattern of trade credit. The importance and relevance of this basic principle of business economics are in no way undermined by the fact that Barry was lying like a dirty rug.

In many ways, the importance of trade credit to the way the economy works is underlined by the ZZZZBest affair. People dont bother to tell big lies and risk long prison sentences (Minkow was eventually sentenced to twenty-five years) about things that dont matter.

We will come back to Barry Minkow and ZZZZBest a few times in this chapter, because they make a good introductory case studythey did quite a lot of different fraudulent things, and they did most of them in an attractively blatant and straightforward manner. As we do, were going to learn how to bust out a business, how to use phony collateral, and how to kite checks. These are all crimes that fit under the most basic building-block category of fraudthe long firm. Although each version of the crime has its own details and subtleties, keep your eye on the ball; the fundamental elements of each of them are time and trust. They all involve making a promise, getting someone to act based on that promise, and then, at a later date, breaking your word.

The time dimension is crucial. As J. K. Galbraith noted, fraud is unusual in having this time dimension to it, and it means that there is a happy period when the nation as a whole feels richer because the fraudster knows that he has stolen the proceeds, but the victim is not yet aware that he has lost them. He coined the phrase the bezzle to describe the aggregate stock of undiscovered fraud in the economy and suggested that its fluctuations might explain quite a few things about the business cycle. But thats a bit of an abstract concept at this stage. Lets start with the simplest possible example of the use of the long-firm methodan old-fashioned Mafia bust-out.

How to do a bust-out Vincent Teresa is possibly dead, or possibly alive in a Federal Witness Protection Program, after spilling the beans on the New England Mafia. Before he disappeared entirely, he cooperated with Thomas Renner on a biography, My Life in the Mafia. This book, in between the endless and eventually tedious tales of idiots shooting each other because they felt disrespected, has some pretty useful tutorial material for anyone wanting to make a dishonest buck. Most of this material involves taking a substantial risk of death or imprisonment. But in between the car robberies, hijackings, and fixed horse races, there is a short description of a scam thats very old indeed and that has been seen all over the world in different forms.

Vincent and his friends would start work in the spring, using a front man with good finances and no criminal record. They would buy toys or white goods from manufacturers and build up a trading reputation through the summer months. A few months before Christmas, they would naturally increase their orders substantially, and in line with common practice, the manufacturers would send an invoice payable in January. The trading company would sell what it could to the public in December, then move the rest of the stock on to a fence early in the New Year and declare bankruptcy after Mr. Teresa sent a good torch artist around to the empty warehouse.

There are actually two frauds going on here, but they are quite easy to distinguish from one another. The business of insuring some goods then pretending to destroy them to collect on the insurance is a straightforward affair (although one that has been very important to the whole development of capitalism back in the days when the only things to be insured were ships and their cargoes, see page 219). The other half of the fraud, though, is the practice of buying goods on credit, selling them for cash, and then declaring bankruptcy. To the goodfellas of Massachussetts, this was known as a bust-out, but it has a history going back to the early nineteenth century, when it was called the long firm.

Etymologically, a long firm has little to do with either length or firms. It first appears in printed English in dictionaries of slang and thieves cant, and both words are used in archaic senses. Long had a meaning from the Anglo-Saxon gelang meaning fraudulent and referring to fault or failure, while firm (like the Italian firma) referred to a signature, and has only comparatively recently been used to refer to a kind of organization. So a long firm is a gelang firma, one Saxon word and one Latin, and refers to the crime of signing a fraudulent bill of goods. And if you understand the long firm, you arguably understand a lot more than most professional economists about the way that business is really done.

Payment terms and trade credit If youre selling sandwiches on the platform at a railway station, you get cash at lunchtime, but you need to buy bread and cheese in the morning. You could take out a bank loan to buy your supplies, but its more common to ask the food suppliers to give you the bread and cheese on credit. In general, in almost every industry, there is some general recognition of the fact that trade customers need to make and sell their product before they have cash to pay for their inputs, and that their suppliers are often in a better position to provide credit to bridge this gap than the financial system is.

Why is supplier credit so common? Because of the convenience factor. As one fraudster put it, you could imagine a system of commerce where every transaction was made with cash and nothing was paid for in advance or in arrears but it would mean every time you wanted to light a fire you had to go out and buy a shovel-full of coal.

In the first place, it is comparatively cheap to provide. If the alternative to making a sale on credit is letting the goods hang around until the customer can raise the cash, there is a saving to be made by getting them moved out of your warehouse and into the customers. This is particularly the case for things like fresh bread, which has a limited shelf life. Second, and related to this, it drives sales. Being prepared to deal on terms means that you can sell to start-up businesses and to customers who happen to be short of cash that week, rather than restricting yourself to selling only to people with ready money. And finally, its likely that a supplier will see somewhat less credit risk than a bank. For one thing, the supplier has an up-to-date picture of how the customers business is faring, simply by looking at the customers orders. And for another, when you provide bread and cheese on credit, you know that credit is being used to buy ingredientsa bank that lends cash is taking the risk that the loan might be used for a purpose other than the one for which it was intended.

Obviously, though, there will come a day when the payment has to be made. If, on that day, it isnt, then the supplier has parted with goods or services and not been paid for them, just as if they had been lost or stolen in the ordinary way. Stealing things by getting them on credit and then not making the payment is the essence of the long firm.

Who bears the risk? Of course, everyone has cash-flow problems to manage, and everyone would rather be paid up front and deal with their suppliers on credit. So the question of who gets what sort of terms from whom is always a complicated one, and reflects patterns of bargaining power, supply and demand, and competition. This is as true whether the underlying business is toy-store retail, online drug dealing, or carpet cleaning. You can tell more about the structure of an industry by looking at patterns of payment terms than you can from any five forces or SWOT analysis.

Credit control When a company goes bust, you often find that its biggest creditors are its suppliers, and when a big customer fails to pay, the resulting loss can often be enough to drive its supplier under as well. So companies have to have credit controllers as part of the process of managing their accounts receivable. This credit-control function can be quite informalas a newly opened restaurant, you will probably have to pay cash on delivery for your produce,2 with terms extending as you build up a record of payment. Or in larger companies there can be a whole credit-control department that takes and reviews formal credit references. Or the accounts-receivable team might subscribe to one of the agencies that provide credit assessments. Whatever the specific form, there is almost always someone there whose job it is to be unpopular with the sales force, earning a nickname like the abominable NO-man, Chief Business Prevention Officer, or similar. This person is the main obstacle that a crook needs to overcome.

Vincent Teresa achieved this task by taking things slowly, and spending most of the year building up a reputation as a good payer.3 He then took care to expand the size of his long firm at a period when to do so would not attract so much attentionoutside of the Christmas period, a sharp increase in orders is usually seen as a red flag. Barry Minkow got around credit controllers another way; he tended to buy his carpet cleaning machines and other capital equipment from people who were either connected to his company and parties to his frauds, or from insiders who he had bribed to overlook the usual checks and balances. From time to time, Barry would also get a letter of reference from one of his banks, then photocopy it after having inserted text that did not appear in the original. In general, where there is a crooked will, there is a way.

Once you have the goods, they need to be sold for cash. If you have enough substance to your crooked business to move the goods to actual customersas Vincent Teresa did and Barry Minkow didntyou can offer very good terms, as your profit margin is boosted by the fact that youre not planning to pay for the stuff yourself. Even if you havent got much of a business, in a high-trust economy the Canadian Paradox will usually look after you and help you turn your stolen goods into cash. Unless you really go out of your way to look like a crook, the normal business community is not in the habit of looking a gift horse in the mouth. This is one of the reasons why the potential victims of commercial frauds try to have a few more tricks up their sleeves, one of which is the institution of taking collateral.

Collateral and the Golden Boos When we left the discussion of Barry, we were noting that he had cash-flow problems in getting the cash up front to pay for his restoration jobs. This was partly because the pattern of credit is driven by the pattern of industry power, and the insurance companies who handed out these jobs were a lot less replaceable than the largely interchangeable contractors who squabbled for them. But it was a particular problem for ZZZZBest, because most of their restoration jobs were utterly fictitious; a fired insurance executive called Tom Padgett had been set up in an office by Barry and his sidekick, the master forger Mark Morze. Under the name of Interstate Appraisal Services, Tom would provide phony paperwork for phony cleanup jobs in buildings that didnt exist.

Obviously the fact that there was no such job was a great way of cutting back on the cost of carpet and cleaning products. But operating costs were always a minor part of the ZZZZBest cost base compared to the cash that Barry Minkow and his cronies were taking out to finance the business-up-front-party-in-the-back lifestyle that young tycoons aspired to in Los Angeles during the hair metal years. Ferraris dont come cheap, and neither do McMansions in gated communities with a Z monogram in the swimming pool. All the time they were trading, Barry and his crew needed to hustle for cash. Borrowed cash.

To begin with (things got a lot crazier, later), their main source of cash was the savings pots of wealthy Los Angelenos. Doctors, film producers, and wealthy widows often had little pools of mad money, on which the applicable taxes had not always been paid, and which they were prepared to take a few risks with in order to earn a better return than a certificate of deposit. In New England of the 1960s, these kinds of people were a useful source of funds for Vincent Teresas loan-sharking operations, but Barry Minkow, particularly when he made friends with Jack Catain, a gangster from out east, learned to tap into the same pool.

The trouble was that the ZZZZBest guys didnt always look like great credit risks. Tom Padgett of Interstate Appraisal Services, the alleged source of Barrys lucrative business and their key credit reference, was a member of the White Aryan Resistance and appeared in the newspapers brawling with members of the Jewish Defense League after the trial of a Klan grand wizard. Maurice Rind, their financial adviser, was a convicted securities felon with, police said, connections to the New York Mafia. Their handyman, Mark Roddy, was a three-hundred-pound albino with a cocaine conviction whose street name was the Ultimate White Man. Barry himself was a nice clean kid who made a big deal about not taking drugs, but he was barely out of his teens and often distracted from the business by his motivational speaking tours. How do you overcome such massive and obvious character and competence issues to get to a point where sensible people will lend you money? You give them collateral. Time for another digression, Im afraid.

If you spend a night in Boston, for example, you might see a notice that state law requires in every hotel room. It warns guests that it is an offense to make a show of leaving baggage in order to acquire credit. This went into the state legal code because of the practice of making a showostentatiously leaving a trunk full of valuables with an innkeeper while running up a large bill, then doing a moonlight flit before he realizes it contains nothing but stones or rags. The uncontested mistress of making a show was Barbara Erni, the scourge of eighteenth-century Liechtenstein, nicknamed Golden Boos for her red-blond hair.

Golden Boos used to travel around in the southern German Alps, carrying with her a trunk of unusual size and weight (as well as for her hair, Barbara Erni was renowned for her physical strength). She would stay in the finest hotels, running up a large tab for food and drink with hoteliers who were reassured by the fact that her trunk was full of valuable goods and jewelryso valuable, in fact, that she always demanded that it be locked up in the safest room in the house overnight. On the afternoon of her surprise departure, however, the trunk was usually found not to be full of rocks or junk, but to be entirely empty. Ms. Erni had taken the scam a step further by using her luggage to store either a child or a small man (accounts differ) who would wait until midnight and then crawl out of the trunk to steal any other valuables in the same room before running away. Golden Boos and her partner would regroup at a safe distance and use part of their ill-gotten gains to buy another trunk. Although she was caught and beheaded in 1784the last person executed in Liechtensteinher intriguing story passed into local folklore: there is a Golden Boos Lane in her home village of Eschen.

As the Liechtensteinian innkeepers knew, holding on to a customers valuables (otherwise known as taking collateral) makes it a lot easier to extend a loan to a business or a person. It reduces your risk in two ways. In the first place, it is usually easier to check out the quality of things than of people, so if your main risk is the collateral, this is easier to manage than if your main risk is a debtors ability and willingness to pay. And in the second, when your collateral is more valuable than the amount of your loan, the debtor stands to lose more by defaulting on the loan than by paying it back. So you can be reasonably sure that the debtor is going to make an effort to repay you. The limiting case here is where you have established a legal right to repossess the house that the debtor lives in, which makes mortgage loans one of the safest forms of credit. As the bankers proverb goes: Mortgage lenders have no cares Whatever happens They get theirs Collateral is a substitute for trust. It relies, however, on strong legal institutions to make sure you can actually realize it by taking possession of it when a debtor defaults. The activity of perfecting an interest, establishing security, and similar euphemisms forms a large part of what lawyers send bills to bankers for, because the law on this is tricky at the best of times and damn near impossible when the borrower starts to play games.

Barry Minkows investors got two kinds of pledges of collateralover some of the industrial cleaning machines and electricity generators, and over the restoration job contracts. In the first case, they were hampered by the fact that the machines had been repeatedly pledged to different lenders, meaning that anyone trying to repossess the physical assets would have ended up in a nasty legal fight (and, given the people involved, quite possibly a physical one as well) with his or her fellow creditors. They were also hampered by the fact that ZZZZBest didnt necessarily own as many cleaning machines as it said it didsome of them were rented from a company owned by Maurice Rind, and some of them didnt exist at all outside of a phony invoice generated as an excuse to pay a bribe to one of the mobsters who was introducing the investors.

The collateral value of the restoration-job contracts was in an even worse position. Even if we were to put to one side for the moment the fact that the contracts themselves were phony, they would only have had value if the insurance company paid up on a job well done. Carpet cleaning companies that go bankrupt tend to do so very suddenly, and usually dont bother to finish off their jobs, particularly ones where all the money is going to outside investors. The loan contracts had what bankers call wrong-way riskthe value of the collateral was very closely associated with the event that the collateral was meant to protect you against.

The investors did their best, they really did. The contracts ZZZZBest signed were very specific in saying that the money loaned was to be used only for the restoration job concerned, which was to be managed and funded separately from the carpet cleaning business and any other restorations. This was no protection at all, as once the cash was in Barrys hands, he could do what he liked with it. There was no effective financial control to stop him, and anyone trying to check up on ZZZZBests offices and staff got shown a Potemkin-stage-set-ful of high school kids paid ten dollars for the afternoon to pretend to be telemarketers.

Creditors also demanded documentation of the contracts, which was easily forged, and photos of the buildings. These were a somewhat tougher proposal, particularly when, as once happened, Tom Padgett had neglected to check whether there was a single building higher than three stories in Arroyo Grande, the town where he had claimed that an eight-story office building had been fire-damaged. He ended up lying on his back in a parking lot, taking a foreshortened Polaroid of the towns highest building, framed so as to not show the gap between its second floor and the bright blue Southern California sky. On another occasion (when the company was planning on raising money from the public and had to have auditors in) Barry and the team had to rent eight floors of a half-finished office building in San Diego and then spend close to a million dollars on doing three months work in eleven days to make it look like a building that had been completed, suffered water damage, and then been restored.

Only in America The bust-out and the collateral scam are important to understand, because theyre the C-major scales of corporate fraud. They illustrate the key principle that credit is essential because production and consumption take time, and that where there is a time difference, there has to be trust and therefore the opportunity for fraud. But theyre actually not all that common in the modern USA as models of crime. Like soccer or diesel cars, they have their aficionados, but theyre pretty small potatoes compared to the all-American practice of check kiting.

In its simplest and most elemental form, check kiting4 is the simple practice of stealing money or valuable goods by paying for them with a check that you know (or ought to know) will be rejected because there arent sufficient funds in the bank account to honor it. In this form it is known to the specialists as paper hanging, and its often a crime of desperation or one carried out with stolen checkbooks rather than a calculated commercial decisionthere are obvious disadvantages to a method of stealing that requires you to give the victim your name and address.

It is possible to make paper hanging into both a systematic fraud and a lifestyle, as Frank Abagnale did (and wrote about in his autobiography, Catch Me If You Can, later made into a movie starring Leonardo DiCaprio). Abagnale got over the main drawback by adopting a nomadic lifestyle and impersonating an airline pilot, something that also allowed him to travel for free, to date flight attendants during the high period of Pan Am recruitment sexism, and to have a plausible excuse for needing to cash checks all the time and not having a permanent local address. But as a commercial fraud carried out by businesspeople, check kiting is a little bit more sophisticated and takes advantage of a peculiarity of the American banking system.

The USA is a big place. Not only is it a big place, but it is made up of fifty states, all with their own local banking regulations and commercial codes. This has, historically, made it more difficult for the American authorities (the Federal Reserve, say) to standardize rules for payment systems than has been the case in other countries. Because of the difficulty of standardization, things tended to default to the lowest common denominator, which was the paper check. Americans have tended to use a lot more paper checks than similar economies. And those checks often needed to be transported for long distances in order to get them from the place where the payment was made to the bank branch that held the account the check was drawn on.5 Up until recently (when, after an absurd period of delay, it was finally agreed that check clearing could take place on the basis of electronic images of the paper checks), the Federal Reserve operated what amounted to a small chartered air force of planes that were dedicated to the same task that had been given to the Pony Express a century earlier, taking heaps of paper from one regional Fed to another. This was the Interdistrict Transportation Service, later renamed CheckRelay, and in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, attacks, there was a substantial anomaly in the money market statistics reflecting the fact that its airplanes were grounded and the checks had to be lugged around on trucks.

The important technical detail here is that because paper checks are particularly common in America, and because the check-clearing cycle is so long, American banks haveunusually in a global contexthistorically been very generous when it comes to allowing their business customers to make payments out of uncleared funds, that is to say checks that have been deposited into their account but that have not yet been endorsed by the bank that they are drawn on. Effectively, when you deposit a check, you get access to a short-term interest-free loan, lasting for the duration of the check-clearing cycle. This raises the possibility of a form of fraud that is the equivalent of NFL football and pumpkin piesomething that Europeans would no doubt enjoy greatly if they tried it, but that is so deeply embedded into the overall American way of doing things that it doesnt really travel.

What you do (in the simplest form) is that you open accounts in two banks. Call them Bank A (from which you get a checkbook with pictures of trees in it) and Bank B (which gives you a checkbook full of pictures of sports cars). Pretend for the time being that you put a token hundred bucks into each account. But now you write a check for $500,000 from your trees checkbook and deposit it in your Bank B account. That check is going to bounce, for certain. Except it will only bounce when the check gets presented, and in the meantime, thinking that you have $500,000 in the bank, Bank B will not mind if you write a sports-car check and deposit it in Bank A. If Bank A sees the sports-car check, they will not mind honoring the trees check for the time being, while they are waiting for the sports-car check to clear. If they honor that check, then you can write another check to Bank B, and so on Of course, this looks like a bit of a closed systemyou can make the checks going back and forth look as big as you like, but if you ever take the money out in cash or spend it on something, the checks will actually bounce and turn you into just another paper hanger. But creating the illusion of having two bank accounts with half a million dollars in each can be profitable in itself because as well as allowing customers to make payments out of uncleared funds, American banks used to be quite generous about paying interest on deposits as soon as they were made. In the heyday of check kiting in the early 1980s when interest rates were in the midteens and bank computer systems in their infancy, you could have earned quite a lot out of the simple kiting scheme described above, unless someone happened to notice. And although even a dull bank clerk might spot a kite based on two banks and checks going back and forth every few days, if you bring more banks into the scheme (chaining) and intermingle the kite with the ordinary back-and-forth cash flow of a large operating business, it becomes very difficult to detect.

The stock brokerage EF Hutton made at least $8 million of interest income out of a version of the check-kiting fraud described above, making use of different lengths of clearing cycles between local and national check transactions, and exploiting the fact that as a large financial-sector counterparty, EF Hutton would often be allowed to overdraw the accounts at its rural and suburban branches, against promises of payment from central accounts in New York and Chicago. A favorite place for EF Hutton branches to have an account was in small towns in upstate New York, where winter snowstorms often delayed the mail for days, allowing Hutton to earn interest on deposits credited against the snowbound checks. Several of their bankers ended up asking Hutton to take its business elsewhere because they were losing so much money on the interest-free loans that they were floating, but eventually the Genesee Country Bank, of Batavia, New York, once the ice had thawed, realized that a small four-man brokerage office was making transactions of as much as $35 million a day and stopped honoring its checks, causing that branchs kite to crash to earth. EF Hutton settled over two thousand individual counts of wire fraud6 in 1985 and ceased to exist as an independent entity shortly after (the brand name has since been revived).

The great days of check kiting in order to earn interest are over, of courseinterest rates are much lower, the clearing cycle is shorter, and banks have automated kite detection systems.7 But those systems are meant to spot regular patterns, and some styles of check kiting are nothing like as orderly as the EF Hutton version. Lets go back to Barry Minkow.

How to train your banker When we left Barry he was living the sweet life, driving his Ferrari with the ZZZZBST number plate and abandoning all attempt at day-to-day oversight of his carpet cleaning locations in favor of cleaning out investors on phony restoration contracts. His problems, though, were multiplying daily. In order to present the image of a successful business, he had to tell his investors that his restoration jobs were progressing according to schedule, but if they were progressing to schedule, its inevitable that some of them would be completed. And when they were completed, the lenders would expect to be paid back. So when that happened, a new fictitious job had to be invented, and documentation supporting it produced by ZZZZBests chief forger and sent out for endorsement to the Nazi Odinist who ran their phony insurance office, so that either the original investors could be convinced to roll their money over, or new loans could be raised to pay out the old ones.8 He worked his tube socks off on this hustle. He also got involved with a succession of Mob-connected figures like Jack Catain, people of the type its advisable to make sure you pay back. But although he worked hard enough at it to be able to raise an amount of money large enough to cover the rollover of the phony project debts, he couldnt always raise exactly the right amount on exactly the right day. So he bounced checks. Lots of checks.

The Minkow method, though, was not to fly under the radar with a clever structure to conceal the kite. Instead, he practically reveled in his reputation as a check bouncer, and combined it with aggressive schmoozing (and/or flirting, depending on gender) with bank employees. He had been lucky early on that one of his main business banks had gone bust, for unrelated reasons, and as a result the federal employees who were administering it on behalf of the deposit insurance fund could often be bamboozled into thinking that missing payments were their fault. But the most usual ZZZZBest transaction was an extravagantly bounced check for hundreds of thousands of dollars, followed at a short distance by an even larger deposit, sometimes from another bank where he was kiting but occasionally from one of his larger investors, who were by now floating him as much as $2 million at a time. When one of the big deposits came in, Barry would briefly be one of the largest depositors at the neighborhood savings banks that he favored for ZZZZBests business accounts, and would take advantage of that status to request a loan.

There would be flowers for the female staff, and backslaps and party invites for the males, with both sexes treated to an aw-shucks big-kid grin from the young entrepreneur, plus suggestions that he might offer them a high paying job. From time to time the act wore thin and a bank would ask ZZZZBest to take their account elsewhere, but in the meantime Barry was actually able to turn his reputation for kiting into a positive. He would explain to loan investors who tried to check him out that his ability to make profits on restoration jobs was entirely a result of his ability to work superlative deals with carpet wholesalers. And as well as Barrys unique depth of knowledge of carpet, the crucial factor in landing those deals was the ability to execute a transaction right there and then, without troubling over administrative minutiae like whether there was enough money in the account. So in many ways, the impressive roster of insufficient-funds checks was a testament to Barry Minkows unique talent and entrepreneurial spirit.

Accentuating the positive was something of a theme in Barrys banking relationships. One of the issues that they had to deal with when talking to investors was that a normal carpet company doing restoration work would tend to receive corporate checks from the insurer, which they would then re-endorse to the investor. Since there were no insurance companies involved with ZZZZBests fictitious contracts, the best they could do was to buy cashier checks made out to the investors name. These checks would usually be waved in front of the investors face during a hard sales pitch for a rollover of the loan, but if anyone asked why they werent corporate checks there was a ready-made excusethe banks had so many bad experiences with Barry Minkow that they werent prepared to let him endorse checks anymore.

This is a crucial theme; a good fraudster will know what the weaknesses in a checking-up process are and attempt to steer through them. But a great fraudster will target the strengths of the system that is meant to catch him, and design his deceit around that. The success of ZZZZBest was not based on being able to avoid scrutiny; it was based on always being one step ahead of that scrutiny and either having Mark Morzes ability to forge documents and arrange phony demonstrations, or Barry Minkows ability to persuade people that obvious red flags were actually endearing foibles. Relying on slipping through the net is for little fish.

The economic geography of fraud Check kiting is a characteristically American crime, but other countries have their own national dishes too. There is a form of fraud, for example, whereby you invent a fictitious asset that has something wrong with itsay, a large bank deposit that is the subject of a freezing order, or a quantity of gold bars that need to have taxes paid on them in order to establish ownership. You then approach your victim with a story about the asset and its problems, and offer to split the ownership of the asset with them if they contribute toward the cost of solving the problem. These days, this is ubiquitously known as the Nigerian advance-fee fraud, the geographical epithet being attached to what used to be called a plain old advance-fee fraud because the criminal classes of Nigeria adopted it so enthusiastically from the 1980s onward.

As far as anyone can tell, the key technological development was the discovery by Nigerian crooks that they could forge stamps reasonably easily, allowing them to send messages internationally to potential victims. Nigeria was an environment with an inflationary economy, a series of famously kleptocratic governments, and with an oil industry that contributed a class of educated English speakers who had a familiarity with doing business overseas. Given that, it seems natural that the kind of fraud that would emerge would be one that echoed the scams of the colonial past (fake tax collectors were rife in the 1910s) and that looked outward to generate hard-currency proceeds, trading off the international image of Nigeria as a land of corruption and hydrocarbon wealth.

There are not so many frauds that have become so locally famous as to be eponyms, but it is a general proposition that, because frauds have to be built around the institutions of the overall economy, they have an economic geography to them. Canada has securities fraud and mining fraud, because its a high-trust economy with a prospector tradition and extremely inefficient and fragmented securities regulation. The last of these is a result of Canadas federal structuresecurities law is mainly a provincial responsibility (although the Royal Canadian Mounted Police do have a role in enforcing it, presumably dismounting in order to do so). This means that Canada has half a dozen independent securities commissions, only one of which has a large and internationally recognized financial center to supervise (Ontario, with the Toronto Stock Exchange). Things have slowly gotten better over time in terms of cooperation among the regional exchanges, the Ontario Securities Commission, and the RCMP, but international scammers have continued to take advantage, most recently by using dormant Canadian shell companies in reverse takeovers so that fraudulent Chinese companies could make use of their stock market listings.

Even these national particularities, though, can be seen as the result of universal underlying principles of equilibrium. The reason for the variety of different national experiences, and for the existence of the Canadian Paradox, is that there are multiple forces at work, and so there is a multiplicity of possible equilibrium states. We could say that, in general, the effort expended on preventing fraud should be in equilibrium when the marginal cost of checking is equal to the marginal saving from avoiding fraudulent transactions. But checking is not the only way of preventing fraud; you can also reduce your exposure to the risk of being taken advantage of by simply reducing the amount of business you do, particularly the amount of business with people who are not part of your close social network. Trust is one social technology that can be used instead of checking, but mistrust is an alternative solution, and one that can be rational if the perceived risk of fraud is very high. And we should also observe that the underlying incidence of fraud is not the same thing as the popular perception of its risk, which is likely to be at least partly a result of culture and history.

We will look at some of these issues of historical development in a while, once weve got the framework to do so. For the time being, theres plenty of subtlety to consider with the good old long firm.

1. Almost all the key personnel of ZZZZBest were describable with at least one of these adjectives and many by more than one.

2. As the chef and author Anthony Bourdain said: if you ever have any question about the viability of your operation, ask your fish purveyor; he probably knows better than you. You may be willing to take it in the neck, but he isnt.

3. There are tricks of the trade here. If you are running two or three (or more) bust-outs at the same time, they can provide references for one another and show healthy cash flow through their bank accounts. And in the days when Vincent Teresa was in his prime, credit controllers didnt always check the difference between Acme Trading and Acme Manufacturing and Trading, leading to what the New England mob unpoetically called the same-name scam.

4. The name seems to derive from eighteenth-century cockney slang that referred to any bill of exchange as a kite, but that over time drifted to refer specifically to worthless paper promises. Barry Minkow received a twenty-first-birthday gift from his finance team of a blown-up version of one of his corporate checks, turned into an actual kite that you could fly. He found it hilarious.

5. Or actually, to a central location where representatives of banks could get together, sort out checks among themselves, and work out what payments needed to be made between them and which checks were not going to be honored. This was the original meaning of clearinghouse and clearing, which is now more of an abstract concept.

6. Wire fraud is any fraud, as long as it uses a telecommunication system of some kind. Similarly, mail fraud is any fraud making use of the US Mail, and the significance is that both wire fraud and mail fraud are federal rather than state crimes. We noted earlier that part of the reason for the antiquated clearing system in the USA is the difficulty of standardizing across fifty different state legal codes; in the days when the mail and the telegraphs were being set up, it was decided to take a strictly no nonsense attitude to questions of jurisdiction, to mitigate the problem of fraudsters setting up in one state to commit crimes in another and benefit from loopholes and inconsistencies.

7. This sentence, or words to the effect of this method of fraud doesnt work anymore because they tightened up the controls, is going to keep recurring in this book. There is a danger that this might lead susceptible readers to believe in a progressive model of the history of white-collar crime whereby things gradually but inexorably get better as antifraud systems are improved one disaster at a time. If you feel you are experiencing these symptoms, put the book down for a minute and remember the financial crisis.

8. Because Barry and his friends often raised new loans to pay back old ones, ZZZZBest is often described in contemporary accounts of the trial as a Ponzi scheme. This isnt really the defining characteristic, though, and reallyeven a legitimate company is often going to do this, as investors dont always care to have their money locked up for periods that match the payback on a capital investment. In this book (see page 75) we try to get a little bit more picky and accurate about what kinds of frauds deserve the Ponzi designation.

Chapter 3: The Long Firm Theres only one thing thats worse than selling something that isnt there to sell, and thats buying something and not paying for it.

Michael Bond, Paddington at Work The Salad Oil King Bicycle racing developed me physically. I possess exceptional strength in my hands and legs, Anthony Tino De Angelis used to say, crushing your knuckles in a bullys shake. He was a short man, but huge; at the height of his powers, he stood five feet five inches tall and weighed over 240 pounds, with a face like Robert De Niro on a very bad day. He used to sponsor cycle races and make charitable donations of bikes to underprivileged kids in the name of his company, Allied Crude Vegetable Oil, which had taken on the big players to dominate the soybean market. He spent thousands of dollars a month on flowers for funerals, because people keep on dying. They called him The King of Salad Oil.

Tino had a shady past. In his youth, he had been known as one of the fastest butchers in the Bronx, and he had set up his own pork-processing company in his early twenties. A reserved occupation in butchering hogs kept him out of the Second World War, during which there were strong rumors that he had been a black marketeer. What is indisputable is that in the 1950s, his company was convicted for shortchanging the US government on school meals. Tino himself was also charged with false accounting and perjury, but these charges never stuck, because a key witness developed amnesia at the last moment. Its a backstory out of Mario Puzo, albeit with somewhat more grease and offal.

For an Italian American with this sort of track record, there are always bound to be rumors and insinuations. Plenty of people believed that Tino himself was responsible for the rumors, spreading them in order to make lenders believe that he had hidden, illicit sources of money to pay them back. But despite his going through several criminal trials, no reliable evidence ever turned up that Tino had any meaningful mob connections. He just handed out largesse like a godfather because, if you were a self-made multimillionaire son of a pizza chef, that was what you did. The few dozen loyal employees of Allied Crude were paid multiples of the going rate for their job, and this bought loyalty. Tinos core group of workers were the kind of people who would crawl over broken glass for the honor of buying him a drink.

Allied Crude Vegetable Oil was based in Bayonne, New Jersey. Bayonne is just across the Hudson River from Wall Street; you can see the major banks from the row of wharves, warehouses, and storage tanks that make up its seafront. You used to be able to take a ferry from Bayonne to Manhattan, although you might be advised not to do so if your briefcase was anything like that of Tino De Angelis. Taking fraudulent securities across state lines is, it pays to remember, a federal crime. This became important in the eventual trial.

Although the commodity that will always be linked with Tino and his crimes is salad oilas much as anything because of Norman Millers Pulitzer Prizewinning journalism that is collected in his book The Great Salad Oil SwindleAllied Crudes interests ran the gamut of whatever could be processed from the soya bean. Food was blander then, and salad oil referred, in the USA, to the highest grade of soya oil. (Over in Italy and Spain, of course, other crooks were ensuring that European salads made their own contribution to the history of financial fraud. Since it is a heavily subsidized commodity with several grades of different values, olive oil has long been popular with fraudsters; the history of crime includes everything from mislabeled extra virgin to entirely fictitious olive groves.) The characteristic of soya oil that made it attractive to Tino was that the USA had massive surpluses of it, and that for this reason, the Department of Agriculture had a special program (Food for Peace) that subsidized exporters to get rid of it, mainly to Europe. Soya oil is hugely versatile, having applications from frying to fuel to plastics manufacture, so there was a strong export market for it, even from countries that were able to dress their own salads. But it was a highly political and opaque trade, which only a few international players were able to master. (For some reason, the trade with Spain was overseen by Opus Dei, the Catholic sect.) Being thoroughly crooked, as it often is when dealing with the governments of poor countries, was a big advantage. It should also be remembered that soybean oil used to be much more valuable than it is today. A tonne of soybean oil cost about $200 in the late 1960s, at a time when the average new home sold for less than $20,000. Tino did deals in the thousands of tonnes.

In any case, driven by Tinos deal-making ability and uncanny sense for the right price, Allied Crude Vegetable Oil gained more and more market share, until it dominated the export trade, making itself an essential middleman and cutting out the Midwestern crushers who produced the oil. In order to reach that position, however, it needed to invest. And that meant that the company needed to borrow money.

But who would lend money to a guy like Tino De Angelis? As always, the answer is something along the lines ofgreedy people, desperate people, and people who didnt know what they were doing. In this case, the newly established business-lending division of American Express was unfortunate enough to have all three characteristics.

It was the beginning of the 1960s, a period whose business culture has been satirized on many occasions. Four-martini lunches, casual sexual harassment, and vintage two-piece suits were very much the order of the day. So, unfortunately, were the kind of bosses who said things like I dont care, just get it done! then went away without checking on anything. American Express at the time had a policy that every division needed to make at least half a million dollars of profit, and they didnt give the impression of caring how it was made. In retrospect, they were comically vulnerable to the next white-collar criminal to walk through the door. It happened to be Tino.

The way in which Allied Crude Vegetable Oil got around the issues associated with its owner was to borrow money based on collateral. The practice was known as warehouse lending; as a means of financing traders inventories it is practically as old as banking itself, and it still goes on today. What happens is, you take some of your inventory down to a secure warehouse owned by a reputable bank, and they give you a warehouse receipt after checking and storing it. You can take this receipt to any bank on Wall Street, and they will advance you money against it. The bank that lends you the money does so based on a guarantee from the bank that owns the warehouse, and the bank that owns the warehouse is prepared to give this guarantee because it has control over your goods. So the borrower gets his money, and the banks dont need to worry too much about the solvency or honesty of the owner. In principle. Its all very convenient because you can shop around for the cheapest lending bank without having to shift the physical goods from warehouse to warehousethe key piece of paper is the receipt that does it all for you.

The trouble with warehouse lending is that it doesnt work very well for commodities like vegetable oil that need specialist storage. So, in a quest to grow their business and make their targets, the debonair risk takers at American Express decided to innovate the concept of a field warehouse. This was their name for an extension of the warehouse lending concept to a case where the borrower kept the collateral in their own storage facility, but the guarantor bank took over the employment of the staff and sent some inspectors around every now and then.

In the case of Allied Crude Vegetable Oil, this storage facility was the tank farm in Bayonne, New Jersey.

The tank farm that Tino had built was an unpromising place. The winters in Bayonne are cold enough to solidify vegetable oil, and the tanks themselves were mostly reconditioned from the petroleum industry. The staff that ran the tank farm were all local boys, all part of Tinos family, and this did not change a bit when they nominally became employees of American Express Warehousing Inc. Part of the way that field warehousing worked was that Amex passed on the payroll costs back to the borrower, so nobody at American Express had any particular reason to check on the Bayonne staff, or to ask why they were being paid two or three times the going rate for warehousemen.

The reason why, of course, was that De Angelis regularly needed them to do him little favors. It all had to do with the fact that oil and water do not mix. Specifically, oil floats on water. This made it very difficult (particularly in winter when things freeze) for an Amex inspector to distinguish between a tank full of salad oil, and a tank largely full of seawater with a few gallons of oil floating on top. The warehousemen also arranged trick tanks, where a deep-dip sample could be taken that went into a length of metal tubing welded inside the tank and filled with salad oil. They even rigged up elaborate plumbing systems that allowed the same oil to reappear in different tanks.

Oil came in on ships and trucks. It went out to customers on ships and trucks. And inspectors from American Express went back on the ferry to Manhattan, blowing on their hands and signing off receipts that confirmed that the same oil was still there in Bayonne. Allied Crude Vegetable Oil took those receipts and borrowed money. Amex Warehouse Leasing got a big customer who paid top-dollar feesthey actually sold most of their non-Tino-related field-warehousing business in order to concentrate on their most profitable niche. A few dozen Italian American warehouse staff got lifestyles wildly beyond their childhood aspirations. And Tino got fatter (literally) and bigger (metaphorically), to become the King of Salad Oil.

Then came the fateful day when an anonymous tipster called Taylor rang up the American Express offices, claiming to have information that Tino De Angelis was a fraudster and that the Bayonne tank farm was a fake. The caller demanded $5,000 for more detailed information, and the Amex Field Warehousing CEO, Donald Miller, sprang into action. On the first day of the audit, the inspectors sampled five tanks and found water in all five of them. Then they went home for the weekend.

On the second, and subsequent days of the audit, all the tanks sampled were full of oil. The water in the first five samples was declared to be statistically insignificant, and probably due to a faulty steam pipe. With the sort of judgment and acumen that one would expect from that dapper, bourbon-guzzling era of business, Miller had sent them to Allied Crude Vegetable Oils own chief chemist for analysis rather than to an independent lab. He later admitted this was probably a mistake, but justified it by saying that they ought to know what was in their own tanks.

As 1962 rolled into 1963, the need for loans became acute. First, De Angelis was extracting money from the company. Half a million dollars showed up later in a Swiss bank account and got Tino an extra jail sentence, but accountants reckon that the total sum embezzled was probably closer to $3 million. Second, Tino was a man with dreams. His dreams tended to be somewhat incoherent, and to involve the dishonest extraction of money from other people, but give him thishe dreamed big. And third, Allied Crude got involved in a dispute over a payment made by the US government under the Food for Peace scheme that was either a conspiracy to undermine Tino by his enemies in Opus Dei (Tino De Angeliss version of events) or a fraudulent accounting scheme (everyone elses).

The solution that Tino De Angelis came up with to solve his problems was born, once more, from his genuine, nonfraudulent and deep understanding of the global vegetable-oil market. As 1963 wore on, it became apparent that the Russian sunflower-oil crop had failed. If Russia needed to replace its sunflower-oil production with imported soya oil, and if the USA was willing to lift its trade embargo, there would be a huge new source of demand. And as the biggest international trader in soybeans, Allied Crude would be well placed to exploit this. Tino started buying more and more oil from the Midwestern crushers, and borrowing more and more money against it. He alsoand this turned out to be a false movestarted speculating in the futures market.

It is not wholly clear what the purpose of the speculation was. For a soybean trader who was claiming to have inventories of soybean oil that were getting on for a full year of US production, it was not obviously a good idea to be entering into lots more contracts for future purchase of soybean oil. At times, it looked as if Tino was attempting to make sure that he would have enough oil (rather than seawater) to fulfill the Russian contract when it arrived. At others, it looked like he might just be attempting to manipulate the futures market and make a killing by forcing it to a peak and then selling high. In any case, being Tino, he went about his futures buying in the least honest and most manipulative way available: by placing orders with dozens of different brokers, to give the impression of genuine and widespread public demand. We can imagine that the Chicago and New York commodities brokers got the same crushing handshakes, bearlike backslaps, flowers, and promises of Cadillacs that were familiar to all of Tinos business partners. They certainly got very good commissions, which seem to have blinded them to what was going on.

Borrowing money should have got more difficult than it did a lot earlier than it did. As well as being a greater amount than total US production, by this point the warehouse receipts written on the Bayonne tank farm indicated a quantity of soybean oil about 30 percent larger than the capacity of the farm itself. Allied Crude responded to these challenges with a two-pronged strategy.

First, a new tank farm was opened up, around the corner from the first one. This was sublet from the Harbor Tank Company, and it was widely acknowledged to be an even worse example of the genre than the first. The location was equally cold, bleak, and depressing, and the vegetable-oil tanks were little short of a joke. Some of the tanks were Tino specials with welded pipework inside them. Some were still leased to petroleum companies who were storing fuel oil in them. And some, as far as the eventual bankruptcy examiners could tell, never existed at all. The Harbor Tank Company salad-oil farm was operated by Joe Lomuscio, a longtime friend of Tinos.

The second limb of the strategy was simpler. While on a visit to American Expresss offices, Tino stole a book of blank warehouse receipts and started writing them himself.

It is probably fair to say that by this point, things were out of control.

Brokers talk; its the nature of the job. As cocktails are poured in New York and Chicago, the men of the exchanges always meet up, to talk business and swap rumors. If Tino had stuck to the physical oil market rather than trading on a futures exchange, it might have taken much longer for the truth to come out. But as the summer turned to fall, the gossip mill was beginning to do its job. Over tables and shoeshines, on commuter trains and in country clubs, the financial community was beginning to realize that all the different companies pushing soybean orders through all the different brokerages were coming back to the same ultimate client. There was no broad-based public demand for soybean futures; it was all Tino.

In the futures market, where prices can be volatile and adverse movements can trigger a request for immediate settlement in cash, it can be dangerous for people to know when you are out on a limb. When brokers get nervous, they tend to ask the customer to either reduce the size of their trades, or to put up more cash as a surety that they will be able to meet losses. Tino couldnt do the first of theseit was only his attempts to corner the market that were holding the price up. And he certainly couldnt do the second.

Then it all happened. Talks in Congress collapsed on a wheat-export contract with Russia, and the market took the view that if the wheat deal wasnt happening, there would certainly be no soybean deal. No Russian buyer meant that there was probably no demand from anyone else, because Tinos speculation had pushed the price so high. The soybean futures market cracked and the futures losses meant that Allied Crude Vegetable Oil had no option but to declare bankruptcy. This in turn caused chaos on the soybean futures market, causing one of the brokers to require a bailout organized by the exchange. And as soon as the bankruptcy examiners arrived in Bayonne, they found a hundred tanks full of seawater and no more of Tinos loyal band to pull the wool over anyones eyes. American Express realized that they were going to have to make good on $150 million of guarantees, back in the days when that was a lot of money (its the equivalent of about $1 billion today). It would have made more headlines, except that the Salad Oil Swindle hit the news on exactly the same weekend that President Kennedy was assassinated.

De Angelis lived on. He was sentenced to twenty years and served seven of them. While in prison, he designed an exercise regime for himself and dropped his weight to a hundred and seventy pounds; when he came out, he gave Life magazine an interview in which he said that Prison saved my life, and that the Lewisburg federal penitentiary was a country club. Several of his cellmates gave testimonials that they had found him an inspirational character who had encouraged them to succeed in other fields and give up on crime. Tino himself was sentenced to another sixteen years in 1980, for a brand-new investment scheme fraud unrelated to salad oil.

The salad-oil scam was one of the biggest white-collar scandals of the Mad Men era. It was a shot of long-firm fraud, with a chaser of counterfeit warehouse receipts.1 From the lenders side, it was a perfect storm of the right conditions to get ripped off. Field warehousing was a new financial technology, which had not been thought through. The Amex subsidiary in charge of it had been given tough stretch targets and so needed to land big customers. The Bayonne facility was staffed by people who were comparatively cheap to corrupt. And oil floats on water.

Once more, fraud shows up as an equilibrium quantity. Why did American Express lose money? Because they lent it against fake salad oil. Why did they lend money against fictitious collateral? Because they delegated the task of checking it to a party that turned out not to be trustworthy. Why did they let Tinos men look after the field warehouse? Because it was cheaper that way. Why was it cheaper that way? Because rigorous fraud controls are expensive relative to the amount of profit that youre making on the deal. And now we arrive at the final why?

Why is there always an incentive to economize on checks, audits, and fraud prevention?

Because fraud is an unusual condition; its a tail risk. In an advanced, high-trust economy, a business can trade for years without ever seeing a big systematic fraud like Tino De Angelis. And normal businesspeople are, like all human beings, usually quite bad at judging the significance of small probabilities and rare events. Its all too easy a heuristic to deal with the small risk of a catastrophic fraud loss by assuming that because its close to zero, its reasonable to act as if it was actually zero. And that meanssince pricing in a competitive industry tends to be set by the lowest bidder, not the smartest bidderthat there will always be pressure to get a short-term cost advantage by economizing on the kinds of bureaucratic, not directly productive checks and balances that pick up frauds.

From the fraudsters side, it is clear that there was a genuine business there. Tino was a crook and his objectives were selfish and destructive, but he wasnt a fakehe really was the Salad Oil King. He traded more soya oil than anyone else, dominated shipping under the Food for Peace program, and brought innovative business practices to the industryhe claimed to have been the first person ever to convert tanker ships to store food oil. Allied Crude Vegetable Oil could have been a strong legitimate business if it were not for Tinos dreams of crushing the crushers, cornering the futures market, and owning the entire industry. It was this plan, along with his desire to extract cash from the business illegally while continuing to grow it, that necessitated his shift into the world of seawater floats, rigged tanks, and forged receipts. If the price of soya oil had kept going up (impossibly), he might even have gotten away with it.

Tinos methodical shift from sharp business practice into fraud is an example of one way that a long firm can make use of a legitimate trading reputation. It contrasts with another possible scenariothe episode of OPM Leasing, a fraudulent business where nothing ever seemed to be planned.

Other Peoples Money Bizarrely, this was what the acronym actually stood forin 1970, Mordecai Weissman had originally planned to call the business he was setting up Leasing Services Division, but felt that the acronym LSD would sound disreputable.2 So he decided to name the company after its business model. The founders of OPM were keen on acronymsat the height of their success, the other partner tried to bid for the Madison Square Garden entertainment complex seemingly for no other reason than that its initials were the same as hisMyron S. Goodman.

Weissman and Goodman were a hell of a team; part Marx Brothers, part Gordon Gekko. They were brothers-in-law, highly regarded in the Orthodox Jewish community as philanthropists and for their devoutly religious and scholarly manner. Goodman would begin meetings by quoting scripture while Weissman took time out from the business in 1973 to fight in the war against Egypt. They commuted by helicopter from their homes in Long Island to Manhattan until the neighbors objected to the noise. Mordy was the great salesman and passer-out of kickbacks, while Myron was the obsessively secretive office manager who made lurid threats in memos. One might describe them as both machers and mensches if not for the fact that they had somehow missed out on any concept of business ethics or common sense.

The business model of OPM was indeed that it used other peoples moneyit was in the business of computer leasing. These were the days, remember, when computers were big pieces of capital investment. The first IBM PC did not come out until 1981, by which time OPM was well into its death throes. In the heyday of Mordy and Myron, a computer was a large metal box that needed its own air-conditioned room with strengthened floors, and that could cost a few million dollars. Companies had special divisions of their planning teams who did nothing but keep up with technological progress, and the Head of Computer Strategy was one of the most exciting roles in 1970s corporate America.

Computers were expensive and went obsolete quickly, and there were considerable tax incentives available to encourage their purchase. All of these were excellent reasons to lease them rather than buy them.3 What OPM did was to send Mordy in to meet the client and find out his technical requirements. Then Myron would arrange a short-term bridging loan from a bank to buy the computer, and Mordy would find out the clients nontechnical requirements (usually a bribe or a donation to a favorite charity). Then the lease would be signed.

At this point, Other Peoples Money had to be brought in. With the help of an investment banker (initially, Goldman Sachs; then, when Goldman Sachs got scared off by OPMs chaotic ambitions, Lehman Brothers), Mordy and Myron would find a pension fund, insurance company, or other investor who wanted a long-term stream of lease payments. The lease agreement would then be sold to the investor, generating enough cash for OPM to pay back the bridging loan. This kept OPMs credit looking good with the banks, and allowed Mordy to go out fishing for new clients.

So far, so simple. However, Myron Goodmans need to keep control meant that the client company would not be allowed to just make its payments directly to the investoreverything had to go through OPM. This black hole of information turned out to be vital to the later fraud, as it meant that people on both sides of the deal were making and receiving payments entirely on Myrons say-so. These are occasionally referred to as mirrored transactions in the jargon, but in this case the mirror in question was like the one in the film Duck Soup, where Groucho Marx stands in an empty frame and mimics his brothers movements.

Another crucial feature was the fact that at the end of the lease, the computer would still exist, and the investor who owned the lease agreement had no interest in the secondhand computer business. The residual value was OPMs responsibility. Since computer leasing was a competitive market, firms would typically price the leasing payments well below the cost of the computer, looking to make the money back on the residual value. It can immediately be seen that a) it was pretty vital to get this residual value right, and b) that leasing companies that systematically overestimated residual values (and so set their bids aggressively for the lease payments) would probably gain a lot of market share in the short term, while storing up massive problems for the long term. Mordy and Myron were incredibly aggressive and growth-oriented, not very scrupulous, and congenitally incapable of proper record keeping (Goodman once yelled at his auditors that I went into business to make money, not to produce financial statements!). It is hard to think of a worse business for two guys like this.

On any sensible accounting basis, rather than the one they actually used, OPM Leasing lost money every year it did business. The signature Mordy deal was one that did whatever it took to win the client business, without much attention to economic viability. They developed a particularly close relationship with Rockwell Inc., the aerospace manufacturer, where the head of computer strategy, Sidney Hasin, was overawed by their ability to beat the competitions terms by miles. In retrospect, Rockwell later admitted, they would have done well to have been more skeptical.

The film Dirty Harry came out in 1971, introducing Dirty Harry Callahan to the world. Myron Goodman followed his lead. He broke rules, but he got results. The key problem that Myron had was that Mordy had brought him such awful leases that when they were sold to investors, they didnt bring in enough cash to pay back the bridging loans. Or alternatively, they brought in enough cash to pay back the bridging loans, but not enough to also fund the very large advances that OPM tended to make to its founders and top management.

The solution that OPM found to this problem was pretty unique, and wholly in keeping with the element of slapstick comedy that pervaded their way of doing business. The reception area of OPM Leasing Inc. had a glass coffee table. Mordy would lie underneath it shining a flashlight, while Myron would lean over it, tracing the signature of a lease client to adjust the value of the computer asset and increase the size of the bridging loan. When loans absolutely had to be paid back, the OPM team were not above pledging the same asset to two or three different lenders, just like Barry Minkow. Crazily enough, official accounts of the OPM Leasing scandal tend to describe this as the relatively honest period; insofar as anyone can tell from the chaotic and infrequently filed accounts, they were only, albeit illegally, hustling creditors to maintain cash flow at this stage rather than actually stealing money.

They might even have truly believed that they would eventually be proved right on resale values one day, and that OPM would find itself on a profitable footing. Since they had a tame accountant who allowed them to get away with their ridiculous assumptions, the company actually reported record profits. They even bought a bank of their own in Louisiana, although the thought of such a manifestly incompetent management team in charge of a regulated bank proved the last straw for Goldman Sachs.

Not only did Mordy overestimate residual values and underprice deals, he made one mistake that was absolutely lethal if one thinks for a minute about the computer industry in the 1970she offered generous early break terms.

Why is this lethal? It meant that he was at the mercy of the IBM product upgrade cycle just when microprocessor technology was beginning to show the exponential rate of improvement that became known as Moores Law. As new computers came out, the resale value of previous models would plummet. Clients who were signed into long leases would be stuck with the obsolete kit, but companies who could break their leases could upgrade their computers while sticking leasing firms like OPM with all the residual risk on the equipment at the worst possible moment. Myron and Mordy, as well as underpricing their business, had bet everything on a strategy that could only fail to be disastrous if computer progress slowed down to a crawl.

It didnt slow down to a crawl. OPM had leased several million dollars worth of IBM 370 supercomputers to Rockwell, all with early break clauses and minimal termination fees. What was their reaction to the announcement in March 1977 of the new 3033 Series? As Myron Goodman said, I nearly passed out. The 370 mainframes that OPM had bought and leased to Rockwell were now yesterdays technology. They were in the position of claiming to their bankers that the market for secondhand 370s would hold up well, as IBM would be unable to deliver 3033s on time, or alternatively that their biggest client, Rockwell, would be unwilling to accept the considerable physical disruption to their plant and operations that would result from taking out one mainframe and wheeling another one in. These were both pretty weak straws to clutch atbut they provided enough of a pretext for OPM to continue borrowing money and looking for new investors.

If they had a conscience, Weissman and Goodman could have shut down OPM and walked away from it, leaving behind nothing more serious than a lot of very bad feeling over some stupidly misstated residual values. They could even have sorted out the multiply pledged collateral, if they had been prepared to give up the money they had extracted by shareholder loans. But this was never in the cards. At various points, the two men discussed a strategy that might have allowed Mordy Weissman to escape with his reputation intact, as they unwound all the bad deals he had been a party to and left Myron Goodman to take the rap. Instead, they merrily danced across the line separating aggressive corporate strategy from outright theft, and started to take advantage of their unhealthy relationship with Sidney Hasin.

OPMs paperwork was notoriously bad, and Rockwell never checked up on it. Instead of doing anything themselves about the numerous inconsistencies and complaints from the investors who had bought their leases, they handed over a ream of official Rockwell letterhead to OPM and instructed them to sort everything out. The investors had no independent contact with the company who they were meant to be leasing to. And so there was nothing to stop Goodman from, for example, signing a lease for $20,000 of Tektronix computer equipment to Rockwell, but telling the Philadelphia Savings Fund that it was a lease for a $50,000 DEC tape storage unit. Obviously, Rockwell would only be making payments of less than half the amount the investor expected to receive, but the excess cash paid by the Philadelphians could be used to make up the difference for quite a while, and more contracts could be faked to generate more cash in the meantime.

Myron was not a good fraudster. His forged lease documents were covered with errors, and he was unable to keep his story consistent from one meeting to the next. He used the bank he had bought to write bad checks, effectively taking an interest-free loan from the Federal Reserve. But this too fell apart quickly, and really contributed little to the fraud beyond making sure that the eventual charges were much more serious. By the end of 1978, OPM was in collapse. Goodmans ability to raise new fraudulent loans was running out, and the company could no longer make the payments on the old ones. The Philadelphia Savings Fund called up Rockwell to ask why they were delinquent on their payments, and Rockwell started to ask OPM why anyone should think that was the case. The reply was classic Myron & Mordy; they said that mistakes had been made by other people and that they would send their father-in-law directly to Philadelphia to make the payment.

At this point, the story should have been close to its conclusion. Indeed, the main question people asked in 1981, when OPM finally gave up and went bankrupt, is why didnt it happen three years earlier? Like a Looney Tunes character, nothing seemed to stop it. New investors were brought in as the old ones gave up in disgust. One of the banks providing bridging loans found out about Myron Goodmans federal conviction for check fraud, but somehow this did not put off the rest of the industry. Lehman Brothers continued to help OPM find investors for their leases, despite the growing mound of administrative errors every month. And the companys lawyers received a whistle-blower report and extracted a confession from Myron Goodman, but then unaccountably decided that, because the information related to past frauds rather than ongoing ones, it was covered by clientattorney privilege.

This is an important lesson: although professionals like lawyers and accountants usually function as the systems defense against bad actors, these defenses can be overcomeusually by a fraudster who pays very well and who accounts for a large proportion of a professional services firms total billings. Once a fraud has penetrated this layer of defense, there are few further constraints on its ability to grow and grow. People dont check up on things that they believe to have been signed off. The threat is now inside the perimeter.

Myron and Mordy were not exactly honest businessmen tempted into bad behavior. Although they were ostentatiously religious and prominent in philanthropic ventures (many of which were connected to clients pet charity projects), they were clearly strangers to business ethics from the moment they leased their first computer. But they had, pretty much despite themselves, built up a legitimate trading reputation as successful lessors in a complicated and competitive market, who had a track record of always paying their debts. Computer leasing was a new industry, and its profitability depended on questions of residual value that were very hard for an outsider to judge. This was how OPM built its franchise and credit, despite a business model that was bound to force Myron & Mordy into an ethical choice that they were comically ill-equipped to make. In the end, although Myron Goodman stood up in court and promised that the wrongs I have done are behind me, he was sentenced to twelve years, while Mordecai Weissman got ten.

This kind of slippery slope effect is also seen in less dramatic cases, and in ones where the crooked nature of the principals is not so obvious. At the opposite end of the continuum from Weissman and Goodman, there is the businessman who drifts into long-firm territory simply as a result of overoptimism in the context of a failing business. In terms of its prevalence, this kind of almost inadvertent long firm might be more dangerous to its suppliers, as the fraudster will look like (and may even sincerely believe himself to be) an otherwise good customer fallen on hard times and worthy of temporary support.

These, then, are some of the ways in which an existing legitimate business can get corrupted to provide the vital credit rating needed to establish a long firm. On the other hand, it is sometimes possible to take a faster way into other peoples money, and to get your credibility and references by just making them up. You can have a sophisticated system of false references like Barry Minkow and Mark Morzes fake office buildings, or you can just put the pedal to the metal and rely on speed and high-octane dishonesty to carry you through. The second option was particularly attractive for the people who were dealing with one of the biggest and softest targets in the history of commercial fraud. There are only quite rare cases in which it is possible to carry out the fraudulent equivalent of a hit-and-run attack, but when they come along, they tend to be associated with victims who have few or no effective controls. That means they can be extremely lucrative.

Rifle, shotgun, and 1980s Medicare This was probably the single biggest fraud category on earth until the banking sector regained the title in the 2000s. Credible, nonpoliticized estimates4 placed the proportion of fraudulent payments in the Medicare system as high as 2530 percent, which would correspond to hundreds of billions of dollars. The nature of the fraud was classic long-firm stuffyou simply sent bills to your local Medicare insurer for expensive medical services that you hadnt provided.5 But if you were going to carry out such a fraud, you had a big choice to makeshould you bother with patients?

The advantages and disadvantages were pretty clear; if you just sent in fake bills for fictitious patients, you could set up quickly and start sending out fraudulent bills in the thousands. There were fewer overheads, no irritating ill people to deal with, and no possibility that someone would blow the whistle on you. On the other hand, if youre caught having sent in a load of crooked invoices for bogus medical procedures, its a lot more difficult to argue that it was a genuine administrative error, a case of crossed wires,6 or a legitimate medical dispute if the patients dont even exist. Youre trading off the ease of setting up the fraud against the likely consequences if it gets caught.

So which one is better? In fact, Medicare fraudsters did both. There were two viable business models given the way that fraud controls worked at the time. There were clinics with no patients, which had the objective of sending out as many crooked bills as possible (usually for standard treatments at standard rates for common ailments, to maximize the chance that the bill would be paid without much scrutiny), get as many of them paid as possible within a single billing cycle, then close down, disappear, and start up somewhere else. At the time, the systems that Medicare used to check on billings were not able to identify sudden increases in the claims submitted by a single provider, so since the individual claims were unexceptional, these frauds would usually be caught only by pure chance.

There were also longer-lived frauds in Medicare, which persisted for many billing cycles, padding the claims of actually existing patients and stealing little but often. These frauds relied on another weakness of the system: the degree of trust that society places in medical professionals was in general, and wrongly, extended to medical administrators. The claims-paying authorities were very reluctant to second-guess providers as to the necessity of treatments, and very quick to attribute obvious discrepancies to administrative errors rather than to fraud. The system was set up to challenge overtreatment and overuse of insured services, not fraudulent claims. So a provider that systematically added unnecessary blood tests, or billed for a more expensive procedure than it had carried out, or charged for an expensive customized wheelchair then delivered a cheap one, was likely to keep slipping through the net.

What Medicare teaches us is that there is a qualitative difference between a good company gone bad and an enterprise that has been wholly designed around a fraudulent purpose. The first is harder to detect given the usual checks, but the second is much easier to construct. In an environment like Medicare, where the systems and controls have been standardized and industrialized, this allows the fraudster to use a technique that the management professor and Medicare historian Malcolm Sparrow christened shotgun, then rifle. You first create a panoply of fake transactions, claims, or orders, and see which ones get rejected. Then, having used the shotgun phase to gather information about the checking process, you move to the rifle, and fire off as many duplicates or slight variations as you can of the ones that worked.

The government is often a victim of this sort of tactic, because it has some unusual characteristics as a victim (it is large, and has problems turning customers away: see Chapter 11). Many defense procurement frauds work in a similar way. But large private-sector entities are also vulnerable to shotgun/rifle approachessomething like this tactic is usually at the heart of organized insurance fraud, as well as some credit-card and mortgage frauds. Usually at the heart of a shotgun/rifle disaster, you will find a system that somebody has painstakingly engineered to optimize for the average unit cost. This is of course the right thing to do for most industrial processes, but you need to be careful that the thing youre working on is an industrial process and not a decision-making process. Optimizing for the common case is not the same thing as trying to get the right answer, and a single medium-sized fraud can blow away all the costs saved by shaving a cent off a hundred thousand normal transactions.

More generally, the fact that a fictitious company requires very little investment to get started means that fraudsters can afford to experiment. The advantage of operating this way, rather than through an existing legitimate business, is clear. The disadvantage is that if you are caught, there is much more evidence of dishonesty and conspiracy. You steal the money and you take your choice. If you are a hit-and-run fraudster, you just disappear. If you have been running a longer-lived and more substantial operation, though, you need to give it (and your victims money) a decent funeral. So you head down to the bankruptcy court.

Bankruptcy Going bankrupt is not quite the same thing as going bust. If you are bust, all that means is that you owe money and are not able to pay it back. If you are bankrupt, that has the specific meaning that you have entered into a legal process to manage the process of going bust.

It was not always this way. For a large period of the history of debt, there was nothing that very much resembled a bankruptcy code, and the law was thatoutside of occasional jubilee episodes of overall debt forgivenessborrowers had to pay what they could and debts would never be extinguished. In ancient societies, defaulting debtors could be stripped of their citizenship and sold as slaves for the benefit of their creditors (Athens was considered quite liberal in limiting the period of debt slavery to five years). The contract imposed by Shylock in The Merchant of Venice was an extreme example and the pound of flesh a metaphor, but it reflected an underlying reality. Even into the nineteenth century, debtors prisons still existed. As time went on and debt became a more central part of the economy, however, it was gradually realized that this was unfair and inefficient, and that the law ought to provide a way in which it could be acknowledged that there was a limit to what could be asked of a debtor.

The next big innovation in bankruptcy law was the concept of limited liability, gradually brought in from the maritime world and firmly entrenched in Anglo-Saxon commercial law by the middle of the nineteenth century. A company is allowed to have an existence separate from the people who make it up and to take on debts (among other legal obligations) in its own name rather than theirs. The liability is limited because when a company you own goes bankrupt, the lenders cannot pursue you for their losses, unless they have explicitly signed a guarantee agreement with you. Obviously, pretty much as soon as it came into existence, this legal concept began to be abused by fraudsters.

Economists, accountants, and lawyers all agree that there are two kinds of insolvency, although not always on the terminology. You are commercially insolvent (or legally insolvent or cash-flow insolvent) if you have a payment come due and are not able to pay it. At this point, the person who you are meant to be paying has the right to make an application to a court to have you declared bankrupt. On the other hand, a company is technically insolvent (or factually insolvent, or balance-sheet insolvent) if the total of its liabilities is greater than the total of its assets.7 The two concepts do not necessarily imply each other; its quite common to be cash-flow insolvent while owning lots of valuable assets and this tends to mean that your creditors end up owning the assets.

More relevant to our current case, though, is the opposite possibility; a company that has debts much bigger than its assets, but which is not legally insolvent yet because it has not had a payment fall due that it is unable to make. This is called wrongful trading if it means that you are running up bigger and bigger debts and making the eventual losses in bankruptcy bigger for your creditors. It is also rather like what a long-firm fraudster does. So, if you have been in charge of a bankrupt company, you can expect to get investigated. You can also expect that you might not be allowed to be a director of any more companies for a while, unless youre someone very special.

The special case of Donald Trump Special, for example, like one flamboyant real-estate developer who later became president of the United States of America. As far back as the early 2000s, the left-wing economist Doug Henwood coined a monetary policy rule that any time Donald Trump is able to borrow money to buy or build anything, interest rates are probably too low. This reflected the tendency of the Trump organization to load up its properties with debt, extract cash out of them in unusual ways, and then end up in situations where Mr. Trump had extracted multiples of his own initial investment from a project but the bankers and bondholders were left with defaulted debt and collateral worth considerably less than its appraisal value.

For the avoidance of doubt,8 Donald Trumps real-estate ventures were not frauds, not even the notorious casino empire in Atlantic City. Nobody, not even the bankers and bondholders who lost money, have accused him of that, although several of them have sued him (and usually settled) over specific events and transactions. But its worth taking a quick tour of the related affairs of Trump Taj Mahal, Trump Plaza Hotel, Trump Castle, Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts, and Trump Entertainment Resorts Holdings in any case. The lesson of this saga is that when you look at the sorts of things that can happen well within the boundary of the law without any suggestion of criminality, its easy to see why prosecuting commercial fraud is so difficult. Absolutely everything that a modern corporate criminal does is a very similar kind of action to the sorts of things that are done by the good kind of risk-taking entrepreneurs that we want to encourage. The crime is made by the intention.

The thing to remember about casinos is that they generate a hell of a lot of cash, and the thing that generates the cash is the gambling license. If you have some land and a gambling license, then you could put up a big tent and some gaming machines and youd be making money. But the gambling commission9 usually wont let you do that; in order to get the really big gambling licenses, you have to build a hotel that brings business to town, and these days often some social housing too. So, casino companies have the need for a lot of capital investment in hospitality infrastructure, and they have a lot of cash flow. This means they tend to take on a lot of debt; they have collateral to offer, cash to make interest payments, and they usually dont want to give away too much of their equity by selling shares.

But theyre in the gambling business, not the hospitality business, and this means they dont work like normal hotel companies. If youre feeling pinched by your interest payments, you can defer maintenance on a casino for longer than you can on a normal hotel (at the expense of long-term damage to the franchise), because youre making money out of gamblers rather than guests. Casino hotels also give away a lot of comps in order to attract rated10 players, and the judgment of what to give away to whom is often very subjective. Its an industry where tracking what goes where is difficult (the question of managing the physical cash alone has been the subject of several Hollywood movies), and where ownership is often similarly opaque because the need to bring together land, gambling licenses, capital, and management capability means that lots of casinos are run as partnerships between a number of corporate entities. But if you take away only one thing from this quick run through the economics, make it the first factthey generate a lot of cash.

The story of Donald Trump in Atlantic City starts in 1982, when he put a site together by combining long leases on adjacent plots of land and convinced the gambling commission that the questionable backgrounds of some of the people he was leasing from shouldnt be too much of a barrier to his own application for a gambling license. Having obtained the land and the license, he formed a joint venture with the Holiday Inn company to build what started out as a local franchise of their Harrahs brand but was quickly renamed Trump Plaza. Holiday Inns contribution was the financing to build the thing, and the two parties would split the profits fifty-fifty. Trump Plaza had a significant problem of inadequate parking, which proved difficult to solve due to a dispute between the partners over the neighboring site where the indoor parking lot was meant to be built. The relationship worsened further when Donald managed to buy the nearly complete Hilton Marina Casino after Barron Hilton failed to be approved for a gambling license. He first renamed it Trumps Castle and then, on deciding he didnt like the apostrophe, Trump Castle. By 1986, Holiday Inn decided it had extracted as much fun out of the relationship as it was going to get, and sold out its half of the Trump Plaza to its joint-venture partner.

The next year, the gaming corporation Resorts International came up for sale, after the death of its founder. The founders family believed that Trump would be the best long-term steward of the assets built up by James Crosby and allowed him to buy voting control of the company, although he only owned 12 percent of the shares. Resorts International owned a half-complete casino in Atlantic City called the Taj Mahal, which would be the worlds largest when completed, but which came with an obligation to build some housing. On taking control of the company, Trump immediately halted construction (not a good idea if it means allowing a structure to sit exposed to salty Atlantic air) and awarded himself a lucrative management contract. After the inevitable share-price plunge, he made an offer to take the company private, which sparked off a bidding war, the outcome of which left Donald saying good-bye to his Resorts International shares, but owning the renamed Trump Taj Mahal, minus its housing obligation.

This was the crest of the wave in terms of Donald Trump in Atlantic City. In terms of financing, at this stage we should note that Trump Plaza, Trump(s) Castle, and Trump Taj Mahal were all separate companies, each with their own independent obligations. The Plaza company had $250 million of bonds outstanding$67 million to buy Holiday Inn out of their half share, $153 million to refinance the debt taken on to build it, and most of the rest to pay for construction of the parking garage. In order to buy the Castle, a loan was taken out under Donald Trumps personal guarantee from Manufacturers Hanover, and promptly refinanced by issuing $350 million of bonds (adding 3 percent to the interest cost but removing Trump from his personal guarantee). The Taj Mahal acquisition (and the completion of the building work) was financed with $675 million of junk bonds at 14 percent interest, the prospectus of which warned investors that no assurance can be given that once opened the Taj Mahal will be profitable. The New Jersey gambling commission had approved the Taj purchase on the basis that it would be financed with low-cost loans extended to the Trump Organization rather than high-yield debt (they get antsy about the sort of people who tend to flock round a casino in financial trouble), but this promise was not kept.

Executives moved between the three casinos in a quite fluid way as they all had contracts for management services and the use of the Trump name. Initially, Ivana Trump was CEO of the Castle and might have been put in charge of all the Atlantic City operations, but this became inconvenient as Marla Maples enjoyed staying at the Plaza for free. The bond prospectus for the Plaza gave another graphic warning that none of the Executive Committee [of the Trump Organization company that was floating the bonds] devotes a significant amount of his working time to the operations of the Partnership.

At this stage, before anything has gone wrong, we can already see that for the initial investment of time and trouble in putting one site together, Trump had managed to borrow enough money to get control of three casinos, ownership of all the cash flow after the interest bill was paid, a management fee that came out before the interest bill, and a place to take his girlfriend, gratis. And crucially, everything was set up in limited-liability vehicles that could declare bankruptcy without cost to Trump. There are lots of ways to take cash out of a company you controlthe Plaza and the Castle even bought four thousand copies each of The Art of the Deal to hang around in the hotel bookshops. At this point, of course, there were no shareholders other than the Trump Organization, but that was soon to change, and even the bondholders might have been disconcerted to learn that once the Taj Mahal was ready for opening, the other two Trump casinos were encouraged to share their valuable customer lists with it, potentially diverting significant gambling cash flow away from themselves.

The Trump Plaza was a reliable moneymaker (it was run by Jack ODonnell, a competent casino executive who later wrote a book detailing the myriad ways in which he did not enjoy the experience), but it was not immune to the recession of the early 1990s. The Castle consistently lost money, at least in part due to spending by Ivana on decoration and renovation, and an apparent inability to decide whether it wanted to aim at high rollers or the mass market. The Taj Mahal was also heading for bankruptcy, for reasons that can be summarized as how could it possibly have been expected to do anything else?it had huge cost overruns, equally huge operational problems that forced its slot machines to be shut down for lack of coins, and a monstrous interest bill.

However, separating a bust casino from its owner is not as simple as a normal repossession, because gambling licenses are issued to named individuals and take time to transfer, particularly when the gambling commission is in a bad mood anyway because it was initially promised that the whole thing wouldnt be financed by high-interest bonds. So a deal was organized in which the banks and bondholders wrote off part of their debt but, in order to stand a chance of getting the rest back, they left the owner in place. Trump kept control of his casinos but sold other assets for cash to put into the deal, reduced his living standards, and personally guaranteed a lot of loans. This was the darkest hour for Donald Trump, but the dawn that followed it was much worse for the investing public.

The not-so-intrinsically-doomed Plaza casino was placed into a company called Trump Hotels & Resorts, along with a portfolio of other Trump assets. This company then launched itself on the stock exchange and issued several hundreds of millions of dollars of new junk bonds. A lot of that money was used to pay back debts owed personally by Donald Trump, and to buy back assets that he had sold in the great restructuring deal. Trump Hotels & Resorts then issued more debt to buy the Castle and the Taj Mahal (from Donald Trump, taking on their debts). Then it went bankrupt. The company that came out of the bankruptcy, Trump Entertainment Resorts, also went broke, several times. All along the way, these corporate entities paid management fees and bonuses, and licensing fees for that surname.

As we noted at the beginning, casinos generate cash and the hotels associated with them dont. If you defer maintenance on the hospitality bit of the business, you improve your cash flow, but in the long term your hotels will look shabby and the high-rated players will stop coming back. That is what happened to the Plaza (now closed) and to the Castle (which was renamed the Trump Marina and after refurbishment by its new owners trades as the Golden Nugget). In a final act of chutzpah, after his management connection had been severed, Donald Trump sued the company that owned the Trump Taj Mahal because he claimed its shabby appearance reflected badly on him. It is now the Hard Rock Atlantic City, owned by the Seminole tribe of Florida.

If you look back on this tale with the perspective of a bondholder, it looks pretty bad. Corporate entities swapped valuable assets with other properties owned by the same party, who took free goods and services from them along with extracting value through management fees and licensing arrangements. Consistently, the corporate entities acquired assets that were the private property of their owner, and sometimes did so at questionable valuations (a shareholder lawsuit over the price paid by Trump Hotels & Resorts for the Trump Castle ended up being settled out of court, for example). Consistently, debts that had been guaranteed by the owner personally were refinanced into debts of a company that already had its own creditors, often at significantly higher interest costs.

To be blunt, if someone did this on purpose, there would be a case to make that it was fraud. What makes it not fraud is the fact that the factors that ended up causing the losses to bondholders were the result of ego, arrogance, and a refusal to hear bad news, combined with a more than usual degree of shrewdness in using corporate vehicles to protect ones personal assets. None of these things are illegal, and it is not as if Donald Trump didnt make it absolutely clear to people planning on doing business with him that he would take advantage of them if the opportunity presented itselfhe even wrote a book about what kind of a person he was and put thousands of copies in the lobbies of the Plaza and Castle hotels.

These days, the banking community has for the most part gotten around to reading The Art of the Deal, and as a result Trump-branded properties tend to be just that; other peoples real-estate developments who have paid a licensing fee to use a name that retains significant cachet, particularly to newly wealthy citizens of emerging-market countries who for some reason want to store their wealth in a different legal jurisdiction from where it was obtained. But there are plenty of mini-Trumps out there, and it is difficult distinguishing between arrogant flakes who need to be avoided as business partners on the one hand, and culpable fraudsters who need to be prosecuted on the other. Thats the biggest asset that corporate crooks have when it comes to getting away with it.

Getting away with it Having looked at some examples of ways of generating the kind of commercial confidence that one needs in order to carry out the first stage of a long-firm fraud, we can turn to the second stageescaping without being caught. The way one achieves this is either by attempting to make the fraud look like a normal business collapse, or by putting as many layers of obfuscation as possible between oneself and the long firm.

If there is enough confusion around, simply denying everything and throwing counteraccusations at your creditors can be a surprisingly successful tactic. Sir Gregor MacGregor took this approach; as the survivors trickled home, he started suing people for libel and publishing defamatory tracts of his own aimed at the merchants from Belize who had tried to rescue themor in MacGregors version of history, the robbers who had stolen goods and destroyed the settlement out of fear of competition from a thriving Poyais. These battles ended up inevitably with the Cazique being disgraced, but it created enough uncertainty in London to allow him to depart to Paris claiming that none of it was his fault and to restart selling Poyais bonds there. He was still trying to sell them, with admittedly dwindling success, by the time of his death in 1845.

In the modern day, the conviction rate for frauds is about 90 percent in the New York State court system. But this is a really misleading statistic, because the fraud cases that come to court are the tip of the iceberg. Prima facie, a failure to pay ones debts is regarded as a civil matter (a breach of contract) rather than a crime, and fairly or not, it is de facto the responsibility of the victim to show that there has been misrepresentation, dishonesty, or conspiracy. Few other crimes give the criminal an explicit chance to cool out the mark,11 but in general, if a bankrupt company can get three-quarters of its creditors to agree to a payment plan, it is highly unlikely that the remaining quarter will be able to persuade the law enforcement authorities to investigate further.

And although simply standing amid the wreckage with an innocent expression is surprisingly effective, a second line of defense can bring the risk down to very low levels indeed. What you need is a person to take the blame for the insolvency, and if the insolvency cannot be passed off as bad luck, to take the criminal consequences. If the person chosen for this role is part of the fraud, he is known as a front; if not, a patsy.

Why might anyone act as a front for a long firm? It might be because he has been bribed. It is by no means unknown for long-firm syndicates to pick up a street-dwelling alcoholic, give him a haircut and a new suit, and introduce him as the chief executive of a new trading company. After a few weeks of the high life, these characters end up being dumped back into the hostels they came from. If one thinks it a little risky to have anything relying on the plausibility of a hobo, there are career criminals who make a specialty of fronting long firms;12 given the conviction rates and typical sentences, the risk/reward ratio is not necessarily so bad. But the other common reason that someone might take the rap for a long firm is that they are not aware that they are doing so. Such a person is a patsy.

There is one more way to abuse the trading reputation of a legitimate firm, and it is significantly nastier than the methods discussed so far. What we are talking about is the version of Vincent Teresas classic bust-out that was seen in the film Goodfellas and common with the New York and New Jersey mob. A moderately successful small businessa bar or restaurant, saygets a new business partner for its owner. This can come about as the result of a brief period of financial distress and resort to a loan shark, or the bad guys can simply walk through the door with baseball bats. In any case, control has passed from a legitimate owner to a crook, and the new crooked owner can start abusing the trading record of the company to run up fraudulent credit. It makes the simple torch-job antics of the New England Mafia look positively herbivorous.

Acquiring someone elses trading name can be done without violence or menace, though. Long-firm fraudsters are often on the lookout for businesses up for sale at cheap prices, where the owners can be persuaded to accept payment in installments. There are two benefits to the fraudster from paying to acquire a company on the never-never; as well as reducing the up-front cash outlay, it benefits the fraudster hugely to obfuscate the ownership of the firm. If the original owner still has an interest in the companys success, appears on the letterhead and so on, then credit bureaus and accounts-receivable controllers will be less likely to notice that there has been a change of management, and therefore less likely to start checking the people placing the orders against their registers of known bad actors (either people who have served time for fraud, or those who have been associated with sufficiently many bankruptcies to carry the pall of suspicion).

There are even more audacious ways to take possession of another companys trading reputation. Even when fraudsters pay up front for a company, it can be surprisingly difficult for the selling owner to organize a final board meeting to formalize the transfer of title. The minutes of such meetings have a habit of getting lost, leaving the previous owner sitting around as the only remaining representative of a long firm, trying to convince the police that a bad boy did it and ran away. Never sell a company for cash.

As well as taking care who you sell to, owners of businesses would be well advised to keep tight control of who is allowed to use their headed notepaper. Since companies dont have fingerprints or passport photographs, letterheads are often accepted as evidence of identity by credit controllers, and if they get into the wrong hands, they can cause serious mischieffraudsters can write credit references for each other, and even place orders.

Finally, a short word about the fencethe party who turns stolen goods into cash. Fencing the goods acquired in a long firm is easier than doing so with the proceeds of a robbery simply because the crime involves a time dimension. The moment a car is stolen, its owner will be on the lookout for it, and its sale will be difficult and risky. But if a dozen cars are stolen by an automotive dealership acting as a long firm, the victim of the crime will expect to see them on the forecourt, being sold for cash to the public. The crime only comes into existence once the payment is overdue and the debt is in default. Fences for long-firm fraudsters always have the cast-iron excuse that the business did not look like a fraud when they were dealing with it, because it did not, and in general, they have to screw things up pretty badly to end up being convicted.

The time dimension doesnt make it easy for everyone involved in a fraud, however. Although it puts distance between the crime and its discovery, that distance comes at a cost. Businesspeople expect to be paid for waitingthats why they say things like time is money. And the time value of money means that while a sum of undiscovered fraud exists, the size of the deception is often growing. This complicates the economics of the thing a lot.

1. If youre being pedantic, genuine warehouse receipts for counterfeit oil. Apart from the ones that Tino forged.

2. At a later stage, when the business had grown and they wanted to present a bit more gravitas, the principals of OPM would claim that this was a dirty rumor, and OPM actually stood for Other Peoples Machines. This claim was undercut by the fact that it had two subsidiaries called AMG Finance, the letters being the Yiddish acronym for Anderre Menschens Gelt.

3. Why do tax breaks mean that leasing is attractive? Basically, tech companies often make losses, and you cant reduce a tax bill below zero. So the tax break is wasted unless the asset is owned by a company that makes a profit. So it can make sense to structure things so that the owner of the computer, for tax purposes, is something like an insurance company with big and reliable profits. The taxman is usually quite relaxed about this because the leasing companies tend to pass at least some of the benefits back to the tech firms they were intended for.

4. Such as that made by Malcolm K. Sparrow in his book License to Steal, from which this example is taken.

5. Or, in some ghastly cases, that you had provided but shouldnt have. One chain of blood-analysis laboratories realized they could massively pad their bills by doing unnecessary tests. They got so greedy on this fraud that they quickly exhausted the normal pool of blood-donation clinics and had to provide incentives to get more. A medical paper on Lab-Fraud Anemia ended up being published as hospitals in the New York area experienced a rash of emergency cases from homeless people who had been donating quarts of blood two or three times a week.

6. Another aspect of Medicare fraud that will make you question your faith in humanity; because they were easily confused and did not make reliable witnesses as to what medical procedures they had or hadnt received, dementia patients were particularly prized by crooked clinics and doctors.

7. To expand on this a little, a profitable company that has negative net assets can act like a solvent one, and even trade its way back to solvency in a reasonably orderly fashion.

8. For the avoidance of doubt is a useful phrase to look out for in a variety of contexts. It generally means my lawyer is nervous. In this case I mean it literally, though; the point of this story is whats legal.

9. Gambling commissions are funny things. They combine the functions of a law enforcement agency and a municipal development board. Even in the absence of the well-known temptations available, this conflict of interest often leads honest public servants into making decisions they later regret.

10. Your rating as a potential casino customer is a function of how much money you have, how much of it youre willing to gamble in any one visit, and whether youre any good at gambling or not. A skillful $1,000-a-hand blackjack player is good, but a terrible player betting the same amount is much better.

11. This useful phrase, brought to prominence by Erving Goffman, refers to the practice of con men of all kinds to assign some time and effort to the task of persuading the victim to frame things differentlyto see himself not as the victim of a criminal act that requires justice, but as someone who has had a bit of bad luck, or engaged in a failed venture. Goffman contends that, sociologically, lots of noncriminal institutions in everyday and bureaucratic life can, once you have recognized the phenomenon, be seen as having functions broadly similar to the cooling out of marks.

12. It has been suggested that if you have access to an accountant who knows how to keep his mouth shut and who is prepared to go to jail, then you are either making money out of a fraud or you arent trying.

Chapter 4: The Snowball Effect Accumulate! Accumulate! That is Moses and the Prophets!

Karl Marx, Grundrisse Ponzi and his scheme The signs, it is almost trite to observe, were there. Charles Ponzi arrived as an almost penniless Italian immigrant in Boston in 1903, having lost all his money to a card shark en voyage and owning only a ticket via New York to meet his relatives in Pittsburgh. He bumped through a series of clerical and menial jobs before winding up in a Montreal jail, claiming that the banking fraud that had put him there was all a big misunderstanding, probably the fault of one of his love rivals, and that he would one day be avenged. After being encouraged to seek his fortune outside the Dominions of Canada, he headed back to the USA in the company of a party of illegal immigrants, which resulted in another short jail sentence.

He promoted power and light investment schemes, pretended to be in a secret society in New Orleans, hung around with medical-insurance fraudsters in Alabama, got married, and ended up back in Boston in 1919. Here, he turned to a seemingly legitimate business, aiming to use his natural gifts for languages and for salesmanship to publish The Traders Guide, a compendium of useful addresses, consulates, customs details, and similar information. The idea was that he would distribute it for free to companies worldwide in the import and export trades and make a profit by selling advertising. Ahead of its time, Ponzis international trade gazette was not a success. But while trying to promote it, he made a discovery that would change the course of his life. He received a request for a sample copy from a company based in Spain, accompanied by an International Reply Coupon (IRC) to cover postage.

While cashing in the IRC, Ponzi realized that while these coupons were convertible into a set amount of postage in each of the participating systems of the Universal Postal Union, they also sold for a set amount of local currency in each of the countries. The IRC system therefore defined a set of fixed exchange rates via its table of prices, and these exchange rates could differ significantly from the market rates. This was particularly true with respect to countries like Italy or Portugal that had devalued their currencies significantly in the aftermath of the First World War.

Ponzi even carried out a trial transaction, sending dollars to a relative in Italy to convert into lire, buy IRCs, and mail them back to Boston. He then took these coupons to the post office on Milk Street, exchanging them for US stamps worth around double his initial investment. It looked like a free-money machine, and all he needed was more capital. He took down the sign on his rented office for The Bostonian Advertising and Publishing Company and put one up for The Securities Exchange Corporation.1 He was ready to start borrowing money.

His first investor was an office-furniture salesman to whom Ponzi owed money; Ponzi successfully exchanged his commercial debt for a ninety-day note promising to pay 50 percent interest. He had to explain the mechanics of the IRC scheme to convince his irate creditor that he was not just playing for time, but once that was clear, the salesman was hooked. In general, Ponzi was never reluctant to give away the details of his scheme to potential investors. He claimed to be unafraid of having his idea stolen because nobody else had the contacts in Europe that were needed to buy the coupons in large amounts. This was true, but neither did Ponzi.

Postal inspectors regularly visited his offices accusing him of fraud; all of them left convinced by Ponzis charm and intelligence that the scheme was legitimate. Seemingly none of them were sufficiently familiar with the rules of the Universal Postal Union, which had anticipated the problem of implied exchange rates and gave a significant amount of protection against having money drawn out of the system by speculators. If Ponzi had ever tried to put his scheme into action, his overseas agents would have found it very difficult to buy coupons in bulk and he would not have been able to convert them into cash in the USA. There is, however, no real evidence that he ever made any serious effort to trade themPonzi claimed that unspecified administrative problems prevented the profitable coupon-trading business from getting off the ground, but this was almost certainly a lie.

Other investors soon followed the furniture salesman. Ponzi offered them the same terms50 percent interest payable in ninety days (he later shortened the term to sixty days). Word first spread through Bostons Italian American community but soon went beyond it into the wider New England scene. He started to employ commission sales agents, giving them 10 percent of the amount that they raised. The rented office was quickly outgrown (Ponzi had become a serious local traffic problem) and he moved into marble-clad premises on School Street, in the heart of the citys business district. Ponzi bought automobiles, smoked large cigars, and made himself prominent about town.

His expansion plans seem to have proceeded as much by luck as by design.2 A fellow former Montreal jailbird came to him looking for a job and threatening to expose his murky past. Ponzi sent him out into the Boston suburbs and New England towns to set up new branches. This new employee turned out to be a natural, and soon the branch network was generating as many new customers as the central Boston office. By 1920, Ponzi had over thirty thousand individual customers, a float of millions of dollars of cash, and absolutely no hope of redeeming all the promises he had made.

Ponzis scheme differed from most of its imitators in that, in the early stages at least, rather than discouraging withdrawals, he actually welcomed them. The marketing proposition he gave to his investors was that interest was only paid at maturityit was possible to get ones money back at any time before the ninety days were up, but without interest. Each early withdrawal, then, actually reduced the size of his underlying problem, at the expense of draining his sources of ready cash. Conversely, customers who rolled over their investments into new Ponzi notes at maturity would be increasing the size of his problem, but not draining cash. This was how the scheme managed to continue rather than collapsing at the first maturity date. Having bought time, Ponzi was as industrious as he was unscrupulous in using it. He set out to try to use his lies and fake assets to take control of some real wealth.

Those who live by the sword tend to die by it. Ponzis scheme was fated to collapse in the equivalent of a bank run, but while he was operating it, he was not averse to using threats of bank runs as a weapon of his own. At the height of his scheme, his companys cash balances (which were held on hand as short-term bank deposits, ostensibly to keep them ready to pay cash for postal coupons) were a significant percentage of the local money supply in Boston and its surrounding area. For a number of large and important banks, Ponzis deposits were a greater sum than they could raise at short notice and were essential to their ability to maintain enough liquidity to sustain their operations. This gave him considerable leverage, and he used it.

After buying some small blocks of shares, he threatened the Hanover Trust Company with an immediate demand for repayment of his deposits, unless the board of directors sold him enough of their own personal shareholdings to make him the majority owner. This left Charles Ponzi in control of a bank, spending about $2 million to gain control of several times that much in potential lending resources. He used his new firepower to make bids for other banks and for real-estate companies all over Boston, and to bid for the surplus ships of the US Navy. He even started trying to underwrite a bond issue for the Republic of Poland (and, in doing so, spread his sales network into another large ethnic community).

The crash, when it came, was triggered by Ponzis first investor (who cannot really be called his first victim, as he had long since been paid out). The furniture salesman who accepted Ponzis note at the beginning had taken notice of the apparently meteoric success that followed, and sued in court over a claim that the initial deal had involved Charles Ponzi selling him a 50 percent interest in the whole business. The lawsuit itself was not so much the problem as the interest it stimulated in Ponzis background, and particularly in the number of times he had been convicted of crimes of dishonesty. He did his best to fight back and defend his reputation, even submitting to public examination by a celebrated psychic to show that his mind contained no hint of turpitude. But the suspicions kept returning. A particular problem for him, of course, was the fact that he could not display records of successful transactions in IRCs because there were none; he had never put the scheme to work. Ponzi tried to bribe officials and used his and the Hanover Trusts deposits as a weapon against the bankers he believed were his enemies. He hired an attorney who was, if anything, a bigger crook than he was (Dapper Dan Coakley, a Boston-Irish political operator). He even attempted to intercept the telegram traffic between Boston and Montreal.

The denouement came just as Charles Ponzi was on the point of another ahead-of-his-time discovery in the world of fraudhe had begun to make loans from the Hanover Trust to his own corporation in order to cover cash demands, anticipating the control frauds (see Chapter 7) of the Savings and Loan crisis by half a century. This, however, raised an alert with the remaining honest employees, and brought the state banking commission into the picture. As an audit report on the scheme came in (the valuation of which was pointlessly disputed by Ponzi), it finally became indisputable that there had never been anything like enough assets to pay the bonds back with 50 percent interest, and Ponzi was taken away by a US marshal.

Ponzi is ill-served as a fraudster by his eponym. He was a considerably more sophisticated operator than the epigones and wannabes behind most modern Ponzi schemes. He was aware from the earliest stages of his scheme that he was only buying time and was relying on his ability to find another idea, as brilliant as the postal scheme but not as impossible to execute. He was decades ahead of his time in understanding that assets controlled is more important to a wholly dishonest actor than assets owned. But Charles Ponzi is not like Lszl Br or Rudolf Diesel; he did not invent the investment scam, or even the idea of targeting affinity groups. In fact, not only was Charles Ponzi not the first Ponzi schemer, he was not even the first Ponzi schemer in the town of Boston.

The Boston Ladies Deposit Company Unprotected females had quite a difficult time of it in 1878. By owning property in their own right rather than through their husbands, they were unusual and vulnerable, particularly if they had been brought up to be provided for rather than to work for a living. It was possible to live off an inheritance or a capital sum, but usually not to live well, and if you used the interest on your savings to live on, you would have a fixed income in a period of modest but meaningful inflation. This meant that a woman in this position would tend to find it difficult to maintain her social standing if she stuck to safe investments, and any unforeseen expenses might see her having to dip into capital, and sacrifice permanently a proportion of her future income.3 For this reason, widows and spinsters tended to be surprisingly willing to make risky investments in search of a higher dividend. The shares of a newly floated railway company4 might rise or fall, but the prudent investments recommended by lawyers and bankers would deliver the eventual certainty of having to work as a governess. In the reams of Victorian melodramas of evil deceit on the stock exchange, the villains perfidy is generally underlined by the high proportion of helpless women in his investor base; the ladies might not have been quite as financially innocent as it suited the authors to paint them, but they were real and they were not always risk averse.

But who would resist an offer for a safe investment that paid 8 percent per month, promising an annual income of $96 for every $100 deposited? How about if it gave you the first three months interest payment in advance? When Sarah Howe opened the Ladies Deposit Company in 1878, she created a stir pretty quickly.

Ms. Howe allowed it to be suggested, without necessarily saying so herself, that her bank was in fact backed by a Quaker charity, dedicated to the promotion of thrift and the protection of virtue, and that for this reason it had to place certain restrictions. The depositors had to be unmarried women, and they had to agree only to withdraw the interest proportion of their savings.5 The Ladies Deposit quickly grew by referrals (for each of which Ms. Howe paid five dollars to her customers) and quickly attracted an investor base that included women of all classes, with maids and shopkeepers lining up to deposit their few dollars alongside rich widows investing their whole capital sum.

Because there was no cover story about postal coupons or anything similar, it was not difficult to work out that this was a scam. A letter to the Boston Daily Advertiser entitled Ladies Deposit BankingHow it is Supposed To Work explained what Sarah Howe was doing, complete with diagrams and a (correct) prediction that the potential investor base would be mined out and the scheme would collapse in approximately three years. Spurred by its readers, the Daily Advertiser investigated Sarah Howes background, and began to ask questions about why what would have to be one of the biggest charities in the USA would have appointed a fortune-teller and stage psychic to be the manager of their financial scheme.

Faced with the bad publicity, Sarah announced that, to prove the doubters wrong, she would change the rules and allow anyone who felt dissatisfied to withdraw their entire capital sum as well as accrued interest. This ended up being a bad miscalculation; she had nowhere near enough ready cash and the Ladies Deposit Company declared bankruptcy. Inevitably, Sarah Howe went to prison; somewhat more unaccountably she came back and executed the exact same scam again (the Boston Womens Bank, 1884). One cannot say she had learned nothing, though; when the Daily Advertiser in 1887 exposed the fact that the Womens Bank was being managed not by Mrs. J. C. Ewell but by Sarah Howe, she had the sense to skip town rather than waiting for the collapse. She reached Chicago with $50,000 of investors money and might have gotten away with it if she had not attempted to open the Ladies Provident Aid Society there. When she got out of jail in 1889, she went back to fortune-telling.

Pyramid schemes The modern pyramid scheme is a rough pile of rocks compared to the Venetian palazzo of Charles Ponzi and Sarah Howes original template. There is little of the design, hardly any of the flair, and a virtual certainty of collapse in the most predictable way possible, rather than Ponzis elegant dance of risks and intrigue. The only real points of commonality are the tendency toward crass public consumption on the part of the promoters in the interim, and the attraction to affinity groups. Pyramid schemes are so rife among churches, for example, that guides to pastors have been published on how to spot one developing in your congregation. These come complete with lists of biblical references to use in preaching sermons on the illusory nature of promised riches. (Ecclesiastes 5:5, for example, Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.) In the simplest form, the pyramid scheme operates without any goods changing hands and takes the form of the chain letters that used to circulate through the mail and nowadays replicate via email and on Facebook. The Infinity Game, for example, was marketed at self-help and New Age seminars in the 1980s. It used an analogy to an airplane to explain the financial transactions involved. You have a pilot, two copilots, four crew, and eight passengers.6 The passengers give $1,500 to the pilot, who then pilots-out. In the next step, the group splits and the two copilots are promoted to pilots of the two new airplanes. The crew are promoted to copilots and divided between the two new pilots, and the passengers are similarly split, promoted to crew and given the job of recruiting passengers to fill out the two new airplanes. This keeps on repeating, so someone who joins as a passenger and successfully pilots-out will get a return of $12,000 on their initial $1,500 gift.

Where does the money come from? Well, it comes from the fact that sooner or later the pool of recruits will be fished out, and some large number of people will send their $1,500 gifts to someone but have no possibility of recruiting enough passengers to pilot-out themselves. In the Infinity Game, this fact was disguised by encouraging successful pilots to rejoin newly formed planes at the passenger level, but the mathematics are the samethe scheme depends on finding new passengers to get funds equal in amount to the money taken out by the organizers.

The more people you recruit at every stage, and the more money you charge, the more lucrative the scheme is for the people at the top, but the quicker it will burn out. So you can fine-tune your larceny to try to maximize your profit while minimizing the chance of the thing collapsing before you have had time to make an escapethis is a business decision, rather like the choice as to whether to bother with real patients in a Medicare fraud.

As you can see from the example, involvement in the scheme is inherently self-terminating, which is a good thing from the point of view of the criminal. If the pyramid continues for five or six more iterations after you have cashed out, it may have spread to an entirely different population and the authorities will have a difficult time tracing up through the levels to confirm that the original fraudster was you.

In this form it is an ugly, stupid scheme that attracts some of the least appetizing characters in crime. Thats because it doesnt work on anyone intelligent enough to think two or three moves into the future, or to understand that the worlds population is not infinite. For this reason, pyramid schemes of this sort tend to disproportionately victimize vulnerable peoplethe Infinity Game was specifically marketed to people who were attending seminars because they felt something was missing from their lives, and authorities in the southern states of the USA report that about half their complaints about pyramid schemes come from churches in poor communities.7 A sophistication of the pyramid scam involves bringing a tangible good into the picture. Rather than just making the payments, recruits are encouraged to buy inventory, sell to the public, recruit other salespeople, and take commissions on sales made by those they have recruited. This brings some significant advantages to the operation. First, it can obscure the essential nature of a pyramid; people who would immediately spot a gifting pyramid are often less likely to notice the underlying economics if the scheme is dressed up to look like a normal business. There is less of a sense of something for nothing, which tends to raise the skepticism of potential recruits.

And second, depending on the product, it raises the possibility of the pyramid becoming a legitimate business. If the recruits are actually selling something valuable to the general public, it is no longer the case that the scheme requires constant new recruits to keep making payments; in a steady state, it is not as lucrative to the upper levels, but the lower levels do not give their money away for nothing. There are actually some legitimate businesses that recruit their sales force on the basis of their being able to earn downline commission. And this creates a very strange gray area. It can be quite possible for something to exist and operate and for nobody to be quite sure whether it is a pyramid scheme or not.

Of course, legal legitimacy is not everything; for every Tupperware in the world of multilevel sales, there is an Amwaya cleaning-products company that has passed every formal investigation and been classed as not a pyramid, but that has still left huge numbers of people (many of whom seem to have started websites) feeling badly treated by the friends and relatives who brought them into the circle. This is one of the nastier properties of both pyramid schemes and legal multilevel marketing companiesbecause they tend to spread through affinity groups, they can develop an almost cult-like atmosphere, in which belief in the economic validity of the scheme becomes a condition of continued group membership, and unbelievers are frozen out. There are some success stories of multilevel marketing, but in general it does not seem to be a field that attracts many quiet and saintly types.

Getting out of hand The thing that makes pyramid schemes crash is a crucial feature of any fraud that persists longer than a short-term hit-and-run bust-outthey snowball. Its intrinsic to capitalismmoney goes into business, and comes out as more money. Then the increased sum is reinvested in business assets, and grows even more. Even a comparatively small positive return will tend to build up over time, like the interest in a bank account. But one key difference between fraudsters and legitimate businesses is that compound interest, the driver of growth and returns for the honest firm, is the enemy of the fraud.

The reason for this is that unlike a genuine business, a fraud does not generate enough real returns to support itself, particularly as money is extracted by the criminal. Because of this, at every date when repayment is expected, the fraudster has to make the choice between whether to shut the fraud down and try to make an escape, or to increase its size; more and more money has to be defrauded in order to keep the scheme going as time progresses.

Consider a really simple investment fraud and take away all the detail to concentrate on the mathematics of the investment returns. You take in a million dollars from your investors, promising them a return of 25 percent on their money. Instead, you steal it. A year goes by, and you aim to keep the fraud going by raising new money from another set of mugs. You get a tame accountant to verify that you have made a 25 percent profit, and armed with these amazing performance figures, you go out on the road to raise how much?

At the very least, you have to raise $1.25 million. You need to pay back your investors not only their original stake, but the fictitious profits that you pretended to earn. And it gets worse. Even presuming you never steal any more, at the end of year two, the people who gave you the $1.25 million are going to want $1,562,500 back. If you keep going for five years, then your original million-dollar theft will require you to commit just over $3 million of new fraud. After a while, the amount of the rollover will get too big to manage and the fraud will collapse.

Ponzi schemes show this feature of crime most clearly. But a similar problem tends to show up in any kind of fraud that necessitates keeping two sets of books. As soon as money is extracted, there is a gap between the real set of accounts and the public set. This gap needs to be filled by some sort of fakeryeither an accounting fiddle or a simple lie that the cash is there when it isnt. And once the gap is there, it will tend to grow. The public books have to keep showing profits and valuable investments to maintain peoples confidence. Meanwhile, the real books are not going to show anything like the same growth, firstly because the true business is nothing like as successful as the fiction, and secondly because valuable cash and goods are being extracted by the fraudster. So the fraud has to get bigger and bigger, just by the passage of time.

If borrowed money is involved, compound interest is often even more important. Loans have monthly payments that need to be made, and you cant pay real debts with fake cash. What often happens is that the fraudster takes out a second loan to make payments on the first. Unfortunately, payments have to be made on the new loan as well as the old one, and although the fake assets are growing at a healthy clip, theyre still not generating any real cash. Credit-card frauds often spiral in this waya small fraud against a single lender ends up as a much larger fraud with multiple banks involved. The need to keep up with snowballing loans seems to have been a big part of what drove the team at OPM Leasing further down the slope into criminality than they might necessarily have chosen to go.

This tends to catch out a lot of amateurs and first-time criminals. A shoplifter or robber can carry out one or two thefts and then take a break; avoiding capture for a blue-collar criminal is just a matter of trying not to be the person who is connected to the crime. An embezzler, though, or a rogue trader or a tax swindler, has to cover up the existence of the crime itself. That means that its very difficult to be a one-time-only embezzler. The original crime creates an ongoing need to commit a series of further crimes, usually growing in magnitude. Small-time white-collar criminals often burst into tears of relief when they are finally captured. As one long-firm veteran put it: Often these businesses, run by people of rare energy and intelligence, could have been very successful. There is nothing sadder in some ways than the managers of a fraudulent firm who then find they have a commercial success on their hands. They try desperately to repay their first plunderings, but the canker in the rose spreads inexorably and eats it all up.

One way to close the gap, by the way, is to take big risks with the money that hasnt been stolen yet. This is how rogue traders tend to expand their concealed losses to levels that blow up banks. But its by no means unknown for even a small-time embezzler to take the float of company cash to a racetrack or casino in a last desperate gamble for redemption.

But if compound growth is such a killer, how do frauds keep going for so long? The need to manage the snowball effect is one of the biggest problems facing a fraudster with ambitions to steal a lot or keep going for longer than a single billing cycle. If you want to steal a lot of money, you have to keep the fraud going. You also have to keep the fraud going if you havent figured out your escape route yet, or if you just blundered into it and dont have a plan at all. But while the fraud is going, it has to be growing; the returns and repayments you owe to other people are growing at a compound rate of return, so you have to commit ever-increasing amounts of new fraud to stand still. This snowball property is the main challenge in managing an ongoing fraud. Thinking about the way in which its managed also throws up some questions about what it really means for something to be a Ponzi scheme.

The misleading name If you start thinking really rigorously about definitions, then as well as depriving Sarah Howe of her proper credit, the name Ponzi scheme is annoying because it doesnt really define a particular kind of fraud. In glossaries of financial terminology (and, disappointingly, on the SEC website warning investors about pyramid schemes), it is often suggested that the defining property of a Ponzi fraud, as opposed to any other kind, is the use of money raised from new investors to make payments to old investors. However, this is basically true of any fraud that aims to maintain a persistent economic existence for any material length of time. Anything that isnt a hit-and-run long firm is going to need cash flow to keep itself going, and since the fraud is incapable of generating enough cash to sustain itself (if it could, it wouldnt be a fraud), the new cash flow is going to have to come from outside investors. So by this criterion, ZZZZBest Carpet Cleaning, OPM Leasing, Enron, Women Empowering Women, and Bernard Madoff were all Ponzi schemes. A term that is this general is not really useful as a classification.

Its also important to note that the SEC definition of a Ponzi scheme is actually so wide that it captures many important economic phenomena that arent frauds at all. A family that takes out a home-equity line of credit in order to repay their car loan is raising new debt to repay previous borrowings. Someone drawing down student loans while making minimum payments on their credit card is doing the same, and will see their debt balances ballooning as a consequence. But in most such cases, not only is there no intent to defraud, but the debts actually end up getting serviced out of increased income at some point in the future. The economist Hyman Minsky noted that the Ponzi model of temporarily taking on new debt in order to service previous borrowing is absolutely ubiquitous in American business (its the standard means by which real-estate development is financed, for example) and only a problem when its use becomes too widespread. He even made this the cornerstone of his theory of the economic cycle; in benign economic conditions, businesses are incentivized to take on longer-term and more risky projects, which require them to build Ponzi-like structures with systematically increasing debt levels, which in turn increases the riskiness of the system as a whole and plants the seeds of the next crash.

The Social Security Ponzi Scheme and other fallacies This is not just a piece of terminological pedantry, by the way. Loose thinking about the nature of Ponzis scheme has ongoing and very damaging political consequences, because the misdefinition of an investment fund that takes in cash from new investors in order to pay out to past investors is one that seems to readily describe the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund, more commonly known as Social Security. And the claim that Social Security is a Ponzi scheme is itself part of the basis for calls to dismantle it and replace it with something thats easier for the financial-services industry to charge fees on.

The claim gets spurious credibility from the fact that most people dont understand pension economics, and presume that a government pension scheme works like a normal savings product. To simplify things mightily and abstract away from any details of actuarial science and tax,8 a retirement savings product (a 401(k) plan, for example) works because you put money into it while youre working, then take your money out when youve retired. There are all sorts of things going on in the background with investment in stocks and bonds, but from the point of view of the customer/investor, the thing just works like a bag of coinsyou put money in, then you take money out. This is a fully funded approach to pensions, as there is an identifiable balance of savings that is associated with the particular pension liability.

The other way of doing pensions is called pay as you go in developed economies, but its basically the Stone Age model. You work until you cant work anymore, and then you sit by the fire, call yourself an elder, and have food brought to you. If you have had lots of children, there is usually some social or religious convention that they have a particular responsibility, but if not, then the community as a whole will support you in your honored position. In a modern society, of course, this would be managed through the tax system, as money is taken in from currently working taxpayers and paid out to current retirees.

The problem arises because at the level of the whole economy, there is no such thing as a fully funded system. Cant exist. Its a monetary illusion. People who are retired have to consume goods and services that are produced today by the people who are working today, not goods and services produced thirty years ago by themselves. There is really not much in the economy that can be stored over the kind of time scale of retirement savings.9 So when youre saving for your retirement, youre actually establishing legal claims on the output of future workers. And when a government department estimates the size of its pension liability, what its talking about is the extent to which it is going to have to use its power to tax future workers in order to pay future pensioners.

This makes the accounting of the Social Security retirement trust fund pretty confusing. The liabilities of Social Security are an estimate of the value of its commitments to pay pensions in the future. From an economic point of view, there is no asset corresponding to this liability, because those future pension payments are going to be made by the United States of America, using its extremely valuable general-purpose asset called the right to levy taxes on the biggest economic entity the world has ever seen. But in order to make the books balance, the trust fund is credited with a series of made-up US Treasury Bonds. A Treasury Bond is, of course, a piece of paper (or these days, an electronic database entry) that gives you the right to claim a series of payments in the future from the US government. Butso is a Social Security pension! The assets are the same thing as the liabilities. The only sensible way to participate in any debate over the Social Security OASDI Trust Fund is to ignore it. Its not really a fund; its a way of recording a promise to pay pensions in a very public way, to nail down the politicians and make it harder for them to renege on that promise in the future.

But, that means that yes, Social Security takes in contributions today and pays them out to pensioners today. It doesnt save them up; how could it?10 If thats what you mean by a Ponzi scheme, then its a Ponzi scheme. But its self-evidently not going to blow up like a Ponzi scheme. In some far-off science-fictional scenario, you might get a case where there were no longer enough workers and taxpayers to fund the pension benefits. But that wouldnt be a Ponzi-like explosive collapse; it would be more like a degenerative disease of the American economy that for some reason failed to either replace its workforce or to grow their productivity sufficiently quickly to make up for the declining ratio of workers to pensioners. There would be no sudden moment when the doors were flung open and the Old Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund was found to have no Treasury Bonds in it.

The true meaning of Ponzi Its not sustainable, then, to say that the single criterion for calling something a Ponzi scheme is that it takes on new debts to repay old. But is there any meaning to the designation at all? If there is, it has to be a sort of family resemblance to Charles Ponzis original scheme and the Ladies Deposit Bank.

The use of new victims to refinance old ones is certainly one of those properties. But its by no means the only important one. As we mentioned, this is really not a specific strategy for a fraudster; its just a natural consequence of the decision to create a fraudulent entity that is going to have persistence over time, with the fraudster stealing money by consistently extracting a proportion of the cash rather than (as in one of Vincent Teresas bust-outs) taking it all.

Why would you do this? Although it might appear at first glance that its better to take everything rather than just a proportion, and less risky to create a fraud thats self-liquidating rather than one that is going to hang around and let people check it, this has to be set against the fact that such a fraud is limited in size. In general and with only a few exceptions, economic things get to be big by starting small and growing, rather than being set up as a big thing in the first place. As the founders of legitimate start-up businesses often find out, having 10 percent of something really big is often better than having 100 percent of something that cant grow beyond the personal network of its founder. If you want to extract a lot of money by fraud, you often have to put up with some of the same issues that you put up with in legitimate business. So the second key property of the Ponzi fraud is that its one that is designed to create an institution that will last for an indefinite period and that will grow; indeed, it will grow exponentially and at a rate that is compounded by the need to generate fictitious returns on money that has been extracted by the fraudster.

A final property of the Ponzi fraud, though, and one that in some way preserves the intuition of the popular definition, is that as with our own taxonomy of long firms, counterfeits, control frauds, and market crimes, the Ponzi scheme can also be defined by the kind of economic institution that it exploits and subverts. As we hinted earlier in talking about the danger of running a pyramid fraud with borrowed money, a key property of many of the things that get described as Ponzi schemes is that they need to undermine one of the social technologies that have evolved over the centuries to manage business relationshipsthe institution of maturity dates.

Debt is a funny thing. As long as everything goes well, it is an arms-length relationship in which people do not need to know much about each others affairs and have no particular involvement with them. The creditor has some rights over the borrower, but these can be summarized on one side of a sheet of notepaper, by a list of dates with associated amounts of money that need to be paid back. When something goes wrong, however, debt turns into a relationship that is all about control and power. Although the idea of a creditor being actually allowed to cut away a pound of the debtors flesh was only ever fictional (and didnt even turn out to be enforceable in The Merchant of Venice), the metaphor is one that anyone who has been on the wrong end of a debt relationship will recognize.

This is not a bad thing, of course; its how debt is meant to work. The best way of thinking about the debt contract relationship is that its a way of economizing on the information that people need to collect about each other. If youre going into partnership with someone, you need to find out a lot about them, particularly if you need to weigh the possible returns from the venture against your own up-front contribution of capital. If youre lending money, though, all the interesting questions about the future boil down to one relatively simple one: Is this person (or this limited-liability company, after about 1811) good for the money? And the great thing about that question is that its often surprisingly easy to answer. Most loan propositions are either good and look good or bad and look bad. The business of moneylending is to be better than your competition at spotting the minority that are bad, but look good.11 Of course, if banking were this easy wed all be doing it and wed all be rich. The problem is that things change. Its rare for a banker who is not a fraudster himself to get into trouble because he made a load of bad loans. What kills you in the moneylending business is not bad loans, but good loans that went bad. Either business conditions change, or you find something out about the character of your borrower that makes you change your mind about whether it was a good idea to lend to them.

In order to give lenders a chance to change their mind, the institution of debt builds in rollovers or maturity dates. You dont, in most cases, make a loan for the full period over which the borrower needs the use of the money. You lend for a shorter time period, on the understanding that at some earlier date, you can demand the money back. When that date comes around, you can either waive that right (effectively making a new loan, rolling over the old one), or you can enforce it. But if you choose the second option, then the borrower is unlikely to be able to pay youas we said, he or she needed the use of the money for a longer period of time. So in order to meet your repayment call, the borrower is going to have to find someone else to lend them the money, effectively taking your place as their creditor. We can note that this utterly normal business practice involves the dreaded taking money in from new investors to repay old ones, just to hammer the point home that the SEC definition of a Ponzi scheme is terrible.

Doing things this way has an obvious advantage for the lender in that they get an early option to do something else with their money, like spend it or put it into a better-looking investment. But it also works as an important means of fraud protection. At every maturity date, the borrower has to once more prove that they ought to get the loan, either from the original lender or a new one. And as well as requiring the proof to be reestablished from time to time, the lender can exercise a degree of control over what is done with the money by threatening to withhold the rollover. If youre a banker who is getting worried about the way one of your borrowers is behaving, one of the first measures in your playbook will be to put them on a short leash by deciding at the next rollover that you will only extend the new loan for a shorter period of time. In the limit, of course, you can shorten the term of the loan to no time at all and lend money on the basis that you can ask for it at any time you like, as if it were a bank deposit.

And in the limit in the other direction, if you have advanced money that never needs to be paid back, you have effectively handed over control too. This was the maxicure that Barry Minkow, Mark Morze, and the ZZZZBest gang were always hoping forthe moment when they would be able to carry out an IPO of their company and use the proceeds to clear the decks of all their creditors. Equity shares in a company have no maturity date, which is one of the reasons why investors (if they are thinking straight, which is not always the case) demand so much due diligence and such a long and demanding checking process before they allow a company to issue them. In the case of ZZZZBest, unfortunately, this did not happenthe auditor did not even visit the head office. But one thing that happens during public issues of securities is that all sorts of people have to make definite and specific public statements, with their own names signed to them, on subjects that they had previously been inclined to waffle on and bullshit about. That is what eventually brought down ZZZZBest. But while it lasted, the IPO strategy was the right one.

Straining against the leash Shortening the leash gives you more chances to get your money out before things go really wrong, and forces the borrower to return your phone calls more promptly. It also wastes a lot of time and effort and potentially distracts the borrower from running her business properly, which is why its a fallback option rather than the way things are set up from the start.

In summary, borrowed money usually comes on terms that mean that it needs to be refreshed. And so any fraud that persists over more than one loan-maturity date needs to in some way subvert the use of rollovers as a means of control and checking. This is the final Ponzi propertya fraud can be called a Ponzi scheme with greater validity, the greater the extent to which the mechanics of the crime revolve around managing the renewal of its financing and convincing the investor and lender communities to keep their money in the scheme rather than demanding repayment in cash. The strategies that fraudsters use to get around this control will depend on how the control worksthe way in which the investors renewal rights are structured.

The most straightforward way to handle maturities is just to use the calendar. Charles Ponzis notes were meant to mature in ninety days and pay their 50 percent interest. The investor could either take back a buck-fifty for every dollar invested, or roll over the proceeds into a new Ponzi note. The second option is usually better for the fraudster in the short term, because it economizes on the need to find cash. It was for this reason that Barry Minkow and ZZZZBest always tried to persuade their investors to roll over their restoration jobsdoing so reduced the need for Barry to kite checks. However, in the long term, the greater the extent to which the proceeds are reinvested in the same fraud, the bigger it grows and the faster it will collapse. This problem was the basis of the calculation by which the anonymous Boston Herald correspondent predicted the likely date of the collapse of Sarah Howes savings bank.

A slightly more uncertain, but quite logical way of setting the equivalent to a maturity date for a debt is to link it to the conclusion of a business episode that is in some way connected with the funds to repay it. So the ZZZZBest investors put up money for restoration jobs, on the basis that they would get paid back when Barry received the money from his (fictitious) insurance-company clients. Or a farmer might borrow money to be paid back when his crop was harvested and brought to market. In fact, agricultural frauds have been surprisingly common.

As far back as the Sumerian tablets that form the oldest written records of anything at all, the concept of compound interest seems to have been based in the similar compound growth of breeding populations of animals, or of crops grown from seed. So its an intuitive concept to someone who is considering an investment in a scheme; while they might be put off and think that a 100 percent annual return is too good to be true if promised as a rate of interest, most people can get their heads around the idea that a breeding pair of pigeons will produce two offspring every year.

This was the basis of the Pigeon King International fraud, which ran like wildfire through farming communities in Canada in the 1990s (and would have done so in Utah too, except the local regulators were a bit quicker on the uptake). The fraudster Arlan Galbraith promised to buy all the offspring at the same price at which he had sold the original pigeons, but many of his investors preferred to hang on to them in order to grow their flock. People were told that there was an extremely lucrative end-user market for the birds, selling either to Middle Eastern pigeon-racing syndicates or to the restaurant trade. There wasnt, but for quite a time the highly incentivized sales force of PKI managed to sell the scheme so aggressively that there was actually a waiting list of investors, as the breeding program couldnt keep up with investor demand. In the end, an investigation by Better Farming magazine confirmed that the birds in question were part of the Strathclyde Genetics breeding program based on Galbraiths own eccentric ideas about pigeons, and were basically useless for either racing (too big) or meat (too small). There had never been any end-user market for them, and in the course of the Pigeon King bankruptcy, over 170,000 of the poor things had to be humanely gassed.

The same scam works with ostriches,12 orchids, fine wines in the barrel, and all sorts of other things that sound as if they might be valuable but for which there is no readily available market price and where the investor is heavily dependent on the promoter for information about when the cash returns should be coming in. Pigeon King International was unusual in that it targeted farmers, and so the investors were responsible for raising the pigeons themselves rather than just handing over money in exchange for a certificate confirming part ownership of a flock or crop. But in either case, the presence of a physical item being bought and sold has attractive regulatory properties.

We will get into some depth in Chapter 9 on the process of evolution that turns businesspeoples conventions into market regulations, then into statutory regulations, and then into criminal law. But for the time being, its just worth noting that laws get written in response to problems that they are meant to address, and that loopholes in those laws often exist because its not yet become worth anyones time and effort to make a law against something. Since the early days of securities markets, there have been blue sky laws regulating the sale of investments to the general public. But it has always seemed like overkill to bring the same requirements with respect to transparency, auditing, information, and conflicts of interest to the purchase and sale of livestock, for example. This means that if you can dress up an investment scheme as being an agreement to buy and sell pigeons or orchids, you will usually be allowed to market it without having to go through all the safeguards and checks of a normal investment scheme. You might end up in trouble if a securities regulator notices what youre doing and sees through the fiction, but a) the regulator has to notice you first, and he or she has a busy day job, plus b) the courts are often quite reluctant to expand the boundaries of the quite draconian world of securities regulation.13 Often, things turn on the question of whether you are contractually committing to buy the ostrich feathers and meat at a given price (in which case this looks like an investment scheme with some funny scenery) or just making extravagant claims about its marketability.

The agricultural cycle for repayment dates is quite quirky, though, and that quirkiness usually puts a limit on the potential size of the investor base. This is inconvenient to a normal investment scheme but very dangerous to a fraudster. Frauds have the snowball property, and a persistent, growing Ponzi-like scheme will collapse once it has exhausted its investor base. So if you want to carry out a really big fraud, you want it to look like a legitimate investment opportunity.

That, of course, is what Bernard Madoff did. His scandal was based on a considerable refinement of the Ponzi scheme, and on a close understanding of investor behavior. The Madoff fraud relied on a distinction between the legal maturity of his investors claims on the fraudulent fund and the behavioral maturity. On paper, Madoffs clients could ask for their money with ninety days notice. In the real world, however, they left it in there much longer. And the way that fund redemptions worked, inertia was on Bernies side. There was no rollover process; on any given day, if no redemption request was received, the fund would presume that none was wanted and the ninety-day clock would reset. This meant that unlike Charles Ponzi or Barry Minkow, Bernard Madoff never had to go through the process of paying an investor in cash or certified checks and then selling them on a replacement dealonce the initial decision to trust Bernie had been made, there was no schedule for it to be regularly reviewed. This is quite a general feature of the economics of fraud. Because verification is expensive while trust is cheap, a common strategy for scrimping on checking costs is to use onetime checks, after which a party is within the circle of trust. This system has two failure modes; attacks based on faking the initial verification (which we call counterfeits and discuss in Chapter 5) and attacks from trusted parties who later become untrustworthy (generally a subset of the control frauds discussed in Chapter 7).

Hedge-fund frauds In fact, Madoff exhibited both of these failure modes. He drifted from a (mostly) honest securities brokerage into a (totally dishonest) investment manager, and he also counterfeited a load of trading records. Like Ponzi, though, Bernard L. Madoff does not really deserve ownership of the eponym on hedge-fund fraud. He was anticipated by nearly a decade, by the very similar case of Bayou Capital LLC and its proprietor Sam Israel. The two men were quite different character typesMadoff was a pillar of the community, a former chairman of the NASDAQ Stock Exchange and a devoted father and husband, while Sam Israel was a lifetime crook and drug addict who enjoyed the company of ex-CIA assassins.14 But the way they went about things was similar.

The first step in the game was to control the information flow. Both men had a sidekickMadoff had Frank DiPascali while Israel had Dan Marino (not the quarterback). The sidekicks were both masters of forging investment returns and getting the numbers through the compliance process. The only difference was that DiPascali would forge trading records, then pass them on to an incompetent accountancy firm, while Marino would forge the accounts themselves (attributing them to Fairfield-Richmond, a fictitious audit partnership he had invented), and ensure they werent scrutinized too quickly by sending them out late on a Friday so they would be buried under the weekend mail when the financial controllers got into the office on Monday.

The second step was to control the growth of your fund to match your financial needs. The way that the hedge-fund business works is that you take a percentage of your funds assets every year as a management fee and if there are any investment profits, you take a percentage of them as your performance fee. If you are reporting phony performance then you can choose your own earnings to match your childrens college and housing needs or the severity of your coke habit, subject only to the constraint that every cent of positive performance you report will go into the base for compound returns for the next period; this will mean that your phony asset base is higher, so your management fee can be bigger, but it also means that you are increasing the size of your fraud, and the amount of cash on hand that you have to keep in case of withdrawals is bigger. Since your fake profits dont correspond to real cash, growing the fund too quickly is a real business risk. Its best to let the pace be set by your marketing team and try to make sure that funds going out (the sum of investor withdrawals, your management and performance fees, plus any straightforward theft that pleases you) are covered with a margin by funds coming in from new salesin other words, that your fraud satisfies the first Ponzi principle.

But you need to manage your investors, to make sure that you dont get people who are going to check up on something that you have not previously thought to fake. The two hedge-fund stars differed in their approach to this problem. Madoff was a classic affinity fraudster who took money from charities and wealthy Manhattanites; the crash of his fund put a substantial hole in the endowment of Yeshiva University, of which he was on the board of trustees. In the later stages of his fraud, when the snowball was beginning to grow out of control, he took money from feeder funds, but he tried to make sure that the owners and sales forces of these second-order funds were dependent on him for their business, and to react badly to any requests for information.

Bayou Capital, on the other hand, organized their business around the same shrewd appreciation of the realities of working in the financial world that inspired them to play the send the accounts late on a Friday trick. Sam Israel tried to avoid taking money from wealthy individual investorsthe ultrahigh-net worth clientele tended to have too many sons and daughters with spare time on their hands who might be tempted to hang around asking questions. So instead he sought out other money managers, people who might be tempted to put some of their own clients money into Bayou to improve their returns, and who formed a protective layer between the rich investors and the drugs and insider dealing that formed an average days work there. Because the money managers had high-pressure businesses of their own to work, they rarely spent much time looking over the shoulder of their subcontractors, as long as the audited accounts looked like they checked out. Which they did, of course. Both Madoff and Bayou had one extra weapon in the form of their excellent published performance numbers. People wanted to keep their money in these fraudulent hedge funds because while it was in there it seemed to be growing. And if you asked for too many redemptions, you might irritate the grouchy principals and they might refuse to manage your money anymore.

The two hedge-fund frauds ended in different ways, befitting the personal styles of their founders. Sam Israel plowed onward through 9/11, even though his Sancho Panza begged him to use the pretext of the market turmoil around the terror attacks to declare massive losses and close the gap between the fictional assets and the real ones. He was brought down by a quixotic quest for the kind of extraordinary investment that could bring redemption, combined with the influence of his maybe-spy con-man associate who encouraged him to invest in wild schemes based on theories about a Federal Reserve conspiracy, fictional gold mines, and a few other lurid fantasies. He ended up faking his own death.

Bernard Madoff, on the other hand, just let the gap between the real and fake books get bigger and bigger. Every month he declared uncannily consistent and excellent returns. A few malcontents occasionally wrote articles in the trade press suggesting that his reported returns were statistically impossible, and some of them even wrote to the SEC saying so, but to little availnothing succeeds like success, and (as we discuss in Chapter 12) the psychological and institutional barriers to accusing a billionaire CEO of being a liar and a fake are incredibly powerful. Madoff had a few nasty moments in 2005, when Bayou collapsed and everyone looked round to see which other hedge funds used strange, obscure accountants that nobody had ever heard of. But the great crash of 2008 did for him just like it did for everyone else. It wasnt so much that the outflows accelerated (although they did) as that the inflows dried up entirely. In order to balance the cash, Bernie started calling in favors from old friends, and eventually borrowing money (and thereby subjecting himself to the discipline of scheduled rollovers and maturity dates). Illustrating the power of compound interest, because he had kept things going so much longer than any comparable fraud, the amount of fictitious assets in the Madoff insolvency was extraordinary. In order to steal a sum of money that could hardly have gotten into the hundreds of millions, Bernie took in $20 billion of cash (net of what he paid back out) and pretended that it had grown to $65 billion.

So thats the snowball property taken to its extreme, and the Ponzi scheme run with a level of modern sophistication. But before moving on, its worth considering another contortion of the intuition behind the Ponzi scheme, and another popular fallacy with political consequences. It goes back to one of the things we mentioned in passing in discussing the collapse of Bayou Capital.

Federal Reserve conspiracy theories During the swan-dive phase of the collapse of Bayou Capital, Sam Israel did what a lot of investors do, but on a larger scale and in a more uncontrolled way. He chased riskier and riskier assets, with the knowledge that merely excellent returns would not change the big picture sufficiently to keep him out of jail, but a tiny chance of a huge payoff could suddenly make everything all right. If hed put an early-stage investment into Facebook or one of its equivalents, this ploy might even have worked, but he didnt. He put money into a high-risk, high-return asset class called prime bank securities.

The prime bank securities market is one of the ways in which the Federal Reserve puts money into the economy. A select group of private-sector banksdrawn from the large investment banks that collectively own the Federal Reserve System, plus some foreign and global institutions that share ownership and business links with themcreate the prime securities, and sell them to each other at a massive discount to face value, say $1 million cash paid for every $1 billion of face value. The Fed then buys these securities at face value, creating a huge profit for the owner. Occasionally, if the syndicate of prime banks has a temporary imbalance in its funding, or one of the banks wishes to carry out a transaction without it becoming general knowledge, a wealthy investor may temporarily be allowed to join the syndicate and act as middleman for their dealings, with the outsider being paid by being allowed to make an investment in prime bank securities that can then be brought to the Fed for a similar outsize profit. The return element of the transaction comes from the fact that the Federal Reserve is able to print unlimited amounts of dollars to buy the prime securities, which is how it carries out monetary policy. The risk element Well, the risk element comes from the fact that the preceding paragraph is pretty much garbage from start to finish and no such market exists. The Fed isnt owned or controlled in that way; thats not how it carries out monetary policy; it doesnt buy securities from private banks at multiples of their value; and the reason given for why the insiders might allow outsiders into this fictitious market doesnt even make sense. The prime bank securities (also often known as prime bank guarantees) market is a scam played on rich people and occasionally on the treasurers of unsophisticated businesses,15 whereby you indicate to the victim that you are one of the parties who are occasionally allowed to deal in this market, and that if they pay you a substantial up-front finders fee, you will allow them to deal in it too. The ideal hope of a prime bank fraudster is that he will get you to a point of excitement where you think you are actually going to be allowed into the market, usually after all sorts of clandestine meetings with his powerful friends, and that you will then wire half your wealth (or your companys treasury) into a brokerage trading account over which the fraudster has joint signing authority. Not hard to guess what happens shortly after that. This is not such a sophisticated crime really; its just a matter of finding a victim and confusing them enough so you can steal their money.

If it is simple from an economic point of view, though, prime bank fraud is quite interesting from a sociological and criminological perspective. Because although they are crooks and liars, prime bank fraudsters appear, as far as anyone can tell, to also be members of a worldwide community of true believers. They often end up reinvesting the proceeds of their own prime bank frauds into other peoples prime bank frauds, and participating in the setup phase of prime bank trading sessions that they have no direct commercial interest in. Under questioning when they get caught, lots of them appear to believe that the prime bank securities market does exist, and that although they have never traded on it, they are just on the point of getting the right introduction to do so. Rather than normal thieves, they see themselves as sophisticated financial operators who had unfortunately had to resort to crime in order to keep their prime bank trading business afloat, and who fully intend to repay their victims from the proceeds of the big deal that is just around the corner.

This is quite a case study for students of mass delusion and psychopathology. But its facilitated by the fact that money is odd stuff. The short description above of how prime bank trading works was garbage, but in all honesty a genuine description of how the Fed carries out monetary operations (particularly in the age of quantitative easing) wouldnt look all that much more comprehensible or less crooked. The Federal Reserve System does itself few favors with conspiracy theorists in many ways. Its not owned by thirteen wealthy families, or any of that nonsense, but its still true that each regional Fed does issue shares to the banks that it supervises, and until quite recently it used to pay a dividend on those shares. Now that the gold standard has been abolished, central banks can print money without limit, and on several occasions in history, they have abused this power. And the way that a money-printing hyperinflation works does have the same compound growth snowball property that is one of the characteristics of a Ponzi scheme. When someone (for example the late Congressman Henry Gonzlez, whose consistent calls to Audit the Fed still have a few pages on the Federal Reserve Boards website dedicated to refuting them) gets it into their head that the modern banking system is a fiction and a fraud, its annoyingly difficult to explain to them why they are wrong.

The thing to do is keep your mind on the simple underlying principle rather than any of the mechanics. Like a rocket ship, the principle is simple and the astonishing complexity is basically plumbing. As J. K. Galbraith said, the true nature of the process of creating money in a modern banking system is so simple that it repulses the mind. Theyre IOUs. Thats all they are. You and your friends might write a chit for twenty dollars, and thats what the banks do too. It seems like theyre different things, because you and your friend both intend at some point to swap the IOU for a twenty-dollar bill or a transfer into your bank account. But really, thats just swapping an IOU for another IOU, one that is nicer to have because its better printed and more people have heard of the issuer. Because money is just IOUs, there doesnt need to be any secret method for creating it. You feel like there ought to be but theres not. When a bank makes a loan, it doesnt need to borrow deposits first, because putting the loan proceeds into the borrowers bank account is just a matter of telling the borrowers bank I owe you. The system works on a version of trust thats so ubiquitous that its almost impossible to break. Almost 1. The US regulatory authorities had not formed the Securities and Exchange Commission by this point, so Ponzi was not attempting to pass himself off as something he was not.

2. According to him, that is. His autobiography, The Rise of Mr. Ponzi, written while in jail after the collapse of the scheme, is a unique insight into the psychology of a man who always has a reason why nothing was his fault. Even when giving literally true descriptions of actions that were obviously crooked, he always claims he was acting honestly. For this reason if no other, none of the factual assertions in the book should be treated as necessarily true, and many of them, including this anecdote, do not appear in other histories.

3. The thrift of Bostonians was the subject of a bawdy joke of the late nineteenth century in which Maud meets Sally walking through an ill-reputed area of town, the punch line of which is My dear, it was this or dip into capital!

4. Or something even more romantic. In the early chapters of Moby-Dick it is noted that the ownership structure of the Pequod includes a crowd of old annuitants; widows, fatherless children and chancery wards, each owning about the value of a timber head, or a foot of plank or a nail or two. German ladies of the same class might aspire to own a little factory as a dowry or to provide pin money.

5. In other words, there was to be no dipping into capital. Bostonians really had a thing about that. But of course, at that rate of interest, the capital proportion of any given account would be modest relative to the accrued interest after even a couple of years, so this was less of a protection against a run on the bank than one might think.

6. Hokey names for the levels of the pyramids tend to be a feature. The Original Dinner Party saw you move from salad to dessert. The World of Giving had sowers, gardeners, reapers, and harvesters. In general, the levels ought to be called sucker, recruiter, extra degree of separation, and fraudster.

7. Not to be too smug, though, here, reader. Women Empowering Women ran like wildfire through early forms of social media in the 2000s, targeting professional women or those able to start off their pyramid-scheme membership with a $5,000 donation. Although poor churchgoers and dementia patients are more frequent victims, no social class or affinity group seems to be immune. As an aside, someone originated Women Empowering Women, and by a quick calculation probably made about half a million dollars from doing so. A bitter congratulations to her; as well as being (most likely) one of a very small number of women among our villains, she is the only fraudster in this book to have escaped detection. Her creation ran away from her and has caused untold misery (and, to be fair, quite a few episodes of five-figure joy) across the developed world.

8. I anticipate that this is the one of my many oversimplifications that readers will be least upset about.

9. Big and sometimes important exception to this generally valid point: houses, which do last a long time. Buying a house with a mortgage is an important form of retirement saving. And its got some very attractive properties as a retirement-savings instrument, because the value of a house is going to be closely related to one of your biggest expenses in retirement: housing.

10. It could, and some people have proposed it should, buy shares in private-sector businesses. This wouldnt really change the economics, though; it would just give the trust fund a potentially remunerative hobby.

11. The fourth category of good, but look bad is really very small indeed. It used to be possible to make a good living out of the lending business of people who were good, but a different race from the bankers, and there are companies that specialize in the small but lucrative niche of good, but without a credit file of exactly the right type to be scored automatically. But in general, I have looked over the business plans of lots of fresh-faced technology types who proposed to use artificial intelligence and Big Data to disrupt the banking industry, and most of them were wasting their time because they thought this category was bigger than it is.

12. This one is still being marketed, and there are even some ostrich investment schemes that are not covers for a Ponzi, albeit that I am not aware of any that have really made anyone rich. I was once nearly made responsible for the regulation of ostrich-meat investment schemes in England and Wales, one of the early signs that my civil service career was not on the fast track.

13. And draconian it is. For example, your First Amendment rights dont extend to making optimistic claims about profitability if youre marketing securities and there are a lot of strict liability offenses where you can be found guilty of a crime even if everyone accepts the fact that your intentions werent dishonest. There are a lot of costs associated with securities regulation that it wouldnt be viable to bear in any other industry that wasnt so insanely profitable when you get it right.

14. Or at least, people who claimed they were. Guy Lawson, in his excellent book on the case, records the fact that it was difficult to establish whether Robert Booth Nichols, Sams associate and occasional business partner, was a high-level deep-cover agent or a fantasist and con man. A look at the history of the CIA reveals that these are not necessarily mutually exclusive categories.

15. Or more charitably, businesses that are sophisticated in other things than the global financial system. Edward Heerema of Allseas corporation put the $100 million he had raised as seed capital into a prime bank fraud in 2011, thinking it would be multiplied so many times he would not need outside investment. The fraudsters (Paul Sultana and Luis Nobre) miscalculated, though, not understanding that someone who has the determination to build the worlds biggest ship might also have the determination to finance a private prosecution of a complicated case that the authorities had given up on, simply because he felt disrespected.

Chapter 5: Counterfeits The habit does not make the monk.

Franois Rabelais The Portuguese Banknote Affair When one thinks of counterfeiting, the first commodity that comes to mind is banknotes, with designer jeans possibly a distant second. What exactly is the nature of the deceit when counterfeit money is created and passed? The important thing is not the simulation of a physical object; its the claim that it is an authentic product. An exact copy of a van Gogh painting would still be a fake if you claimed that it was by van Gogh, and a pair of Lacoste jeans are still deemed to be counterfeit even if they have been run off from the same cloth and patterns and by the same workers in a subcontractors factory.

Similarly, even a perfect forgery of a banknote produced on the monetary authoritys own presses would still be a forgery, if it hadnt been produced with the permission of the central bank in question. This has actually happened on a few occasions, most notably in one of the most macroeconomically and politically significant frauds ever. This was the Portuguese Banknote Affair of 1925, the culmination of the short but insanely ambitious career of Artur Virglio Alves dos Reis.

Both Alves dos Reis and the country of Portugal were in tough economic straits at the beginning of the Roaring Twenties. Portugal had resorted to printing money to finance its government deficit after the Great War, and had changed the constitution of the Bank of Portugal to make this possible. The Bank of Portugal, for its part, had not been able to keep up with investment in modern anticounterfeiting technology (like serial numbers) and had outsourced all of its note printing to the English firm of Waterlow & Sons.1 Artur, on the other hand, had been forced to seek his fortune in Angola after his familys fortune had been lost.

He decided to take a Portuguese university diploma, copy it, attribute it to the Oxford University Polytechnic School of Engineering, and give himself qualifications in engineering, geology, geometry, physics, metallurgy, mathematics, palaeography, chemistry, mechanics, and civil design. As well as teaching him that Portuguese notaries would stamp anything, this helped him get a job as chief engineer of Angolas railway system. Despite the fact that his degree was a fake, Alves dos Reis managed to teach himself enough engineering on the job to avoid disaster, and returned to his homeland in 1923 with a little money of his own and a good reputation.

Neither lasted long. He had ambitions to enter the world of high finance, but the way he went about a hostile takeover of a company called Ambaca led instead to the world of jail. While inside, he concentrated on reading improving booksnot the Bible or Shakespeare, but the statutes relating to the Bank of Portugal.

A number of features of the 1920s Portuguese monetary system came together to create the conditions for what happened next. First, the Bank of Portugal, despite having the monopoly on printing escudo banknotes, was a private company with shareholders (this was not unusual; so was the Bank of England until it was nationalized in 1945, and the Federal Reserve still nominally is2). Second, the currency used in Angola was the Angolan escudo, worth one-tenth of a Portuguese escudo. But the Angolan escudo banknotes were simply escudo notes, with the word Angola overstamped on them. Fourth, there was no systematic checking of the serial numbers of escudo notes in circulation. And finally, the Portuguese government and the Bank of Portugal were in the habit of occasionally authorizing secret issues of banknotes for purposes they felt would be politically unpopular.

When combined with the fact that, as Artur already knew, Portuguese notaries of the day would stamp nearly anything, these details could be put together to form a plan. He forged a contract, on a reasonable simulacrum of government letterhead, and had it notarized four or five times. This contract said, in summary, that the governor of the Bank of Portugal had deputized Artur Alves dos Reis to put together a syndicate of investors to make a loan to Angola, with the investors to be compensated by being given the right to print the equivalent of $5 million in Angolan escudos. He took his fake contract to the Portuguese minister to the Netherlands, explaining that the Angola loan was a secret, that the governor didnt want his shareholders to know about it, and that for this reason, Artur needed some friends with money and official Portuguese letterhead who could help him get the notes printed. By luck or design, the minister was a crook anyway, so whether he was convinced by the story or by the promised commissions, he assembled a consortium.

This consortium approached Sir William Waterlow, whose suspicions were immediately raised. For such a transaction, he would obviously need the personal authorization of the governor of the Bank of Portugal. Unaccountably, though, rather than contacting the Bank of Portugal himself, Waterlow asked the consortium to provide him with a personal letter. Back it cameanother Alves dos Reis forgery.3 Finally, there was the issue of serial numbers.

Artur had persuaded his backers to make him a large cash advance so that he could go through dozens of 500-escudo notes and reverse-engineer the format of Portuguese banknote serial numbers. He did a pretty good job, but was unlucky in not having a copy of the master list of serial numbers that was kept by Waterlow & Sons. Some of the numbers he requested would already be in use. But he thought quickly; since these notes would only circulate in Angola, this was not a problem! Waterlow accepted this excuse and got on with printing. Of course, Alves dos Reis had no intention at all of stamping his notes and decimating their value; he relied on the lack of systematic checking to ensure that duplicates would not be detected.

As the notes were sent back to Lisbon and spent (introducing them to the system via a small army of backstreet money changers, known as zangoes, or drones), all hell broke loose. The sum of counterfeit money totaled slightly less than 1 percent of Portuguese GDP. There was a miniboom. The members of Alves dos Reiss syndicate never seemed to ask why the loan to Angola didnt happen, but they were happy enough when the banknotes were split four ways. And Alves dos Reis went on to even greater ideas.

Recall that the Bank of Portugal was the only entity that would be in a position to check up on fake banknotes. And that it was a private company with shareholders. And Artur Alves dos Reis was now a man with his own bank (the Bank of Angola and Metropole, founded with fake money) and sudden unbelievable riches. It was almost the logical thing to dotry to take over control of the Bank of Portugals shares and become its governor, thus ensuring that the fraud could never be detected.

Obviously, this sort of thing leads to gossip. The Bank of Portugal was doing its best to quell rumors of its ownthe sudden explosion of activity among the drones had immediately caused people to think the country was being flooded with forged notes, possibly as an act of foreign aggression. The Bank of Portugal, though, wanted to maintain confidence in the currency, and so kept testing for suspect notes, naturally finding that all of the notes in circulation in Lisbon were genuine stock, printed in England by Waterlow & Sons.

It was pure coincidence that the scam was found out. Hostile rumors were spread in the newspapers about the Bank of Angola and Metropole by people who feared its bid for the central bank. Media pressure then forced the authorities to inspect the notes in Arturs vaults. While confirming them to be genuine, the inspector happened to find two notes with the same serial numbersa genuine one had been stacked next to its twin. Once he knew what to look for, it was not too difficult to find more pairs. Alves dos Reis was off to prison, where this time he did start reading the Bible.

Inflation took off as confidence in the currency slumped. The Bank of Portugal ended up having to recall all 500-escudo notes and swap them for 1,000-escudo notes. The army staged a coup, and brought in the Estado Novo dictatorship, which ruled Portugal until 1974. For most of this time, the country was ruled by an economics professor, Antnio Salazar, who must have occasionally pondered the series of events that brought him to power.

The Portuguese Banknote Affair remains one of the most tragic cases in which the weak link in a high-trust society (in this case, notaries) ended up pulling down the whole structure of trust itself. In 1955, Alves dos Reis got an obituary in the Economist saying that his scheme had been good for Portugal on Keynesian principles, which probably ranks as one of the stupidest things that newspaper has ever printed.

A banknote, of course, is an unusual thing because it certifies nothing but itself. For this reason, banknote counterfeiting is something of a closed loop; once the paper is created, the crime is complete. Its more typical for a fraud of this kind to involve the exploitation of a wider system of trust, one in which pieces of paper or similar delegated authorities are used to certify something else, like the value of a gold deposit in the ground.

The Bre-X Mining Fraud Theres something about the mining industry, particularly in precious metals, that attracts crooks. On the one hand, the lure of a literal gold mine is often enough to make investors switch off their critical faculties. On the other side of the equation, even a basically honest miner is quite capable of deceiving himself that the mother lode is only a few more meters of drilling away, and this can often shade into the telling of white lies to backers to raise the money for a few more holes. A popular joke on the Vancouver Stock Exchange4 used to define a mine as a hole in the ground with a liar at the top of it.

And mining is a sector of the economy in which standards of honesty are variable but the requirement for capital is large, and you can keep raising money for a long time before you have to show results. Unsurprisingly, its a magnet for people who, whether or not they started honest but deluded, end up as stock-exchange fraudsters.

In the old days, what you used to do was to get a shotgun cartridge and remove all the shot. You then filled the cartridge with gold dust, took it down to the site of your mine, loaded it into a shotgun, pointed it at some rocks, and pulled the trigger. Then you picked up the rocks you had shot at and sent them off to be crushed and assayed. Lo and behold, the results would come back from the laboratory saying that the rock samples from your mine were shot through with flecks of metallic gold. You then took this assay report (signed by a reputable mining chemist at a well-regarded lab) and went to investors to start the real process of getting rich. It was known as salting a mine.

In the modern era, however well, the process is really not all that much more sophisticated than it was in the Gold Rush of 1849. Now as then, the key input to the process of carrying out a mining fraud is the manipulation of assay reports and geologists studies, and the way that you do it is still to introduce gold from somewhere else into a sample taken from under the ground. Since a few micrograms in a sample will give you an assay report of five grams per ton, which is eminently commercially exploitable, it can be as simple as taking a file to a wedding ring.

There have been some improvements to the process since the nineteenth century. There are standard procedures for taking samples, and for logging the time and place at which they are sealed and placed into (hopefully) tamper-proof bags. It is considered good practice to split a drill core down its length, allowing a second set of tests to be carried out at a later date. And geologists and assay labs have become professionalized and regulated. But it still remains the case that if you can find a crooked geologist, and if your fake mine is remote enough to make inspections unfeasible, you can get away with a lot. As recently as 1997, a more or less valueless hole in the ground in Indonesia was valued by Canadian investors at $12 billion, on the basis of reports that seemed to suggest that it was the largest gold discovery in the history of the world.

The Busang mine in Kalimantan, Borneo, and Bre-X, the company that claimed to have discovered it, was the largest mining fraud recorded to date, and it offers a classic case study in how this form of counterfeiting works. Michael de Guzman, an ambitious geologist down on his luck, was hired by David Walsh, a nearly penniless stock promoter working out of the basement of his foreclosed house. Somehow, they managed to raise enough money to hire equipment and drill holes deep in the Borneo jungle. Under Guzmans strict personal supervision, the drill cores were logged and sealed (but, controversially, not split) and then sent off for assay.

There was gold in the groundeverybody agrees about that. The local villagers sometimes supplemented their income by panning for gold in the rivers. But every other mining firm to have staked a claim in Kalimantan ended up concluding that there was not enough gold in the rock to make a commercially viable mine and that the really valuable mineral rights were elsewhere. Thats why, of course, the rights to the Busang region were selling cheaply enough to have been picked up by a nearly bankrupt Canadian promoter.

Mike de Guzman had his own theories, though; among mining geologists he was known as an expert in diatremesquartz formations like inverted funnels that can go very deep into the ground and contain rich veins of gold. At some point shortly after his being hired by Walsh, he developed a strong belief that the Busang claim was exactly such a diatreme. He wrote academic-sounding papers on it and gave presentations at mining conferences. (This is normal behavior, by the way, for the geological staff of small mining companies. It is part of the capital-raising process and by no means evidence of dishonesty in and of itself. Like the pool hall next to a saloon, however, geological presentations at investor conferences are often places where trouble starts.) The market for Bre-X stock really heated up, however, when the assay data came back from de Guzmans drill cores. They showed very high percentages of gold in the rock, once it was crushed and heated. The Bre-X investor presentations started to use a couple of new slidesmicroscope photographs taken of the crushed rock, clearly showing the smooth metallic-gold micronuggets.

Readers with a background in geology might note at this stage that when you find gold in rock, it doesnt come in smooth nuggets. You find smooth gold nuggets if it has been acted on and eroded by running water (alluvial gold). For example, you might find smooth nuggets if you had bought your gold dust from the villagers panning for it downstream from the Busang claim, and added it to the drill cores manually.

This was, however, pretty much the only slipup that Bre-X made in what was otherwise a textbook mining scam. The key to any kind of certification fraud is to exploit the weakest link in the chain; in this case, the initial logging and sealing of the drill cores, which took place at a remote mining camp high up in the Indonesian jungle, where the only people present were either laborers or very junior geologists hired by de Guzman personally and intimidated by him. Once the core samples had been tampered with, there was no further opportunity for the fraud to be detected, and the process leading to an objective, reputable third-party certification of utterly fraudulent gold reserves was as certain and inexorable as the path from the rock crusher to the forge itself. Analysts and investors back in Canada believed that the Bre-X data had been analyzed by three separate independent consultants, without realizing that none of the three had access to anything but the fraudulent data prepared by Bre-X.

Gaps like thisbetween the facts that a certification authority can actually make sure of, and those that it is generally assumed it canare the making of a counterfeit fraud. Having gotten one set of facts certified, the crook immediately promotes his operation as if the whole thing had a seal of approval. And this is exactly what Bre-X did, with spectacular success; while they never made specific claims about reserves, which would be a specific technical claim that someone would want to audit, Guzman and his boss, John Felderhof, were keen on making public estimates of the size of the Busang deposit, which, if true, would have implied it was the biggest gold mine in the world. For a while, it was the ultimate penny-stock fairy story, as the share price5 climbed from pennies to over $264 on a split-adjusted basis, and hundreds of Canadian stockbrokers and investors got rich.

However, in the end, discovery was inevitable. The Indonesian government demanded that Bre-X develop the mine rather than just drilling assay holes and issuing stock-market press releases. They were totally incapable of this, and so were forced into a joint venture with an established mining company. This company (Freeport-McMoRan) wanted to drill its own holes to be sure of the ore body. On his way to a meeting called at Busang to discuss the fact that Freeports drill cores had come up gold-free, Michael de Guzman fell out of a helicopter, in circumstances that have never been satisfactorily explained. He later had to be identified by dental records; wild pigs discovered the body before investigators did. Bre-X stock certificates can still be bought in novelty shops in Toronto as souvenirs, having largely got there from middle-class Canadian households who got caught up in the mania and lost a proportion of their savings.

Mining for investors It is not too difficult to generalize the concept of a mining fraud to other industries, because the only real mining involved is the act of digging deep into someone elses pocket. The central structure of the scam is that you take an industry in which a big up-front investment is needed in order to earn rewards at a later datethe crucial dimension of time that defines the commercial fraud as compared to other kinds of theft. Then you recruit outside investors to pay that cash, and divert the cash to yourself rather than investing it in the project. The counterfeit is the keystone of the fraud as it provides the reason for the victims to transfer the cash.

The recent case of a company called Theranos, for example, looks for all the world like a mining fraud, but one that was carried out in the health-care sector. As we saw in Chapter 3, health-care frauds are usually cash-positive, as they generate large revenues in the form of insurance payments, while accruing minimal costs because the treatments provided are fictional. But Theranos was a case in which the provision of fraudulent treatment (although this did take place to a small extent) was incidental to the main project of bringing in cash from investors.

The value proposition of the company was simple enough; its founder, Elizabeth Holmes, had a vision of a device that could perform diagnostic tests automatically on a single drop of blood. This would allow people to walk into clinics that used its machines, subject themselves to a mere pinprick (rather than needing a syringe full of blood to be drawn by a phlebotomist), and get their test results almost instantly. Diseases would be detected earlier, people would be better informed, and health care would be revolutionized, obviously at huge profit for the inventors of the device.

It was never going to work, though; there were in fact layers of reasons why the Theranos plan was a chimera. Fairly simple mathematics shows that a single drop of blood does not provide enough volume to give an accurate sample; when you are testing for marker chemicals that are present only in very small concentrations, you need to have a large enough sample to be sure that the variation from normal levels is medically important rather than just chance. Lots of people who went into the trial clinics that Theranos set up with the Walgreens pharmacy chain got told that they had potential heart problems, when in fact all that had happened is that the normal variation in a tiny blood sample had been multiplied up many times.

However, Theranos could only reach the insoluble statistical problem if it could first get past an equally insoluble fluid dynamics problem. The central lab-on-a-chip concept depended on having the droplet of blood flow down a couple of dozen microscopic channels, each one having a different chemical sensor built into it. But blood just doesnt flow that way. You can make it do so by diluting it with water, but when you do that you are making the chemical sensors job much more difficult. In the prototype version of Theranoss machine (called Edison by the founders, with typical modesty), this problem was solved by requiring a normal syringe-sized blood sample from the patient, then using a robot arm (sold for industrial gluing purposes) with a pipette attached to it to divide it up into a dozen or so subsamples that were then dropped (by the same robot arm) onto commercially available blood test chips made by other manufacturers. The samples created in this way were too small for the commercial chips, so the machine gave bad results. But even if it hadnt, one does not have to be a purist to think that a toy robot with an eyedropper stuck onto it should not be the basis of any $10 billion valuations.

Silicon Valley, though, has a complicated relationship with fake demos. If you were a steely-eyed fraud detector who could detect bullshit at a glance, your record as a tech investor would have been well, youd have to have made a lot of really good choices to offset the fact that the rule dont deal with people who fake demos would have kept you out of all the biggest success stories. Even Microsoft, for example, put together a demo of their Interface Manager software (later to be renamed Windows) in April 1983, which was meant to show off the programs ability to display applications overlapping each other, rather than working in discrete tiles. The problem was that the code underlying the demo did nothing other than display the graphics used in the demo; there was no functional windowing system at that stage. This smoke and mirrors approach seems to make an appearance in nearly every biography of any of the tech giants, and it is not always apparent that the authors understand that faking a nonexistent technology in order to attract sales or investors is pretty much the same thing as salting a gold assay. The mistake Theranos made was to set up at the interface between a culture that tolerates faking it until you make it in the name of fast progress, and the heavily regulated medical industry. When peoples health is at stake, higher standards of quality and transparency are generally required.

Having said that, the usual method of biotech fraud is to exploit the regulations themselves. The definition of a biotech company, as opposed to a pharmaceutical company, is really one of maturitya biotech is a pharmaceutical research and manufacturing company most of whose intellectual property is in drugs that have not yet been approved for use by the public. This means they have the classic gold-mine profile, as they have to keep raising money to finance their research and to pay for the extensive testing required to demonstrate that their drug is safe and efficacious. If enough of this effort is put in, and with good luck, approval will be given by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and a figurative pot of gold is uncovered.

The equivalents of geological assay in the biotech field are the various rounds of tests required and their results. A particular kind of investor (doctors are notoriously good markets for biotech-stock promoters) gets a gamblers adrenaline rush from buying stock in a tiny company with a few drugs in testing, in the hope of seeing their value increase massively if and when favorable results come back. But its not particularly common for test results, particularly in the early stages, to give absolutely unambiguous positive or negative results. And the results themselves are potentially quite difficult to interpret, even for trained professionals. Which means that its all too common for biotech companies to cross the line between spin and dishonesty in communicating the results of testing to the stock market. The temptation to do so is particularly great when the companies need to issue more stock.

You can really get a sense of how difficult medicine is by looking through the documentation of securities regulators judgments against biotech companies. In the 1990s, British Biotech,6 for example, was at the very earliest stages of testing an anticancer drug called marimastat. It filed plans with the FDA saying that it intended to test marimastat on cancer patients, and to measure its progress in reducing their tumors by monitoring levels of cancer antigens in their blood. The FDAs immediate response was to say that you cannot measure tumor size by counting antigen levels, they are not closely enough correlated in that way, and that it would only accept data based on actual measurements of the tumors.

However, the FDA does not actually ban you from doing a trial it considers to be worthless (unless its also dangerous), and so British Biotech went ahead. It then commenced to send out a stream of positive-sounding press releases about how well the antigen-level trials were going, omitting to mention in any of them that so far as getting closer to an approved drug, they might as well not have bothered. The company ended up getting in serious trouble with the securities regulators, as it was felt that the investing public should not be expected to know quite so much about the FDAs views on antigens. The drug itself was eventually approved, but the company has long since disappeared into the chain of mergers that characterizes the biotech sector.

An almost exactly similar case showed up ten years later when AVEO Pharmaceuticals Inc. decided that its press releases relating to another cancer drug called tivozanib should accentuate the positive rather than lingering on the fact that the FDA was demanding a second clinical trial to address their concerns about patient death rates during the first trial. In the period between hearing this bad news and sharing it with the stock market, AVEO sold $53 million of shares to the public. The company later paid a $4 million fine in a civil fraud case, neither admitting nor denying culpability. Underlining the pitfalls in this industry, the drug itself was rejected outright by the FDA with the trials described as impossible to interpret, but later approved in Europe on the basis of the same evidence.

On the other hand, misrepresenting the results of drug approval tests to your investors is comparatively mild. Well see pretty soon that its possible to commit acts of fraud against the approval system itself, with disastrous consequences. But first lets think a bit more closely about what the type of fraud we call counterfeiting is really all about.

Circles of trust Think back to the hedge-fund frauds of the last chapter. The value of a crooked auditor is that he can sign off on a crooked set of accounts. All accountants (like Bernie Madoffs sidekick Frank DiPascali) can provide useful technical advice on how to hide your theft by creating difficult-to-check receivables balances to disguise the withdrawals. But an experienced fraudster is usually capable of working out that sort of thing for himself. What you cant do for yourself is create a valid set of audited accounts to present to investors, creditors, and the general public.

The professional qualifications and memberships of lawyers, doctors, accountants, and actuaries give them a special status in the business world. Certain kinds of documents are only valid with an accountants seal of approval, and once they have gained this seal of validity, they are taken as audited accounts, which are much less likely to be subjected to additional verification or checking. Similarly, a document drafted by a qualified lawyer and stamped by a notary is more likely to be presumed valid than one drafted by a layman, even on matters where technical legal expertise is less relevant than simple checking of facts (like, for example, whether the person selling a piece of land is actually the owner).

What is going on here, of course, is that these professions are considered to be circles of trust. The idea is partly that the long training and apprenticeship processes of the professions ought to develop values of trust and honesty, and weed out candidates who do not possess them. And it is partly that professional status is a valuable asset for the person who possesses it, which can be taken away with a stroke of the pen by a disciplinary tribunal. So the sum of money needed to corrupt a professional is significantly larger than that needed to corrupt a layman; as well as compensating for the risk of being caught and paying the normal penalty, a professional needs to be compensated for the risk of losing his or her professional status, and the lifetime stream of earnings that would otherwise derive from it. If we presume that the premium earned by someone with a professional qualification over the same person without that status is in the order of tens of thousands, and that the duration of a professional career is around twenty-five years, it is not difficult to see that the majority of lawyers and accountants, even if they have no moral sense at all and are looking for opportunities for corruption, are not necessarily going to find it worth their while to get involved in a fraud in which their share of the proceeds is less than about a million dollars.

Another way into the circle of trust, of course, is through an affinity group, as we saw with pyramid schemes. In principle, the economics of this ought to work; the more socially connected you are to a person, the more interests and ties you share, and the more costly it would be for that person to rip you off. This is how the Greek side of the Canadian Paradox works; as well as doing deals with handshakes over brandy, Greek shipowners know each other well, see each other every day, and marry into one anothers families. If one of them were to treat another one sufficiently badly, he would lose his business career and social life all at a stroke. The danger arises because people can identify with affinity groups even when the actual commonality of interest is pretty weak. There was no real reason for Bostons Italians to trust Charles Ponzi just because of his second name. And although the widows and spinsters of Boston might have identified with Sarah Howe, they really had nothing in common with her but their marital status and gender.

In many ways, part of the explanation why Californian venture capitalists are so relaxed about fake demos is that their main filter to weed out frauds and flakes is more like an affinity network than anything else. The big investors tend to know each other, socialize with one another, and work together on all sorts of different deals, and so a start-up company that manages to establish a relationship with one of them will quickly be brought into the circle of trust of many more. This mechanism seems to broadly work in an environment that is much more focused on huge wins than small losses, although the example of Theranos does seem to show that once a bad apple is inside the loop, there are very few further controls; several prominent Silicon Valley investors embarrassed themselves by writing publicly in support of Elizabeth Holmes and criticizing naysayers like John Carreyrou of the Wall Street Journal who were instrumental in exposing her.

And as with accounting, so with all the other types of counterfeit. Even in cases of straightforward banknote forgery, the deep structure of the crime is an attack on the certification systemthe presentation of something as having had a particular provenance and origin when it was actually produced in some other, cheaper, or less honest way. One of the parts of the economy that has taken the most time and trouble over issues of certification, monitoring, and verification of claims of authenticity is the pharmaceutical and medical industry. And because we know that fraud is an equilibrium phenomenon, we can guess that one reason why so much trouble has been taken to build a robust system of certification is that the industry has a lot of potential fraud. This turns out to be true. In fact, one could say that there are two main kinds of medical fraud: frauds carried out against the medical industry, and frauds carried out by the medical industry. It is not obvious which is the more serious problem.

Both sides of the pharmaceutical-fraud problem, however, are facilitated by the fact that certification is supposed to be a onetime process. As with a notary or other professional, one of the roles of a professional is to provide assurance and trust to other parties, so that checking effort does not need to be duplicated. For this reason, strong social norms exist against questioning or second-guessing the judgment or opinions of professionals. When these social norms get intermingled with all the emotional and cultural baggage that is inevitably attached to the concepts of sickness and disease, the end result is a very powerful collective mental block.

One of the reasons why fraud controls were not properly built into the Medicare system, for example, was exactly this issuenobody wants to say or imply that they dont trust doctors. The Medicare program had tough political ground to tread, and inserting its cost-control bureaucrats into the doctorpatient relationship would certainly have made things worse. The relatively low social status of claims administrators compared to doctors made sure that it was difficult to get the paperwork submitted on a timely and orderly basis even from honest professionals. This, in turn, fed into a culture in which all anomalies tended to be deemed administrative errors or mistakes and the paperwork was sent back to the submitting care provider for rectification. This was a disastrous policy, as it facilitated the shotgun/rifle methodology described on page 60 and turned the claims administration process into a training program for fraudsters.

The culture of deference would have been bad enough, but in practice, the special consideration and trust in doctors got extended to any and all providers to the system. While medical professionals make good gatekeepersthey have a long qualification period, a strong ethical code, and a lot to lose if caught in a dishonest actthere is no Hippocratic oath binding the proprietors of medical-device firms, wheelchair dealers, or the managers of assisted-living facilities for the elderly. And this kind of company (where it was entirely possible for a convicted felon to set up a new company and register it as an approved provider to the Medicare program with only a few cursory checks) ended up being given the same gatekeeper status as a hospital or GP practice; anything that originated from them was already past the front line of defense. This is how Medicare ended up losing as much as a third of its program spending in fraud. And then things got really bad.

Drug counterfeiting When the pop legend Prince died, one of the things found near him was a bottle of generic Vicodin painkiller tablets. These tablets were counterfeits; they contained fentanyl, a synthetic opioid many times stronger than morphine. At its worst, the counterfeiting of pharmaceutical products is a crime of violence, in which vulnerable patients are deceived into putting substances into their bodies without informed consent about what they are doing.

The incentive to commit the crime comes from the fact that all the value in the medicine industry is tied up in the certification system. The manufacturing of pharmaceutical products is difficult and competitive, and as a result profitability is always under pressure. The bit of the system where the money is made is right at the end of the journey from molecule to patient, where a large markup over the cost of manufacture can be made, either because there is a strong brand or patent protection. As a result, there is always a temptation for someone who can manufacture pills, and has no brands or patents of their own, to fake someone elses.

We can note once more that the crime of drug counterfeiting is essentially an attack on the certification system; even if the counterfeit is chemically identical to the real drug, there is still a diversion of profits from what was intended by the patent system, and the fake drug is still fake. The thing is, the certification system for pharmaceuticals is also a safety system. A counterfeit manufacturer cannot be subject to the same audit requirements and checks on manufacturing processes and purity of ingredients, because all the authorities that might be able to certify these elements of the manufacture are also part of the system that underpins the patent. And once the step into criminality has been made, you tend to be dealing with the kind of person who might introduce fentanyl into a pill that was only meant to contain hydrocodone simply because they dont care and are a bastard.

The battle against counterfeit drugs is also a case study of the problems in trying to create a zero-fraud system. The pharmaceutical industry has expended more effort than practically any other in building mechanisms to track products from the start of the process to the end, often at significant inconvenience to itself. Medical wholesalers, for example, used to manage their inventories of drugs by trading with each other on the gray market. This was quite important to the business model, particularly since drugs are perishable products that cannot be kept forever. But the gray market was such a conduit for fake drugs (particularly since, in states like Florida, a criminal record for fraud or even narcotics addiction was no barrier to being licensed as a wholesaler) that it ended up being regulated down to a fraction of its former size.

And yet fraud creeps back in. The track and trace systems that have been mandated in more and more markets over the last decade have ensured that randomized serial numbers are applied to every packet of pills, and each link in the supply chain keeps an audit record when an item changes hands. In principle, this ought to make it impossible for fake drugs to enter the market.

In practice, what happened is what we might have expected from the original insight that fraud is an equilibrium quantity; as the audited chain has become more inconvenient, it has become less relevant. The majority of counterfeit pharmaceuticals bought in the developed world are now sold through unlicensed internet pharmacies. Its quite possible for people to become the victims of a darknet exit fraud while trying to commit a counterfeit-drug fraud. As the Ghanaian proverb has it, When a thief thieves a thief, God laughs.

And the track-and-trace system cannot protect against counterfeiting when it is carried out by people within the circle of trust. Ranbaxy Laboratories, for example, pleaded guilty in 2013 to seven criminal charges relating to the generic drugs it manufactured for sale in the USA and worldwide. The company was in the habit of using substandard ingredients and manufacturing processes, and then faking quality-control test results by buying boxes of its competitors branded product to submit to the lab.

Vioxx Ranbaxys frauds were an extreme case (although apparently not so extreme as to throw it out of the circle of trust entirely; under new management, it still exists and produces drugs today). However, pharmaceutical fraud is not restricted to minor or marginal players; it has been seen at the highest levels and from people and companies whose reputations were previously spotless. The Merck companys drug Vioxx (the brand name chosen for the compound known to pharmacologists as rofecoxib7) had already been through the US Food and Drug Administration process and had been approved for prescription as a painkiller when the trouble started.

It was initially approved in May 1999 for the treatment of osteoarthritis and of severe menstrual pain, but its manufacturers had ongoing research programs aiming to demonstrate wider benefits. One of them was a test of whether it could help sufferers from Alzheimers disease; another was a very large study aiming to show that it had fewer gastrointestinal side effects than a competing drug for rheumatoid arthritis (naproxen). The Vioxx Gastrointestinal Outcomes Research study (VIGOR) had eight thousand patients in total, half taking Vioxx and half taking the other drug.

Early on in the study, there were two stock-taking meetings among the researchers on the project and two key findings. First, the Vioxx patients were indeed suffering fewer ulcers and less bleeding. But second, they were suffering serious (including deadly) heart problems at twice the rate. This clearly posed a scientific and ethical problem, but not one with an obvious solutionit could have been that the alternative drug naproxen was lowering the risk of heart attacks, or the data could have been a fluke. It was decided to carry on with the trial, but to add a data analysis of heart symptoms. For reasons best known to themselves, the researchers decided that they would analyze data on heart attacks if they happened before the end of February, but gastrointestinal symptoms up to the end of the study, a month later. This meant that the eventual paper they published in the New England Journal of Medicine overstated the benefits of Vioxx and understated the risks.

This practice had become standard at Merck. Vioxx was aggressively marketed as a super-aspirin bringing new life to sufferers from arthritis. Mercks sales force was highly trained in rebuttals to concerns about cardiac side effects (the sales training team even produced a science-fiction cartoon series featuring V-Man, a superhero who battled Vioxx doubters in outer space). Toward the end of the year, the FDA rebuked Merck for portraying their theories about the VIGOR study as if they were fact, and in general for their aggressive sales tactics with respect to cardiac risk.

Nevertheless, as the worrying evidence mounted, the drug stayed on the market. External statisticians analyzed data from a collection of Vioxx research and kept finding the same cardiac side effects. They also found three heart attacks in the VIGOR data that hadnt been included in the NEJM paper. Their study was criticized by Merck as inadequate in its analysis, and their recommendation for the company to carry out specific research into cardiac risks was ignored.

Merck continued to carry out studies to extend the range of conditions for which Vioxx could be prescribed, though, and so it almost incidentally continued to pile up evidence that it caused heart attacks. The Merck sales force received new and slicker rebuttal sheets, and were instructed not to bring up the growing controversies in discussions with doctors. The FDA required a change in the labeling on Vioxx to refer to the results of the VIGOR study, and point out that it had found an unknown level of riskthe sales force were instructed to emphasize the word unknown. An obstacle response document was provided, to support Project Offense, the sales drive to gain market share for Vioxx by concentrating on the intestinal benefits while minimizing the cardiological risks.

Finally, in 2004, the data from studies into whether Vioxx could be used to treat colon polyps and Alzheimers disease was the final straw. The control system at Merck had not broken down entirely, and the management of the Vioxx issue switched from trying to keep the drug on the market to minimizing the legal costs of the damage already caused. Vioxx was withdrawn from sale, and the litigation began. A later study estimated that, because Vioxx was such a successful drug in sales terms, in the five years that it was on sale it probably caused around eighty thousand patients to have heart attacks, some forty thousand of whom most likely died.

Partly as a result of this, many practices have been tightened since 2004, particularly with regard to the disclosure of conflicts of interest by medical researchers who also work as consultants to pharmaceutical manufacturers. But the broad shape of the Vioxx scandal is by no means a thing of the past. We can note here that there is no real smoking gun in terms of a specific act of counterfeiting, even though the company eventually settled and admitted criminal wrongdoing in its marketing practices. The lesson of Vioxx is that the concept of a crime against the certification systema counterfeit in the most generalized senseis a breach of an overall system of trust, not an isolated attack on a single victim like a long firm.

The trust in question in the pharmaceutical industry is that prescription drugs are the output of a process that is managed and regulated on a clinical and scientific basis rather than a commercial one. The patients who took Vioxx were entitled to assume that the company would behave in such a way as to take an objective, rather than optimistic, view of the clinical risks, and that it would communicate with prescribing doctors in a similar manner. Different histories of the Vioxx affair disagree on the extent to which the senior scientists at Merck understood the risks, or to which they were distracted by dreams of scientific glory resulting from discovering a new wonder drug. But what is clear from the admitted facts in successive court settlements is that the system of checks and balances broke down and scientifically unsupportable claims were made.

There is a tension here, given that the economy is organized on the basis that pharmaceuticals are produced by commercial companies, but that tension is exactly what the system is meant to manage. So the counterfeit item in the Vioxx case was not a drug, or a warning label, or even really a scientific paper. It was a counterfeited image of how business is carried out.

1. Banknote printing was, and still is, a competitive game. Waterlow & Sons had been around since 1810, but had missed out on the contract to print Bank of Poyais notes, which went to Perkins, Bacon & Co.

2. Nominally! The regional Feds are owned by the banks in their area. The shareholders have no rights of control anymore, though. Do not think on this subject too harda morbid interest in the technical workings of the Fed is often an early symptom of being a victim of prime bank guarantee fraud.

3. Central-bank governors signatures are not all that difficult to forge, because there tends to be a good-quality example on every banknote in circulation. Arturo used a pantograph to make it a bit bigger.

4. This was the one that Joe Queenan christened The Scam Capital of the World. It no longer exists, to the distinct relief of other Canadian stock exchanges, to which it was giving a bad name, as the ratio of fraudulent mining promotions to genuine companies grew excessive.

5. I am oversimplifying mightily once more. Bre-X had multiple classes of stock, and its relationship to the Busang project was definitely not one of simple ownershiplots of other companies claimed bits and pieces of ownership of the rights, there was a joint venture and the Indonesian government did its best to profit from ambiguity. This sort of confusion is often helpful to the fraudster in two ways. First, as we keep mentioning, the layers of complexity are likely to bore and baffle the jury in the eventual trial and make an acquittal more likely. And second, faced with a mound of confusing garbage, capital markets tend to simplify things down to a single overarching narrative. In this case, the narrative was Bre-X = Busang = Biggest Gold Mine in the World.

6. If there was to be declared a Vancouver of Biotech, the London Stock Exchanges Alternative Investment Market (AIM) would probably be it.

7. Decoding pharmaceutical names, and indeed distinguishing them from excerpts of Ella Fitzgerald scat solos, is something of a puzzle. In this case, coxib at the end identifies Vioxx as a cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor, part of a whole class of drugs. At the time, many of the worlds most respected researchers believed that cox-2 inhibitors were potentially wonder drugs that could be used for all manner of inflammatory conditions. A lot of the problem with Vioxx seems to have been that people fell in love with this theory and stopped doing their job of looking at the evidence as it piled up.

Chapter 6: Cooked Books Well thank you for that we appreciate it asshole.

Jeff Skilling, CEO of Enron, on being asked why his company could not produce a balance sheet There are many reasons one might want a crooked set of booksto present an image of financial soundness to the victim of a long firm, for example, or to pretend that a sum of money has been spent honestly rather than embezzled. But the most common one is that you want to show your crooked accounts to investors so that they give you money. For this reason, any discussion of accounting fraud needs to be put in the context of stock-market fraud, because one is usually the point of the other. With that in mind, heres how one steals money by lying to the stock market.

A public financial market provides the same service to liars that it provides to honest businessesit converts stories into cash. If you own a profitable enterprise in an economy with functioning stock markets, you hold a form of Supermoney, as the fund manager and author George Goodman noted in a book of that name. Super how? Not only does the business provide a steady stream of income; the stock market offers a way to acquire and spend years of future profits before you make them.

The first step is simply to sell a share in the company. A quick envelope calculation shows how it works. Pretend you own a sandwich business, which makes $1 million a year of profit. You want to buy a yacht that costs $5 million, but you dont want to save up and you dont want to go into debt. So you have a meeting with an investment banker, who tells you that, at present, stock-market investors are prepared to buy and sell shares in sandwich businesses at a price equivalent to fifteen times their annual earnings. Since you currently own all the shares in your business, you can consider yourself to own an asset worth $15 million. If you sell a third of your shares,1 you can buy the yacht. This will, of course, reduce your annual share of the profits to $660,000, but if you cant live on that much, you shouldnt have been buying the yacht.

In the very simple example, this looks almost offensively prosaic; it is hardly different from an even simpler case where you owned a building producing $1 million in rent and used it as collateral for a loan. And the extension to more exciting casesfor example, ones where your company has no earnings currently, but is assigned a stock-market valuation based on a small-percentage chance that it will one day dominate the online retail marketis not really much of an intellectual challenge either. The important abstract concept here is that the stock market capitalizes expectations of future profitsliterally, it is the place where claims on these expected future profits are exchanged for a capital sum. The story is turned into cash.

Which means, of course, that stock markets can also be the place where a lie gets turned into a fraud. If companies are trading at a multiple of fifteen times earnings, then every dollar of accounting overstatement is potentially directly convertible into fifteen dollars of cash.

In fact, this one-for-fifteen ratio of lies to profit would be the theoretical maximum. It would be hard, though not impossible, to sell all the shares in a fraudulent enterprise in a short enough period of time2 to keep the fraud alive. Your ability to convert accounting misstatement into profit is limited by how many shares you can sell to the public. But on the other hand, fake accounts are cheap to producea markup of only three dollars of cash to one dollar of fakery is still a fantastic return.

In principle, it is the institution of buying and selling shares in companies that converts the story into cash, rather than the stock market per se. You could carry out the example transaction with the sandwich shop by selling a stake in the business to a single investor, and its just as possible to tell lies to the private-equity industry3 as it is to the stock market. At the time of writing, if you want to convert a ludicrously false story about the internet into enough money to buy a yacht, private venture capital is probably the way to do it. But public markets have some advantages too.

The first is that the process of checking up on you is distributed across the market rather than being assigned as the responsibility of any one individual. And better than that, its distributed across a lot of individuals, most of whom have only a small stake in your story. Like a lot of other areas where counterfeiting frauds work, stock markets tend to operate on a certification basis; there is meant to be a lot of checking up (due diligence) at the first occasion on which you enter the market, but once youre in, youre in. Compared to the size of the potential opportunity for fraud, there is surprisingly little ongoing monitoring of companies that are already quoted on a stock market. The numbers that a company posts are, for the most part, treated as facts and it is very difficult to gainsay them from the outside.

This feature of public stock markets introduces the vital element of time into an investment fraud. If you are able to corrupt the initial due-diligence process and float a fake company, it is quite possible that it will survive, and continue to publish deceitful statements, for quite a while before it goes bust. And when the cash finally runs out and the company collapses, it will be significantly less likely for the initial fraud to be connected back to you. This was the version of securities fraud that marked the career of Jordan Belfort.

The founder of Stratton Oakmont called his autobiography The Wolf of Wall Street, presumably because Tales of a Parasite would not have been as good for sales. It is a memorably emetic book, full of simpering, sniggering self-aggrandizement and insincere contrition, and it starts with four consecutive chapters about a time he passed out on his front lawn from taking drugs. But it does contain one paragraph that partly redeems the rest of the book and that summarizes the business model of boiler room stockbroking: And what secret formula had Stratton discovered that allowed all these obscenely young kids to make such obscene amounts of money? For the most part it was based on two simple truths: first, that a majority of the richest 1 percent of Americans are closet degenerate gamblers, who cant withstand the temptation to keep rolling the dice again and again, even if they know the dice are loaded against them; and second, that contrary to previous assumptions, young men and women who possess the collective social graces of a herd of sex-crazed water buffalo and have an intelligence quotient in the range of Forrest Gump on three hits of acid can be taught to sound like Wall Street wizards, as long as you write every last word down for them and then keep drilling it into their heads again and againevery day, twice a dayfor a year straight.

The stereotypical Stratton Oakmont stock would be a flotation of a new company, in a fashionable industry like defense or high tech, which had either seriously overstated and fraudulent accounts, or no earnings at all but a story about a new product that was just about to launch. Stratton Oakmont would contract to sell shares in the company to the public, taking a significant proportion for themselves as payment for doing so. The shares owned by Stratton would usually have their ownership concealed to avoid the stock-exchange regulations on disclosing the owners of large stakes, with the front people used as nominal owners charmingly referred to as ratholes.

Once the company had been floated and had a stock-market quote, the second stage of the fraud would begin. Specialists in market manipulation would send the new issue sky-high, attracting interest from outside investors and allowing Stratton to sell the shares they had hidden in the ratholes. While the pump phase of the operation was going on, Belforts teenage brokers would persuade their victims to buy even more of the shares as their price soared. Finally, the company and its investors would be abandoned by its high-flying crooked brokers, leaving them to find out, at a later date, that the accounts were fake and the business was worthless.4 The stock manipulations formed the basis of the majority of the charges that sent Belfort to jail, but these were market crimesbreaches of that part of the stock exchanges own rules that have, over time, become sufficiently important to the operation of the overall economy to be regarded as a matter for the state and the criminal authorities. But the real fraud committed by Stratton Oakmont was in facilitating so many companies to go public in the first placetaking money from investors on the basis of false accounts. At base, it was another example of counterfeiting: a certification fraud against anyone who believed that a seemingly reputable brokerage would not get involved with fake companies.

One final thing worth knowing about the way that stock markets capitalize future earningsthey dont always do it very efficiently. In principle, everyone ought to focus purely on cash, and do so with a very long-term forecast horizon. But thats extremely difficult, so people who actually have to trade shares will often look for shortcuts. One such shortcut is to look only at short-term earnings and assume theyre a reasonable proxy for long-term cash flows. This means that manipulating a single years earnings, even at the expense of future years, can often create enough of a bump in the share price to extract some fraudulent cash. And another important shortcut is that for fast-growing companies, people often look at revenues (or sales) rather than earnings, presuming that these are a better guide to the long term than a profit number that might be weighed down by start-up costs. This can be useful to an accounting fraudster: revenues are often easier to manipulate than earnings. Assets can also be manipulated, and sometimes (as with Bre-X) you can manipulate a stock market by talking about gold reserve numbers that arent even in the accounts. But in order to get a feel for how accounting fraud works, its necessary to get a bit technical.

Techniques of accounting fraud There are two species of false accounting. It is tempting to call them accounting fraud versus accounting manipulation, but really they are both forms of fraud. Just think of them as things you have to lie to the auditors about and things that the auditors will help you with.

The second of the two categories, by the way, is not meant as a joke and is only to a slight degree a calumny on the auditing profession. Since the dawn of capital markets, audit firms, including the most prestigious, have helped dishonest managers to present utterly misleading sets of accounts. On many occasions they have stretched things so far that it is not credible to claim that the auditors believed they were within the letter of the accounting rules (which are themselves bad enough). This happens despite the fact that auditing is a profession, and performs a crucial gatekeeping role. Well look into the reasons why this keeps happening later in the chapter, but for the time being, remember that as well as lying to the auditors, its possible to fake a set of accounts with the help of those same auditors. A full list of accounting shenanigans would fill a book of its own, but here are seven techniques that show up regularly and give you a flavor of what can go on. Well mainly be taking examples from the most recent golden age of account fiddling, the dot-com and telecom bubble of the late 1990s/early 2000s.

Completely fake sales As in sales that never happened, but that you record in a ledger as if they did, and present the fictitious ledger to the auditor. Usually best to make these fake sales overseas, perhaps in an emerging market, but in any case somewhere where theres a substantial time-zone gap or an equally substantial language issue and where company registration is opaque. That way, you can set things up so that if the auditor checks at all, he gets through to one of your conspirators, confirming that the fictitious order exists. When the cash doesnt show up, say its been banked locally and hope that the auditor is on too tight a deadline to question your faked statements. The computer software company Lernout & Hauspie recorded millions of dollars of sales to South Korea out of their offices in Belgium in a fraud of this kind.

Completely fake sales were also generated by Gowex (also known as Lets Gowex), a Madrid-based company that claimed to be in the business of providing roughly nine times as many free municipal Wi-Fi setups across Europe and the Americas as it actually had. This was in some ways a more audacious fraud than Lernout & Hauspie because the completely fake sales would have required fake capital equipment to be bought and installed, which should be easier to check up on than software licenses. If nothing else, the auditors could have walked down the street in one of the cities where Gowex claimed to be providing free Wi-Fi and established that they hadnt. In fact, Gowexs auditor was a small local practice and was prosecuted alongside the directors, but Lernout & Hauspie was audited by KPMG, showing that these things can happen in the best ordered of families.

Fake sales by economically meaningless transactions Lets pretend I am a US long-distance telecom company (say, Qwest Communications in 2001). And pretend that you are also a US telecom company (say, Global Crossing, also in 2001). We both own lots of telephone cables and charge other companies for their use. What happens if we make a capacity swap and let each other use our cables free of charge, up to a reasonable limit? It feels like both of us should record some kind of revenue, and an equal amount of costthe swap is kind of like a pair of mutually offsetting sales. Usually the way to establish that number is to guess what the market price of selling that much telecom capacity would be, and add it to both the revenue line and the cost line of the accounts. But if we happen to know that the stock market is paying attention to our revenues rather than our earnings, we might choose to use a much higher number, and tell the auditors it was a strategic deal, or some other pretext for why open-market pricing was not relevant.

This tactic was massively overused during the dot-com boom of the 1990s, as websites swapped ad inventory with one another and acted as if they had sold it. No cash changed hands, and so not only were two companies both able to pretend that they had sold more ad space than they really had, but there was no constraint on their ability to pretend that the market price of their adverts was higher than it really was. This feature of swap sales can be highly useful in other contexts, because it allows a market price to be set that then becomes the basis for valuing assets. Two property developers, for example, might sell small parts of their developments to each other at an inflated valuation in order to create a recent transaction that would allow them to value their whole business higher, and persuade their banks to keep lending against what they believed to be valuable collateral.

A further extension and generalization of the fake-sales gambit is one that no longer involves two offsetting transactions, and looks for all the world like an open-market sale for cash. You find another company that the auditors dont know is controlled by you, either by directly being owned by a connected party, or by being an actually independent company that has agreed to take the role of a front for this transaction. Then you lend this company a sum of money (either as an ordinary loan, or by buying newly issued shares in it), on condition that it uses the money you lend it to buy goods from you. In this way, you can effectively buy from yourself, recycling money raised from investors and making it look like profits. Another popular dot-com scandal, this was one of the many restatements made by telecom giant WorldCom shortly before its CEO and CFO did the perp walk.

Up-front recognition of revenues Myron and Mordy from OPM Leasing used to call their version of this accounting fiddle the Kutz Method, after the accountant who managed to persuade their auditors to agree to it. In a long-term contract, like a lease, the usual method of accounting is to report the payments made by the customer as revenue, spread out over the life of the lease.5 The Kutz Method was to record all the payments as revenue on the day the contract was signed. This obviously made the accounts look a lot better in the short term, and equally obviously it created accounting disasters when clients took advantage of the early break clauses that Mordy Weissman negotiated; not only was there no new revenue coming in, but a large proportion of revenue reported in the past under the Kutz Method had to be un-accrued.

This was also a favorite of 2000s-vintage telecom companies, and is particularly associated with the internet ventures of Jeff Skillings Enron. Skillings version of the Kutz Method was even more extreme; rather than restricting itself to contractual revenues, Enron would account up front for revenues that it merely hoped to earn. In one memorable episode in 2000, they signed a joint-venture contract with Blockbuster Video to deliver films on demand over their internet cables, and reported all the profits they expected to earn in the next twenty years as revenue. The following year, Blockbuster decided not to go ahead with their part of the joint venturemeaning that Enron reported another lump of revenue, reflecting their new assumption that they would no longer have to share the profits from their internet film idea with Blockbuster! In the end, almost no revenue was ever actually generated and the internet video idea joined the rest of the footnotes to the mammoth accounting restatement that marked Enrons slump into bankruptcy.

Delayed recognition of costs The obvious counterpart of recognizing a load of up-front revenue is the practice of spreading costs out into the future. This was how WorldCom managed to overreport $3.8 billion of profits, and the nature of the scam had a sort of symmetry with Enrons practice of accounting for revenue as soon as they had a bright idea. WorldCom used to pay line-rental fees to regional telecom companies in order to connect up their long-distance cables with the customers actual telephones. This was a cost, and obviously needed to be accounted for as suchthere was no long-term contract, and telecom capacity cannot be stored. But what if you persuaded yourself that your decision to pay a lot of line fees to a local telecom operator in, say, Wisconsin, was a brilliant strategic move, incurring some short-term expenses in order to build market share and get to a much more profitable position in ten years time? Wouldnt that mean it made more sense to spread out the cost of the line fees you were paying so that they were reported over the ten-year period of your strategic plan rather than all in the year that the cash was paid?

Well no, it would make no sense at all, but Scott Sullivan (the chief financial officer of WorldCom at the time) convinced both himself and Arthur Andersen LLC that it did, for a short time. Since failing to report a cost does not make it go away, however, WorldCom ended up being considerably less cash-rich than it reported to its investors, a factor in its eventual bankruptcy.

Completely fake assets Although it is more usual for the accounting faker to take an existing asset and overvalue it, it is by no means unknown to create a complete fiction. Gowexs network of European municipal Wi-Fi hot spots would be one example, although the biggest fake-asset frauds tend to involve offshore bank accounts. There are legitimate reasons6 why a company might want to have a lot of cash sitting in an offshore accountit might be the proceeds of a large asset sale that need to be reinvested, or be money raised through a loan or bond issue from an offshore bank. But offshore accounts by their nature tend not to be very transparent, and it occasionally happens that the account gets emptied by an embezzler, or that the ownership of the account turns out to belong to a corporate entity other than the one that is reporting it in its accounts. Its even possible to just pay the money into your own bank account and fake some paperwork. The Italian milk company Parmalat was briefly (between Enron and WorldCom) the holder of the world record for the largest fraud-driven bankruptcy scandal, largely due to the auditors sudden discovery that a bank account with $4.9 billion in it, which made the difference between solvency and insolvency, did not exist. Proving that nobody ever learns anything, the chief operating officer of the German credit card processing company Wirecard is, at the time of writing, on the run after the discovery of an exactly similar fictitious bank account in the Philippines.

Unreported debt You dont want to show too much debt on the balance sheet. But you do want to borrow too muchborrowing money in a corporate vehicle you control is a basic step in getting cash out of a fraud. So what do you do? Get a separate company to borrow the money, telling the bank that you guarantee the debt, then (because the separate company is controlled by you) use the loan for your own corporate purposes. The accounting rules are meant to protect against thisthe concept of consolidation in a set of accounts means that the balance sheet ought to show all of the assets and liabilities controlled by your company, and for which it is responsible, whatever company name is on the loan paperwork. But what does the word controlled mean? What does it really mean? Whats the exact definition of a guarantee? People who loved semantic debates over beer and pot in college will find that there are thick books full of rules relating to these seemingly simple concepts, and that its possible to argue literally without end about when debts taken out by one company should also appear as liabilities of another. There is massive scope for browbeating your auditors here, although this is not always necessaryin a lot of cases, you can just tell the auditor, I dont want this debt to appear on the balance sheet, and off he will go, hitting the books and looking for loopholes, before coming back to you with a funny-looking diagram covered with boxes and arrows that, for a while, gives you the result you wanted.

This was why Enron decided that it was going to create lots of off-balance-sheet vehicleseffectively, brass-plate companies with offshore registrations, which had no business activities of their own, except to borrow money from global capital markets and then buy large assets that Enron wanted to operate. Of course, the only reason that these shells of companies were able to borrow money in the first place was that they were guaranteed by Enron, and so, with the benefit of hindsight, it was quite obvious that their debts should have been reported by Enron as if they were the companys own. Or at least, thats what the eventual bankruptcy examiner thoughtif there is a convincing argument to the contrary, its probably lost in a shredder somewhere in the Houston offices of Arthur Andersen.

Overvalued or undervalued assets In a famous interview, Donald Trump said that [m]y net worth fluctuates, and it goes up and down with markets and with attitudes and with feelings, even my own feelings. This statement has been widely mocked, but its actually true. These days, as we noted earlier, the main activity of the Trump Organization is putting its owners surname on things, and therefore the main asset of that company is that name (or technically, the right to use it as a trademark; other people who happen to have the same surname probably wouldnt be allowed to undercut the Donald). The value of that asset; well, it goes up and down from day to day, and all the things on that list, even President Trumps own feelings, are probably going to be relevant.

It would be a simpler world if the only things that appeared on a balance sheet were cash, stocks of readily salable goods, motor vehicles listed in a Blue Book, and real estate in high-turnover markets. In other words, things where you can get a pretty good idea of what the thing is worth by comparing it to other similar things that have recently been sold on an open market. Unfortunately, companies tend to own lots of specialized machinery, factories without alternative uses, patents, brands, and long-term servicing contracts.

These are all things where the value is a matter of opinion rather than fact, and where the number to be recorded in the accounts has to be estimated by the accountants, based on their calculations of the possible future cash and profits that could be derived from the asset. Since the accountants starting point for that valuation is to talk to the management, and since you can usually lean on an auditor (see below), there is considerable scope for an asset to either be substantially overvalued, exaggerating the value of the company as a whole to investors and lenders, or substantially undervalued, meaning that people dont object so much when it is sold to a party connected to one of the managers. Both of these practices used to be absolutely rife in the former Communist states of Central and Eastern Europe, and there are many stories of Western investors thinking that they were getting the bargain of the century but discovering that, in the old accountants proverb On the left side7 nothings right, and on the right side nothings left.

Auditors, analysts, and other disappointments All of these frauds should have been prevented by the auditors, whose job it specifically is to review every set of accounts as a neutral outside party and certify that they are a true and fair view of the business. But they werent. Why not? The answer is simple; some auditors are crooks, and some are easily fooled by crooks. And whatever reforms are made to the accounting standards and to the rules governing the profession, the same problems have cropped up again and again. As always, when something keeps happening in different times and places, its likely to be an equilibrium phenomenon linked to the deep underlying economic structure.

First, there is the problem that the vast majority of auditors are both honest and competent. This is a good thing, of course, but the bad thing about it is that it means that most people have never met a crooked or incompetent auditor and therefore have no real understanding that such people exist. In order to find a really bad guy at a Big Four8 accountancy firm, you have to be quite unlucky (or quite lucky if that was what you were looking for). But as a crooked manager of a company, churning around your auditors until you find a badun is exactly what you do, and when you find one, you hang on to them. This means that the bad auditors are gravitationally drawn into auditing the bad companies, while the majority of the profession has an unrepresentative view of how likely that could be.

Second, there is the problem that even if an auditor is both honest and competent, he has to have a spine or he might as well not be. Fraudsters can be both persistent and overbearing and not all the people who went into accountancy firms out of college (and then ended up doing audit rather than a more glamorous specialty) did so because they were commanding alpha-type personalities. Added to this, fraudsters are really keen on going over auditors heads and complaining to their bosses at the accounting firm, claiming that the auditor is being unhelpful and bureaucratic, not allowing the CEO to use his legitimate judgment in presenting the results of his own business. Partly because auditors are often awful stick-in-the-muds and ass-coverers, and partly because audit is a surprisingly competitive and unprofitable business that is typically used as a loss leader to sell more remunerative consulting and IT work, you cant at all assume that the auditors boss will support his employee, even though the employee is the one who is placing his signature (and the reputation of the whole practice) on the set of accounts. As with several other patterns of behavior that tend to generate frauds, the dynamic by which a difficult audit partner gets overruled or removed happens so often and reproduces itself so exactly that its got to reflect a fairly deep and ubiquitous incentive problem that will be very difficult to remove.

Wall Street Confidential By way of a second line of defense, investors and brokerage firms employ their own analysts to critically read sets of published accounts. The analyst is meant to be an industry expert, with enough financial training to read company accounts and to carry out valuations of companies and other assets. Although their primary job is to identify profitable opportunities in securities tradingshares or bonds that are either very undervalued or very overvaluedit would surely seem to be the case that part of this job would involve the identification of companies that are very overvalued because they are frauds.

Well, sometimes it works. A set of fraudulent accounts will often generate tellsin particular, fraudsters in a hurry, or with limited ability to browbeat the auditors, will not be able to fake the balance sheet to match the way they have faked the profits. So inflated sales may show up as having been carried out without need for inventories, and without any trace of the cash they should have generated.9 Analysts are also often good at spotting practices like channel stuffing, when a company (usually one with a highly motivated and target-oriented sales force) sells a lot of product to wholesalers and intermediaries toward the end of the quarter, booking sales and moving inventory off its books. This makes growth look good in the short term, at the expense of future sales (and of refunds on any sale-or-return arrangements, and of the general brand damage of having a lot of product in the shops that has been sitting around in wholesalers inventories going stale).

Often, an honest auditor who has buckled under pressure will put a cryptic-looking passage of legalese, buried in the notes to the accounts, explaining what accounting treatment has been used, and hoping that someone will read it and understand that the significance of this note is that all of the headline numbers are fake. Nearly all of the fraudulent accounting policies adopted by Enron could have been deduced from its public filings if you knew where to look. There are analysts who make a career out of this kind of close analysis, but it is a niche and not a particularly profitable one; because most companies are honest, most red flags turn out to be red herrings.

More common is the situation that prevailed in the period immediately preceding the Global Financial Crisis. Analysts occasionally noticed that some things didnt add up and said so, and one or two of them wrote reports that, if taken seriously, could have been seen as prescient warnings. But for the most part, when things were going up they wrote reports saying things were going well, and when things were going down they wrote reports saying things were going badly. The same thing happened during the dot-com bubble, and in every bubble going back to the South Sea. The independent, market-driven watchdogs suffer exactly the same flaws as those with statutory status and backing.

The problem is that spotting frauds is difficult, and for the majority of investors not worth expending the effort on. That means it is not worth it for most analysts too. Frauds are rare. Frauds that can be spotted by careful analysis are even more rare. And frauds that meet both the preceding criteria and are also large enough to offer serious rewards for betting against them come along roughly once every business cycle, in waves.

Analysts are also subject to very similar pressures to those that cause auditors to compromise their principles. Anyone accusing a company publicly of being a fraud is taking a big risk and can expect significant retaliation. It is well to remember that frauds generally look like very successful companies and there are sound accounting reasons for this. It is not just that once you have decided to fiddle the accounts, you might as well make them look great rather than mediocre. The snowball property of growing companies means that if you are extracting cash fraudulently, you usually need to be growing the fake earnings at a higher rate. So people who are correctly identifying frauds can often look like they are jealously attacking success. Frauds also tend to carry out lots of financial transactions and pay large commissions to investment banks, all the while making investors believe that they are rich. The psychological barriers against questioning a successful CEO are not quite as powerful as those against questioning the honesty of a doctor or lawyer, but they are substantial.

And finally, most analysts opinions are not read. A fraudster does not have to fool everyone; he just needs to fool enough people to get his money. The London Quarterly Review in 1822 published, under the guise of a book review of Thomas Strangewayss Sketch of the Mosquito Shore, an absolutely forensic dissection of the Poyais fraud. The anonymous author of the review noticed that the majority of the book was plagiarized from gazetteers of the West Indies. They set out the real facts relating to the Spanish territorial claims to Honduras, and the extreme unlikelihood of a local tribal chief having ceded sovereignty to a British entrepreneur. They cast derision on Gregor MacGregors war record and noted his past exploits as a con man. They even suggested that his title, KGC, stood for Knight of the Gull-Catchers rather than of the Green Cross of Portugal. And yet, for all the good it did in terms of slowing down the progress of investors capital onto the Kennersley Castle and Honduras Packet, they might as well not have bothered.

1. Actually, slightly more than a third. The investment banker is going to want his commission.

2. And even if you did, youd get the sum net of the bankers commission.

3. The private-equity industrypeople, and pools of savings that they manage, who do deals buying stakes in companies but not on the normal stock market. Two main kindsmanagement buy-out merchants, who do what the name implies, and venture capitalists, who invest in companies that dont have enough profits of their own to raise money from the public. The former kind tend to get defrauded by accounting misstatements, the latter to be victims of companies that are simply frauds from top to bottom. Neither of them is keen on admitting theyve been taken for a ride, as they need to portray themselves to their own clients as well-connected geniuses.

4. With one exception. The shoe designer Steve Madden was a boyhood friend of one of the Oakmont partners, and they took his womenswear company public. Although the initial flotation of Steve Madden Shoes was as crooked as anything, and Madden himself was prosecuted for acting as a rathole, it turned out that the actual business was so successful that the good news outweighed the bad. Purely by accident, Stratton Oakmont managed to float a profitable company (and in doing so, caused plenty of pain for the small cottage industry of hedge funds who had come to regard short selling any Stratton Oakmont IPO as an easy way to make money).

5. Matching the time period in which you report revenues and costs to the time period in which the services or goods are provided is known as the accruals principle and accountants fight the most unbelievable holy wars over how it should be done properly. The example they use in accounting textbooks is usually an annual newspaper subscription, which might be paid for up-front in cash terms, but which is accounted for as if it were a sale of one newspaper per day for a year.

6. People with a moralistic view of tax-driven structuring may question the use here of the word legitimate; all we mean to convey is not intrinsically fraudulent.

7. Traditionally, a balance sheet is set out with assets first and liabilities (including shareholders funds, if they havent all been stolen) on the facing page.

8. Formerly Big Five, Big Six, and numbers up to Big Eight, as the accounting profession consolidated and Arthur Andersen collapsed in the wake of the Enron scandal. Presumably to become Big Three and Big Two before the regulators get involved to prevent Big One. People complain bitterly about the lack of choice, but it probably doesnt have many bad consequences other than to slightly reduce competition in the market for audit fees. And in all honesty, the extreme unprofitability of audit compared to all the other consulting and advisory work done by the same firms is a lot of the problem here.

9. Fraudsters are also highly reluctant to dig into their own pockets to pay tax on fake accounting profits with no corresponding cash, so an anomalously low average tax rate is also often a red flag.

Chapter 7: Control Frauds Larry Holmes said that he makes more money with Don King stealing from him than getting 100 percent from other promoters.

Don King at a press conference, 2001 Sometimes, the fraud is coming from inside the building. The person best placed to steal from a company is often the person in charge of it, and the person who is best placed to nullify the systems and controls intended to detect and prevent fraud is the person who is in charge of administering them. A control fraud, in the broadest sense, is a fraud that depends on the delegation of management and control from someone who bears the risks and rewards of success and failure, to someone who does not ultimately bear those risks, but who can arrange the business so as to benefit from the rewards.

This is, of course, a form of white-collar crime that depends on a certain level of economic sophistication and complexity to exist. There are few control frauds in the Bible or in classical literature, because they cant exist in a world in which trade and industry take place on the basis of small workshops and warehouses, managed by their owners. Although the ownership of ships by merchants provided considerable opportunity to dishonest sea captains (which well talk about more in Chapter 10), the land-based control fraud really needed to wait until the factory system and the industrial revolution to come into its own.

The most common white-collar crime committed by insiders, of course, is simple embezzlement, or hand-in-the-till fraud. In second place would probably come the kickbacka side payment made to a purchasing or sales manager by a supplier or customer of the company in return for preferential treatment on a contract. Neither of these, though, is really a control fraud in the strict sense of the term; they are straightforward thefts that happen to be committed by employees of the company. Although schemes of this kind can end up becoming dizzyingly complex, particularly if fake accounts need to be constructed in order to conceal the embezzlement, there is not much economically, as opposed to criminologically, interesting to them. You steal the money, or take the bribe, and then hope not to get caught.

The really economically interesting kind of control frauds are the ones where having control of the enterprise is essential to the nature of the crime, rather than just being the means by which the opportunity to steal presents itself. Someone with management control has unique abilities to defraud in ways that others simply cannot. In particular, control of an enterprise allows you to commit a subjunctive crime.

For example, imagine that you are the manager of an investment fund1 that is meant to invest conservatively in blue-chip stocks. Youre paid according to your success in investing, and you want to win fund manager of the year awards. But risk and return go together, and you cant stand out by buying the same boring shares that everyone else has. Then one day you happen to come across a really interesting investment opportunity. Theres a little company with a brand-new technology for extracting oil from tar sands, and it could be worth billions.2 But its massively removed from what you ought to be doing; its not even quoted on a proper stock exchange. On the other hand, the investors are hardly going to complain if you make them a load of money. What do you do? By this point in the book, you can guess that the answer here is the wrong thing.

This is a subjunctive crime because it only really exists in some states of the world but not others. If the oil-sands company really has a miracle new technology, theres no harm and the breach of the investment guidelines is going to be regarded as a technical slap-on-the-wrist offense, the kind of bold maverick move that has to be expected from investment geniuses who break rules but get results. If, as it factually turned out, the great investment was actually a worthless company owning nothing but a patch of oily sand and a good story, then what youve done on behalf of your investors is what is called a fraud.

Of course, the first rule of white-collar crime is then going to holdthings snowball. A bad investment rarely shows itself up as a badun with one glorious moment of revelation. What it usually does is look like a basically good idea that is just in danger of running out of cash in the short term and needs a few more injections of funds in order to bring it to fruition. So you need to increase the investment and the little tar-sands speculation is going to be quite a significant proportion of your portfolio. Thats problematic, as people are going to notice that its not really a conservative blue-chip share.3 What would make them overlook this? Well, theyd be less inclined to scrutinize it if it looked like it was doing well. And since its a private investment in a small business, whos to gainsay you if you mark up its value to show that its a strongly performing investment? So the original bad decision, by the time it comes to court, will have turned into a multimillion-dollar loss and a criminal charge of false accounting.

On the other hand, as I say, if it had all gone well, there would have been no crime. An even simpler version of the same story is implicit in what Chicago options traders used to call the Brazilian straddle. This is a joke, based on the tendency for options products to be named after the jurisdictions in which they were inventedthere are such things as European, American, Asian, and even Bermudan options, differing according to the rules for their exercise and payout.

A normal straddle in options markets consists of two optionsa call option that makes money if the market goes up, and a put option that makes money if the market goes down. So the trade is a way of expressing a view on volatilityyou profit if the market goes up or down, but lose money (specifically, the money you spent buying the options) if the market goes sideways. This is a legitimate way to trade options, but its not an easy way to make money; you have to have a view not only on what the market will do, but whether the expected volatility is correctly priced by the different put and call options markets.

If you lose a lot of money trading straddles, and the end of the quarter is near and you want a bonus, you might consider a Brazilian straddle. The Brazilian straddle is a portfolio consisting of a load of call options on one side, and on the other side, an air ticket to Brazil. If the market goes up, you collect all the profits on your call options. If the market goes down, you leave the country quickly.

This is the nature of the control fraud; as well as the other dimensions of white-collar crime, it rests on the ability of the manager to take action on behalf of someone else, and therefore to take much bigger risks than that someone else would ever have regarded as reasonable if they were acting on their own behalf. This is part of the reason why the most egregious examples of control fraud tend to be found in the financial sector, because thats the part of a modern industrial society in which there is most delegation of risk-taking authority. Even quite low-level employees of financial firms have the power to make contracts that expose their employers to massive losses. This is the phenomenon of the rogue trader.

Rogue traders Investment banks are frequently the victims of a particular type of control fraud, and sometimes they go bust because of it. There are several features of the system that come together to create rogue traders, but the one that does the damage is the convention that banks that trade with each other on securities markets do so on the basis that if someone is a trader and he4 places a trade, he is authorized to do so and his bank is on the hook for the consequences. And, importantly, that this is the case even if the trader is massively exceeding his authority and if the top management of the bank would never have allowed the trade to be placed if they had known about it. The principle that the failure of your employees to obey your companys rules is not my problem is known as the indoor management principle, or more poetically Turquands Rule, after the liquidator of a nineteenth-century railroad who discovered that the directors had illegally run it into bankruptcy and failed in his bid to get the fraudulent debts struck out. Since securities markets allow the transaction of very large amounts of money, the operation of the Turquand Rule makes it pretty important to be on top of what all your traders are doing, and that they are in the habit of obeying their risk limits.

Banks usually manage to do this, but theres a particular pattern to their failures. The sequence starts with a failure of honesty on the part of someone on a trading desk. Traders have a particular affinity for control fraud, because part of the essence of a control fraudwhat distinguishes it from the long firm, sayis that the appropriation of the stolen money is usually done by means that are themselves legal. Rather than taking cash and failing to deliver goods, you get yourself in a position where there is an economic entity that you control and that will legitimately pay out some proportion of its value to you, through dividends, salary, or transactions with other parties owned by you. Then, on the basis that 10 percent of something morbidly obese can be worth more than 100 percent of the same thing at its healthy weight, you start taking measures to inflate the size of the thing you control, letting the rewards naturally flow to you. Thats why its such a pernicious fraud and so difficult to detect; the individual mechanics are all innocent and the crime is in the overall scheme.

The way that investment banks pay bonuses5 as a percentage of trading revenues turns the compensation system into something of a control-fraud construction kit. Traders get a share if they make a profit, but typically dont have their bonuses reduced below zero if they make a loss. There is an asymmetry here that means that an increase in risk increases the value of the compensation package. People who earned finance degrees would see the payoff structure as similar to a call option, and its an important theorem in mathematical finance that the vega (sensitivity of value to volatility) of a call option is always positive. People who didnt earn finance degrees might just take the intuition that if someone has offered you a free bet, you might as well put it on a twenty-to-one shot rather than an odds-on favorite. If you have upside potential but no downside risk, you have the incentive to take more risks, is the intuition here.

A small health warning is necessary. In the words of derivatives guru Paul Wilmott, the explanation Ive just given of the motivation for rogue traders is not wholly rigorous, mainly because its wrong. This is the orthodox theory of why rogue traders get startedthat they are rationally responding to distorted incentives, and that if you fix the incentives you will fix the people. Its the view of the world that has shaped financial regulation since the crisis. It is probably even my own biggest influence on the world, because as far as I am aware, the first attempt by a major regulator to come to grips with this subject began with my research paper, Remuneration and Risk, in the Bank of England Financial Stability Report in 1996 (given the way things have developed, I wish Id never written it). Nevertheless, its more complicated than that, as well discuss in a minute. For the time being, its enough to just accept that for some reason, a trader starts to wander offtrack and to build up risks; well come back to this one.

If all that happened was that one bad apple started taking too many risks, this would not be a problem. In order to turn into a rogue trader, the losses6 need to be concealed from the people whose job it is to spot and correct breaches of risk limits. This is the second component of the rogue-trader scandala flaw in the control system that the rogue knows how to exploit. In the case of Joseph Jett7 of Kidder, Peabody, it was an error in the internal accounting system, which calculated the interest earned on a bond trade in a different way from the interest paid in funding it, and so recorded an illusory profit whenever a particular kind of trade was established. In the case of Nick Leeson at Barings Bank, a decision to skimp on costs in establishing an Asian futures business had left him in charge of both the front office (making the trades) and the back office (monitoring them and sorting out the funding). In the case of John Rusnak at Allfirst bank, it was just that there was nobody else in the foreign-exchange trading department. All these cases, by the way, happened between 1992 and 2002, the vintage decade for rogue traders.

There is a second line of defense for a bank that has screwed up and missed someone breaching their risk limits. And that is that trading is a cash business. Every day at close of business, trading books are marked to market and the daily profit or loss calculated. If there is a loss for the day, you need to post that amount of cash with the exchange. This way, the profits and losses build up over the course of the trade, rather than requiring a large lump-sum payment that somebody might default on. Holding the cash is one of the services that an exchange provides for its members. This of course means that a trader who is making money will tend to be a source of cash for the bank, while one who is losing money will need to be constantly on the phone to the central treasury asking for more cash to be posted with the exchange.

This brings in the third element of the rogue traderthe abuse of market conventions to generate fraudulent funding. Although most positions are margined every day in the way just described, some trades generate cash up front. As we saw in the description of the Brazilian straddle, one such trade is the sale of an option, or any other insurance-like contract. And some exchanges8 will let you offset the up-front cash you raise by selling options against the cash they want you to post against losses. Thats mainly what John Rusnak did in order to keep his losses hidden, and it was also a large part of Nick Leesons strategy. Leeson also exploited the fact that he knew the Asian exchange rules much better than his bosses in London. He claimed that the Osaka Exchange was one of the exchanges that did not allow you to offset positive options cash against negative cash on other positions, and so convinced the London office of Barings to send regular cash payments against what they thought was a balanced book, but that was actually just a means of generating cash to fund Leesons trades on the Singapore Mercantile Exchange. Joe Jett didnt need to mess around with any of this; the same computer error that generated his fictitious profits also concealed the existence of any anomaly in the funding of his trades.

Finally, the snowball property comes in. Its not entirely inevitable that things snowball out of control; several rogue-trader memoirs contain a moment of false dawn when the market turns back in the traders direction and he gets close to being able to shut the whole deception down and walk away. But unfortunately, the way of financial markets is that when youre wrong, youre usually going to get wronger. And the trouble is that most of the financing techniques used by a rogue traderparticularly the use of selling options to raise cashtend to make the overall position bigger and to therefore require more funding and even more options sales. Before long, the size of the rogues trades becomes too big for the exchange to handle, or the funding needs start to exceed the capability of the bank to borrow money, or someone at the head office gets their act together and notices.

At this point, things fall apart in a fairly undignified way. And rogue trading is another one of those frauds where the detectives have the opposite problem from murder investigators; the existence of the crime is easy to miss, but once youve noticed that a crime has taken place, its very easy to work out who did it. Leeson went to jail and his bank went bust. Rusnak went to jail, but his bank didnt go bust (it was sold by its parent company, an Irish bank that later went bust for unrelated reasons). Joseph Jett never faced criminal charges but was ordered by the SEC to repay $8.2 million of bonuses with an additional $200,000 fine for false accounting. Kidder, Peabody was also sold by its parent, with significant loss of jobs.

Lets go back, though, to the role of the bonus system. This is important, and we introduced the conventional incentives theory of rogue traders because the channel from the size of the trading book to the size of the bonus is the engine of the control fraud. But we shouldnt confuse mechanisms with motivations here. Does it really make sense to risk sending your employer into bankruptcy in order to get a bigger bonus? Isnt that a bit short-term gain, long-term pain? In fact, if you do the math (calculate the vega mentioned above), you can see that the value to a trader of increasing risk in order to inflate the value of a single years bonus is, while strictly positive, pretty small. Even given normal levels of risk aversion, its hard to see how a minor increase in the small chances of a huge payoff would be worth the extra stress and risk associated with running a high-volatility trading book rather than a low-volatility one. When you take into account the likelihood of losing future years bonuseswhich resembles a kind of downside risk from losing too muchthe calculation isnt close. In the real world, there is much more of a problem with traders being too risk averse and banking profits if they have a good start to the year. Normal people responding to the structural incentives of the investment-banking industry dont act like Nick Leeson.

What kind of people do respond this way? Fragile egos, basically. The three 1990s rogue traders described above were all, in one way or another, driven outsiders. Leeson was a working-class boy who had joined an exceptionally blue-blooded bank without going to college. Rusnak had been brought into a slightly sleepy mid-Atlantic bank as a brash Wall Street guy who was meant to show the locals what to do. Jett was one of the first African Americans employed in a front-office role at Kidder. The pattern has continued since that day. Jrme Kerviel, the biggest rogue trader in history who lost $6 billion for Socit Gnrale, was a Breton who went to a provincial university when his colleagues were all at Grandes coles. Kweku Adoboli, the biggest fraudster in the history of England at $2 billion, was a Ghanaian immigrant who had been to a minor private school but not to Oxbridge. All the rogue traders had a strong psychological need to prove themselves to be stars, combined with a powerful work ethic and a fascination with the technical detail of the markets they worked on. The temptation is always there, but it is only tempting to people for whom the structure of the bonus system is a psychological hunger rather than a rational calculation. Unfortunately, such people are also highly susceptible to cognitive dissonance and denial, the forces that motivate them to conceal and magnify losses rather than admit a mistake. Its not too much of an exaggeration to say that all these guys destroyed their lives, and some of them their employers, because they didnt want to say sorry.

But as a psychological profile of rogue traders, the description given above has the disadvantage that it also describes a lot of successful traders. That ought to be a worry for the banking industry, because as we pointed out earlier, control fraud is often a subjunctive crime, that only exists in retrospect and if things have gone wrong. There might be a lot more of them than the ones who blew up. And not just at the level of individual traders. The key to the fraud is the ability to control information about the size of the position, and to keep funding the losses by having a sufficient position of trust to persuade the bank to keep making payments. It is not so big a step from the rogue trader to consider what might happen if an entire bank came under the control of fraudsters and if the rogue was at the very top.

The Savings and Loan scandals The Savings and Loan (S&L) crisis of the 1980s set the tone for many of the financial scandals to come. It was the first really major banking crisis of the postBretton Woods era and marked the transition from the inflationary 1970s to the hard-money era in the USA and into the Great Moderation. It also gave the first foreshadowings of the fact that financial deregulation tends to lead to crises; the interaction between the economic conditions of the time and the two major deregulation bills was particularly destructive. And related to this, the S&L crisis happened at the start of the Reagan era, as the power of government was being rolled back and that of corporations was waxing fat, leading to a sea change in the nature of the relationship between powerful bankers and the officials meant to supervise them. But most of all, for our purposes, it was with respect to the S&L industry that the term control fraud really came of age.

It is probably fair to note at this point that the economic history of the S&L crisis is contested territory from an intellectual point of view, with both market-oriented and pro-government economists having written studies of the crisis that blamed the other side. Broadly speaking, if you did your economics degree in Chicago and call yourself a libertarian or small-government conservative, you tend to view the S&L crisis as the result of broad macroeconomic factors that destroyed the underlying business model of the industry and couldnt be stopped. If you did your economics degree at Yale and vote Democratic, you tend to view it as the natural consequence of the deregulation of the sector removing constraints on the banks while keeping their implicit state guarantee, creating an inevitable incentive toward wrongdoing. Either point of view is defensible, because the S&L crisis was, in reality, at least two crises, and the policy measures that, partly successfully, aimed to solve the first arguably helped to bring about the second.

The crisis had its roots in the 1970s and the attempt to tame inflation by raising interest rates. Savings and Loans (also known as thrifts) were a kind of small bank that had grown up in the pioneer era, taking deposits and making loans in a small local area. The legacy of bank runs and instability in the early days of the USA had, before the 1980s, left a legacy of mistrust of large or multibranch operations, but the S&Ls had strict limits on what they could do and tended to operate in uncompetitive local markets. For this reason, it was felt that they didnt need much scrutiny from bank examiners. The joke about their style of banking was always that they followed the 3-6-3 rule: pay 3 percent on deposits, charge 6 percent for loans, and make sure you are on the golf course by 3 p.m.

This was all very well. But it was a business model with an obvious failure mode. The loans that the S&Ls made were thirty-year mortgages paying a fixed rate of interest, while the deposits were short-term or variable-rate ones. As interest rates went up, the rate paid on deposits went up with them while the interest on the mortgages stayed the same. The 3-6-3 rule became a 12-6-12 rule: if youre paying 12 percent on deposits but still only getting 6 percent on loans, youll be bankrupt within twelve months.

Because it was the early 1980s and the Reagan Revolution was beginning to find its form, the solution to the S&Ls problems had to involve deregulation. The idea that the main problem of finance is excessive red tape and that all problems can be solved by leaving things to the market has been a constant since the days of the railroad barons. And so, successive rounds of deregulation took place.

The first one removed size limits on S&Ls, in the hope that they would be able to grow out of trouble. Immediately, a wave of mergers began. This had the short-term effect of improving things. Because of an accounting quirknot itself dishonest, but open to abusemerging an insolvent S&L with a borderline-solvent one tended to make the accounts look better.9 To finance this growth, they were allowed to borrow from sources other than small depositors, including the junk-bond market. In cash terms, however, growth tended to make bankrupt S&Ls bigger but still bankrupt; they needed to be able to earn a return on their assets that exceeded the cost of their liabilities. So the regulations that kept them out of business loans, commercial-property loans, andcruciallydirect ownership of speculative property developments were also relaxed, on the basis that higher risk meant higher return, and that was what was needed.

Before long, the S&L industry had moved on from its history of small local banks, and was increasingly characterized by quite large organizations, often owned or controlled by property developers, and several of which were connected to the junk-bond financier (and later convicted securities fraudster) Michael Milken. It was at this point that the second phase of the S&L crisis can be said to have begun.

Nobody better epitomizes the S&L scandal than Charles Keating, an amazing fraud, crook, and hypocrite. He was the owner of American Continental Corporation (ACC), a real-estate company with headquarters in Phoenix, Arizona. One of ACCs subsidiary companies was Lincoln Savings & Loan, which was licensed in the considerably more deregulated state of California.

The financial structure that Keating brought to the game was a clever means of cash extraction. Lincoln, in order to satisfy regulators, had to declare strong profits, and it did. ACC, on the other hand, did not carry out much profitable business other than borrowing money to finance half-built housing developments and acting as a place for Michael Milken to park junk-bond deals. The two companies therefore entered into a tax-sharing agreement that allowed ACCs losses to offset Lincolns profits for corporation tax purposes, and incidentally allowed Keating to mingle the cash flows of the regulated bank he controlled with the less-regulated company that he owned.

Keating himself was a memorable character. He was a tall, good-looking former champion swimmer. He liked the finer things in lifeprivate jets, luxury hotels, and politiciansand spent lots of money buying all of them. He also had an extreme horror of pornography and was a major financial backer of moral crusades at the time, including one attempt to discourage high school girls from wearing shorts in case they distracted motorists. As well as founding Citizens for Decent Literature and commissioning the documentary film Perversion for Profit, he had served on the Presidential Commission on Obscenity and Pornography. He even managed to combine his hobby of sexual prudery with his job of undermining financial regulators at one point; he tried to convince a judge that the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco was staffed by a conspiratorial network of gay fraud examiners who had a vendetta against Keating for being such a virulent and outspoken homophobe.

Keatings modus operandi was growth. Banking is a business in which time is one of the crucial commodity inputs; interest payments are accrued as revenue from day one of a new loan, and bad loans only show up as problems at some point in the future. Because of this, a fast-growing bank will generally look better than a slow-growing or shrinking oneit has a greater proportion of new loans and new loans have not had a chance to go bad. Keating pushed this fundamental truth about banking to extremes, and as a result appeared to be one of the most successful and profitable bankers in America. The problem was, if you use fast growth to create the illusion of success, eventually the new loans get old and the problems catch up with you. But Keating had a solution to that too. He lied.

Keatings Lincoln Savings & Loan had taken full advantage of the deregulation of the industry. Previously restricted to mortgage lending, S&Ls were now allowed to invest in loans to real-estate developers. Since property developers as a group tend to have an almost insatiable appetite for borrowing money, it was possible to grow much more rapidly by making million-dollar loans to developers than by making five-figure mortgage loans to retail customers. This was the pattern followed by all of the group of superstar S&Ls who dominated the scene in the early 1980s and were held up as examples to the rest of the sleepy, half-bankrupt industry. Every one of them turned out to be a fraud.

The property-development loans still had to be collateralized, however. An S&L could only make the loan if it could be shown that the value of the real estate was greater than the value of the loan. So if growth was the key to S&L fraud, the key to growth was appraisal fraudthe art of convincing the auditors that a half-built shopping center in Californias Inland Empire was worth a lot more than it really was.

The first building block of appraisal fraud is to corrupt or intimidate the appraiser. Real-estate assets are valued by professional surveyors and estate agents, and it is a competitive business. A bank always has a choice of dozens of appraisers to choose from when it needs to get a third-party valuation in order to complete its mortgage documentation, or to show to its auditors or to fraud examiners. And so a crook like Charles Keating will ensure that his employees both shop around by sending more business to appraisers with a more optimistic view of the world, and make it known to the pessimists that they will lose a major client if they dont start looking on the sunny side. This sort of pressure tends to start out soft and difficult to detect, but to quickly become very blunt and blatantsteak dinners, jet rides, and even new Porsche sports cars for the cooperative appraisers, threats and angry phone calls to the recalcitrant ones. By 1986, Lincoln Savings had a small community of valuers who were thoroughly bent to their will.

However, although appraisal fraud starts with a corrupt appraiser, it usually cannot end there. Bank examiners would have an easy time if all that was backing up a crooked banks books was a set of subjective opinions of nominally independent professionals. To make the most obvious point, an appraiser only has a certain amount of leeway in his or her valuation to make assumptions that depart from the price paid in relevantly similar recent open-market transactions. If you want to systematically fiddle the valuations, you need to fiddle the market too.

It is at this stage that the control element of a control fraud starts to become the key to the operation. The more things you control, the greater your ability to create fake evidence to justify the fake valuations that underpin the fake profits earned from your fake assets. Control of the top of the organization allows you to undermine all the controls and completely corrupt the infrastructure of trust and checking that is meant to protect the system against external attackers. So a Charles Keating figure has a surprisingly wide menu of options to choose from in creating fake open-market transactions. Bill Black, the lawyer who was Keatings nemesis at the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (and later the FHLB of San Francisco), used to give the different methods little nicknames, as follow: My dead horse for your dead cow. One corrupt S&L owns one half-built development. Another owns a similar one a few miles down the highway. They sell them to each other at an inflated valuation, creating two new market data points for the value of that kind of property in that kind of location.

Cash for trash. A borrower is desperate for a $10 million loan against a property that is probably worth $8 million. You refuse to lend it to him. Instead, you tell him that you will lend him $30 million, as long as he uses $20 million of it to buy another exactly similar property from one of Charles Keatings real-estate companies. This is a wonderful scheme for Keating; he has extracted $20 million in cash in exchange for an $8 million propertya profit of $12 million. And it looks good for the S&L too; the supplicant borrowers property can now be revalued based on this open-market transaction, so instead of a $10 million loan against an $8 million building, you now have a $30 million loan secured against a $40 million real-estate portfolio.

The horse-for-cow trick has the best name, but the cash-for-trash deal really gives the flavor of the control fraud: the combination of facilitating growth at much faster rates than would economically be possible, plus extracting cash for the controlling party, plus faking the accounts to make the loan book look much safer than it is. The problem is that, as can also be seen, the raw material of this scam is other scams; to keep growing you need borrowers. And the only kind of borrower who will participate in transactions like this is a deadbeat real-estate developer, desperate for money and building a questionable asset. So the growth plan of the S&L control fraud depended on being able to find and proliferate this kind of borrower.

It also depended on keeping people like Bill Black out of your bank. Keating always had a problem with people who were capable of seeing the forest for the trees. All of the appraisal scams, cow-for-horse tricks and the like, would work on a complaisant auditor as long as they were presented one by one and against a checklist of tests to verify that a professional appraiser had given an opinion and justified it against market transactions. Where they fell apart was when people started to look at the portfolio as a whole, seeing a string of massively overbuilt projects along a dusty stretch of highway, all of which were financed by the same small group of lenders and none of which were remotely capable of generating the cash to repay even a fraction of their owners debts.

For this reason, Keating used all the political capital he had built up in his porn-campaigning days, and bought a lot more with Lincolns and ACCs money. He had nearlybut not quiteenough political influence to get a lawyer on his payroll onto the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, and lobbied the board to have supervision of Lincoln removed from the San Francisco office and passed on to less experienced supervisors in Seattle. At one point he had made significant enough campaign contributions to get no fewer than five serving US senators to intervene on his behalf with the federal authorities; the Keating Five were later investigated and censured for their involvement.

In the end, though, the manner in which Charles Keating was brought down has to be considered a qualified success for the forces of regulation. Although he was able to bring huge amounts of political influence to bear, his attempts to get bank supervisors fired never really bore fruit. He found out that his detractors were simply better at bureaucratic infighting than his supporters. It did not help matters that ACC, his holding company, went ever more extravagantly bust as it got further and further involved with Michael Milkens junk-bond empire, and that he was financing ACC by selling bonds to widows and orphans in a way that was bound to attract the attention of other regulators, and burn the goodwill and political influence built up by his corrupt S&L. Lincoln Savings & Loan was seized by regulators in April 1989 and at $3.4 billion was the most expensive of all the S&L failures. Keating made a long, incomprehensible, and rambling speech to his employees toward the end, attempting to tie his own business failings in to a more general picture of American decline caused by communism, immorality, and pornography.

The S&L scandal illustrates the control element of a control fraud, but it also suggests that we need to be somewhat more subtle in our understanding of the relationship between control fraud and risk. The loans that people like Charles Keating made were often described in the reports of inquiry commissions as high risk, and in a sense, thats what they were. But when several multiples of the capital of a small savings bank had been invested in shopping-center developments being built into a glut, and fraudulently refinanced at multiples of their true value to connected parties, then it somehow stops making sense to talk about eventual insolvency as a risk rather than a certainty. Sure, you might strike oil in the foundations of one of them, or the local government might suddenly need to buy the land to build a road, but realistically, even if a broke S&L did suddenly turn up a miraculous source of profits, they would just be reinvested into bigger frauds. Like playing chicken by running back and forth across the train tracks, each individual project might be considered high risk but the eventual outcome is certain. The difference between good and bad borrowers in this context isnt one of probabilityits one of quality.

And Charles Keating didnt have a quality control problem in his lending; the types of projects that his banks lent to were part of the plan. Fraudsters like low-quality borrowers because they are easier to control. Thats partly because they just tend to be lower-quality people, and partly because they dont have alternativeslegitimate lenders wont touch them. If there was a solid real-estate development that was willing to refinance itself halfway through for no reason, or to sell a minority stake to a connected party at an inflated value, then Lincoln Savings & Loan would have been delighted to deal with it. But these things dont tend to happen; low-risk projects have fewer things that can go wrong with them, so more people are prepared to deal with them.

Distributed control fraud The S&L crisis was an example of the classic control fraud. A crook took control of an economic entity and used it to create fake profits, which could then be extracted by legitimate means (in the sense that large fake profits justified large salaries, bonuses, and dividends, which are all normal ways to distribute earnings, as opposed to theft). Its intellectually interesting because of the change in the method of theft, but its still a case where a single controlling mind took a decision to steal money.

The control fraud also, however, permits of an even higher degree of abstraction. In the run-up to the 2000s financial crisis, we saw the development of what might be called a distributed or self-organizing control fraud. As we move into discussion of this, a preemptive apology might be needed in case the language gets annoyingly elliptical, allusive, and overinclined to use the passive voice. If this happens, the reason will be that most of these people are still alive, and hardly any of them have been convicted of a criminal offense, and they and their lawyers might be unwilling to see the word fraud chucked around when the context is them. Sorry about that.

The reason that many of the perpetrators of the 2000s control frauds are still walking around and enjoying their profits is that one can actually develop the technology of a control fraud to a significantly more sophisticated level than the rather crude versions used by the original S&L crooks. One important aspect of a control fraud is that the method of extracting cash is usually not intrinsically criminal. You set up an organization such that it will legitimately pay out a percentage of its value to you through dividends, bonuses, and commercial transactions with other controlled entities, then you blow up the size of that entity to an absurd level by taking on a load of debt, and let the normal and legitimate mechanisms of the corporation transfer the fraudulent value into your pocket.

Now, consider thiswhat would happen if, rather than organizing the fraudulent inflation of the corporation yourself, you simply set up a system of incentives and (non-) checks and balances, such that other people were likely to inflate it for you? In other words, rather than committing crimes yourself to inflate the value, you just created a criminogenic10 environment in the firm, and let nature take its course? This would be heading for the perfect crimeall of the cash flowing into your pocket is legitimately sourced, while all the fraudulent inflation that drives it would be done by other people. As long as there is no connection that can be found between the creation of the criminogenic scheme and decisions taken by you, this is close to unprosecutable. And given the way in which corporations can work by nods and winks, its not hard to manage the setup of a self-organizing scam without leaving any paper trail or even anyone in a whistle-blower position.

Thats pretty abstract. But there is a level of abstraction even higher than that. What ifstay with me here because there will be exampleswhat if there really was no intention to create a criminogenic scheme at all? If you were lucky enough to set up a company with bad incentives and internal controls by accident, then you would get nothing but positive reinforcement for your decision for quite a whileit would look like the company was profitable, it would grow at a snowballing rate, and in that sort of situation, what senior manager would question whether or not he deserved a big bonus? Hypothetically, it could be possible for a massive control fraud to take place purely by accident, without any criminal responsibility for the overall scheme at all. This would present a really unattractive case; there would be appalling amounts of criminality and misrepresentation, but all of it would have been carried out by relatively low-level employees, most of whom would hardly have profited from doing so, and many of whom would be able to credibly claim that they were not sophisticated enough to realize that what they were doing was illegal. Meanwhile, you would have a top tier of rich senior managers, who should have known what was going on, and about whom everyone has a strong suspicion that they must have known, but no possibility whatsoever of anyone being able to meet criminal standards of evidence of them having done so, because they in fact didnt know. Can you think of anything more likely to be corrosive to general standards of public trust in the modern capitalist system? And anything more clearly descriptive of what actually happened in a lot of cases in the 1990s and early 2000s?

Mortgage-backed securities and robosigning Like the apocryphal quote about Mae West playing Snow White, the mortgage-backed securities market started off pretty pure, but it drifted. The mechanics are simple; you form a brass-plate company11 with a funny name, then sell bonds issued by your company to investors and use the cash proceeds to let the brass-plate company buy a bunch of mortgage loans from a bank. When this happens, the bank is now free of the risk of something like the first stage of the 1980s S&L crisis happening to its interest income (and it has freed up funding that can be used to make more loans), and the investor has a bond. Since lots of investors are things like pension funds that arent at risk from deposit rates, but that want things that pay out steady cash flows over the life of their pensioners, there is a gain from trade. As anyone who read newspapers during the high days of panic in the Global Financial Crisis of 20082009 knows, you can add many dozens of layers of corporate finance tricksiness in order to get exactly the right kind of bond that the investors want while creating a load of toxic-waste bonds that bear all the risks that nobody wants, but this is the basic structure. As a way of shifting risks onto the people best placed to bear them, and thus making mortgage credit cheaper and more widely available, they looked like they worked for a long while.

There is a big underlying snag, though, which is also pretty widely understood after a few hit Hollywood movies, so well go through it only quickly. Since the bank that makes the loan knows that its going to be sold on to somebody else, they dont have as much incentive to check up on the credit quality of the borrower as they might if they were keeping it for themselves. And in conditions of overwhelming demand for mortgage-backed bonds, some quite scuzzy people get drawn into the mortgage-lending industry and are able to get funding even though theyre underwriting loans that should clearly never have been made.

So anyway, there are tales of cocaine and steroids, with mortgage brokers lying in order to sell mortgages to people who could never afford them. Tales of products designed so that the monthly payment shot up once the teaser period was over. And then the bonds themselves were pushed out onto the global market to gullible investors (many of them foreigners) with the minimum of transparency or care on the part of the investment banks responsible. And those investment banks in turn were largely too busy slapping themselves on the back for fooling the rubes to remember that their own balance sheets were carrying the toxic-waste risks, the last dregs of those brass-plate companies that no investor, no matter how much free tequila you bought them, would be prepared to buy. And there are thousands upon thousands of families forced out of their homes, with credit and wealth destroyed that had taken a generation to build even to the meager levels at which it stood before the crisis. These are tales that have been told a lot. Whats less clear is how all these individual acts fit together into a structure in which everyone was guilty but nobody went to jail.

One way to think about what happened was as the result of two interlocking control frauds. In order to get the mortgage securitization market off the ground in the first place, the investment banks had to bend the rules, if not commit outright fraud. The system that it put together facilitated the commission of another massive fraud12 on vulnerable borrowers. And the consequences of this fraud folded back to the initial fraud, with the investment banks attempting to extricate themselves from the consequences of the second fraud by turning the first system of sharp-but-probably-legal practice into a definite and massive fraud. Lets start with the organizational and legal disaster area that was called MERS.

Skimping on the paperwork The United States of America is unusual as a country in that it has no central land registry. Title to land is often not even centralized at a state level; it is mainly registered in county courthouses. There is hardly any digitalization of the system and, naturally, errors and uncertainties are rife. It is one of the few countries in the world in which there exists a product known as title insurancean insurance policy that covers a homeowner and mortgage lender against the risk that someone else turns out to still have valid title to the land that the homeowner erroneously believes he has correctly registered.13 Unfortunately, the existence of this producta billion-dollar industry that only exists because of the entirely broken land-title systemmeans that there is a substantial lobby against doing anything to improve it, and this lobby shares an interest with thousands of county courthouses.

However, although there was a strong lobby against doing anything about US land title, there was also a substantial lobby in favor of doing something. Mortgages on properties needed to be registered in the same way, and particularly, needed to be reregistered every time the identity of the mortgagor changed.14 In the old days of banking, this hardly ever happened, as the bank would hold the mortgage until the homeowner moved house and the property was sold. If, on the other hand, you want to have a brand new market-based system of mortgage finance, with residential mortgages packaged into securities and traded in their billions every day, it would be quite a speed bump in that process to have to send people all round the country to municipal buildings to reregister the change of mortgagor.

And so, a solution was found. The banks decided that they would create a central database, called MERS (the Mortgage Electronic Registration System). They would also create a nominee company, also called MERS. Whenever a bank wanted to turn a portfolio of mortgages into a mortgage-backed security, they would transfer the registration of the mortgage into the name of MERS, file away15 the paper documentation, and say that from then on, the mortgages would be traded between banks and investors as claims on MERS. Meanwhile, a specialist bank called a servicer would do the work of actually collecting the payments, talking to the customer, and foreclosing on the house if necessary. It was an elegant solution, if it had been legal.

Was it legal? It was not clear. The title-insurance industry and the municipal courthouse lobby, seeing a threat to their fee income, lobbied hard to get a law passed against it, but failed. This left MERS in, ironically, the same grimy and uncertain legal state as most American land titlesCongress had never said it was legal, but also specifically declined to make a firm statement that it was illegal. Given the prospect of making a lot of money, and the general deregulatory spirit of the 1990s and early 2000s, it was generally agreed that this was close enough for rock and roll.

What was definitely a bad idea, though, was the decision to never really go through with properly registering the mortgages to the trustee, not make even the initial visit to the county courthouse, and just submit all the paperwork to MERS instead, relying on them to hand it back if anything went wrong. This was now not so much close enough for rock and roll as out of tune, even for free jazz. But it was essential to the industry as it wanted to develop in the years of the real-estate bubbleit would have simply been administratively impossible for the industry to make the kind of volume of loans that it wanted to make if it had done things properly.

Even before the crash, the mess that was US mortgage paperwork caused problems. When a borrower defaulted on a loan, the servicer needed to foreclose on the property. At this point, the servicer asked for delivery of the mortgage paperwork from MERS. At this point, the servicer all too often found out that someone had cut corners a few years previously, and the mortgagor of record was a different bank, usually the one that had made the loan.16 At this point, the servicer had to spend some time and money (and wipe out a good proportion of the savings made by cutting corners in the first place) by getting some lawyers down to the municipal courthouse, apologizing profusely, and getting the mortgage transferred so that it could proceed with the foreclosure. As long as you didnt have too many defaultsand in the boom years, you didntit all staggered along.

Finance is weird Lets pause the MERS story there to look at how and why the loans themselves that went into the system were so bad. In order to understand the criminogenic incentives, it might be a good idea to remind us how strange even quite simple financial calculations can be, and how deadbeat customers are the most profitable. Before we get on to mortgages, lets take a really simple example: the maxed-out credit-card customer.

The very best kind of customer for a credit-card lender is one who makes the minimum payment every month, but no more. It isnt too hard to see why with a little arithmetic. Pretend you have $1,000 to invest, and you want it to generate an income for you forever. Even if you get a very generous rate of 4 percent, youre looking at forty dollars a year. But if youre lucky enough to own a credit-card business and have the right kind of customer, you can do much better than that.

A maxed-out credit-card balance of $1,000 means a minimum payment of forty dollars per month. At that minimum payment, and assuming a typical credit-card rate of interest, the balance would be repaid in just under six years, with total payments of around $1,500, according to the standard mathematics of loan repayments. But in fact, its likely to be a lot better than that.

The reason for this is that a borrower with a maxed-out credit card who is only making the minimum monthly payment is very unlikely to be someone who is going to pay off that full balance. Something will come up after a year or so, and he or she will run it back up to the $1,000 limit. So rather than reducing the balance and therefore the interest cost, your borrower is more likely to just hang around for the foreseeable future, paying you forty dollars every month for the privilegethe same income as your bank deposit would have paid you in a whole year. Every now and then some of the principal sum will be paid back, but not for long. The financial experience is going to be more like having a deposit account that pays 48 percent interest.

Of course, it can be objected that people in this financial situation often end up realizing that their debts are unsustainable and going into some form of bankruptcy or other, or at the very least taking advantage (if they can) of the consumer-protection laws in some jurisdictions that freeze the interest. But as long as it takes them more than two years to realize the mess theyre in, youve got your original $1,000 paid back, and you can find another borrower to replace them with. Credit-card customers who are bad at managing their money are gold dust, and the biggest snag with this investment strategy17 is that these days the people who pore through credit files and social media data to locate them will charge you an arm and a leg for the sales leads.

The intuition Im trying to establish here is firstly that in order to understand these things you have to adopt an analytical approach that a lot of people find to be pretty terrifyingly amoral. And secondly, that everyday consumer financial products are often much trickier than the stocks, bonds, and derivatives of high-end finance, because they have all these little features built into them to account for consumer behavior. And you have to analyze them based on the way that they are actually used, not by looking at the interest rates and maturity dates on the paperwork. The key to understanding the subprime-mortgage distributed control fraud is to think about early repayment.

Making money out of other peoples trouble Patient Zero of the subprime scandal began life as a relatively nontoxic product, invented by one of the most ethical and socially conscious mortgage lenders that there ever was in the USA, Golden West Financial18 of California. It was called Pick-a-Pay, and it was an Option ARM.

The idea was that the early years are often the toughest for a new homeowneryou need to buy furniture, set up utility bills, and so on. Added to which, your income is likely not to be as high in the early years of the mortgage as it will be later on. So its an attractive pricing structure to set the interest rate low for the first couple of years, and then higher for the rest of the mortgagethis is the adjustable rate mortgage or ARM part of the description.

And sometimes people who have just moved into a new house have a baby, or they go through a bit of employment uncertainty before theyve had a chance to rebuild their savings from paying the mortgage deposit. So it would be nice to have a bit of flexibility with respect to the monthly paymentto choose to pay a lower amount, and have the underpayment added on to the principal sum. Thats the option bit of the name, and the idea that the principal balance is growing rather than shrinking in the early years is called negative amortisation (amortisation being a bankers term referring to the gradual paying down of a loan). And finally, of course it wouldnt be fair for you to just take the early discount period and then move your mortgage to a cheaper deal, so these products tended to include a prepayment penalty to compensate the lender for missing the higher-interest payments at the end of the discount period.

All of these things sound pretty reasonablethere is the word negative in there, but in a context that makes it sound like a good thing, and the penalty can sort of be seen as fair dealing. In fact, put together and in the conditions of the 2000s, these are the ingredients for a hellbroth of perverse incentives.

The thing is that the subprime-mortgage product was always based on the assumption that it would be repaid early. It may have been nominally a twenty-five-year mortgage, but people arent meant to stay subprime forever. They improve their credit, their income goes up, and they qualify for a prime mortgage. Or even if nothing much happens, the price of their house goes up, which makes them a better risk proposition even with all other things held equal. Thats the reason for the prepayment penalty; because its expected that as soon as they can, the borrower is going to refinance to a cheaper loan.

But in a market in which incomes are stagnant, interest rates falling, and house prices rising, that prepayment penalty starts becoming crucial to the economics of the thing.19 It was typically set at an amount of money roughly equal to six months interest payments. So if you got into a situation in which borrowers almost all refinanced after two years, then the lender effectively got five mortgage payments for the price of four. Thats quite a sizable bonus, particularly if it happens over and over again.

In the sweatbox In order to earn the bonus, banks increasingly had an incentive to structure the products so that they would be more likely to be refinanced. You want to make sure that the loan is affordable at the teaser rate, but completely unaffordable at the go-to rate. If this happens, then the borrower is effectively stuck and forced to refinance whether their income has gone up or not, usually adding the prepayment penalty onto the amount of the new loan. This was one big weakness in the system; historically, refinancings had been a means of lowering the monthly cost to the borrower.

If that didnt happenif one subprime loan was rolled over into another one rather than into a prime loanthen with the combination of the high interest cost and the periodic penalties, the borrower was not really making much progress on repaying the principal amount. They would pay the interest cost for two years, during which the value of their house would increase. Then, under a certain amount of financial duress, they would refinance, and the prepayment penalty would eat up about half of the house price appreciation. The borrower wouldnt have the money to pay the prepayment penalty up fronttheyre poor, rememberso it would get added onto the balance of the loan. And so, like a minimum-payment credit-card borrower in the sweatbox, the subprime-mortgage customer would be making their monthly payments on a loan that grew rather than shrank every two years. This was, not wholly unfairly, characterized by banking-sector critics as renting a customer to sit in the house you are betting on.

If the value of the house was going up, the credit risk would still look okay (remember Chapter 2mortgage bankers have no cares, they chiefly look at the value of the collateral rather than the repayments). But it can be noted at this stage that we were building a system that was very dependent on rising house prices, and that would come under serious strain if large numbers of houses had to be repossessed in a flat or falling market. The subprime-mortgage scam is not as good as the subprime credit-card scam as a method of exploiting poor people, because a large part of its value is in the loan itself rather than the cash flow.

There was another, much bigger problem, though. This was a terrible deal for the borrower. The banks werent willing to forgo the higher interest payments on subprime loans entirely; even the teaser rates were often as high as 8 percent per year, with the cost somewhat concealed by lowering the monthly payment with the Pick-a-Pay trick. What kind of a person would agree to a deal in which they were paying premium subprime rates, but were forced to keep refinancing (and paying a penalty to do so), effectively giving up a significant share of their house price growth to the lender while never really building any housing equity themselves?

Its the same answer every time we ask about the typical victims of fraud. Greedy people, desperate people, and people who didnt know what they were doing. This is the point in the story at which all the stories of laughter and tears emerge that have lit up the Hollywood screens. Strippers with six rental properties. Families offered an American dream that went sour. Divorced families for whom the choice was get this loan or sell the house.20 And the business of getting these people through the door, in the quantity that the financial industry demanded, was predictably ugly. Bank apologists occasionally try to shift the blame onto irresponsible borrowers, but its one of the truest proverbs of the industry that financial products are sold, not bought. Even in cases that are less obviously exploitative than the systematic marketing of unaffordable subprime products in low-income communities, it stretches belief to pretend that dozens of people just woke up in the morning and decided to get out of taking their clothes off for a living and into real-estate investment.

Criminogenesis Which is where the story joins back up with MERS and the securities industry. For a variety of reasons, all of which boil down to various idiots thought that they were much safer than they actually were, subprime mortgages, despite being extremely profitable on the four-payments-for-the-price-of-five refinancing model, could be funded very cheaply by borrowing through the bond market. This meant that investment banks who wanted to originate these securities were prepared to pay well over the odds for the raw material. And that created a predictable incentive thats been known to pest-control authorities since the colonial period of the USAif you are paying ten cents for a pelt, the local children are going to start breeding rats.

This was the criminogenic incentive. Nobody really decided to do this, but if you pay over the odds to buy a particular type of loan product that only suits a very small proportion of borrowers, then that loan is going to be sold to people whom it doesnt suit. And the structure of the Option ARM lent itself to misleading sales practices. Really not so many borrowers understood that a lower monthly payment didnt necessarily mean a cheaper loan. The prepayment penalty structure was also criminogenic, because it encouraged salespeople to keep coming back to the well to get recurring commissions, while disguising to the customers how much they were paying by adding the amount to the principal of the loan.

But as well as providing the bounty to incentivize the sales force to bad practice, the way that the mortgage industry had developed managed to, probably unintentionally, circumvent one of the controls on how bad things could get. Because, awful as it was, the cranky old land-title system that MERS largely replaced had at least been under local supervision and had provided a channel of information to the state-level regulators who were largely responsible for mortgage-lending standards.

Texas didnt have a housing bubble in the 2000s. This came as a surprise to some people as the Lone Star State had historically been quite prone to real-estate booms and busts; it had been the second most important locus of the S&L scandal and Don Dixon of the Vernon S&L was almost as big a crook as Charles Keating. But during the particular distributed, self-organizing control fraud that characterized the bubble of the 2000s, a few pieces of banking law that had been hanging around in the state constitution since the turn of the century suddenly became useful. Texas did not allow loans that had negative amortisation. It restricted mortgage loans to 80 percent of the appraised house value and prohibited the act of taking out a mortgage to pay other debts. And finally and most importantly, Texas prohibited the charging of prepayment fees on high cost (which is to say, subprime) mortgages. A few other states (Vermont, for example) had similar laws and saw similar effects.

If other states had regulated prepayment fees and negative amortisation, there would have been much less value in the subprime lending business for the mortgage providers, less bounty to incentivize the sales force, and almost no reason at all to sell Option ARMs to people who could not afford them. The wall of credit would not be pushing prices up so much, which would in turn restrict the flow of abusive lending still further. But for state regulators to make these changes, they would have needed to realize that there was a problem to solve. Taking mortgage registrations out of the county courthouses cut off the flow of this kind of information.

Enter the robosigners When the housing market turned down, the weaknesses in both halves of the interlocking system were exposed. The aggressively mis-sold21 Option ARM had always been a triumph of short-term over long-term thinking, because there was no realistic way of getting the principal back from the borrowers repayments. That meant that at some point, the lender was always going to end up having to repossess the house and sell it. Seemingly no thought at all had gone into the question of what the circumstances surrounding that situation would be, whether the rapid growth of the market meant that a lot of lenders would be trying to do the same thing at the same time, and how this would affect the core assumption that diversified bundles of subprime mortgages were safer than the mortgages themselves. Frighteningly, though, the difficulty of getting anything close to the appraisal value in a repossession was only the second-worst problem the mortgage industry had made for itself.

The worst problem was that of getting the repossessions done at all. As the prices fell, homeowners exercised their option to hand back the keys and walk away from the loan. Either that, or they lost their income and stopped paying. Suddenly the banks were overwhelmed with defaults.

We noted a few sections back that it would have been an administrative impossibility to finance the loan growth if the paperwork had been done properly first time around. This logic now worked viciously in reverse. It was an equally great administrative impossibility to do the paperwork properly in handling the defaults; there were not enough lawyers and not enough hours to get the mortgages transferred. A lot of the mortgage paperwork was either lost, or registered in the name of a bank that had nothing to do with either the original lender, the current servicer (the bank that handled the admin of collecting payments), or the brass-plate mortgage-bond company that actually owned the loan. And without anyone presenting the mortgage note, the borrower could in principle stave off foreclosure indefinitely; just as a landowner cant sell a house if the mortgage is there, a court wont usually allow someone to foreclose on a property just because they say they have a mortgage on it.22 When faced with the consequences of having cut corners in the past, the banks did what came naturallythey cut corners. And this is where things started moving out of the realm of unacceptably sloppy practice and into the realm of definite fraud. Bank employees started falsifying documentation to make it look as if the mortgage had been transferred years ago. The term robosigner was coined to describe a bank employee who had his or her signature on so many loan agreements that it was obviously impossible that they were originals; they were just facsimile loan documents that had been put out in a row on a table and signed, one after another, for hours on end. And then delivered to the court system as if they were originals.

The problem was, if the original documentation had been present, it might have shown that the lending decisions were very badly flawed in the first place. People were offered loans well beyond their capacity to repay. Borrowers (particularly from ethnic minority communities with a history of suffering discrimination by lenders) were sold expensive subprime loans, despite having credit scores good enough to qualify for much cheaper ones. Customers were encouraged to take out the kinds of loans that CDO investors wanted, rather than the fixed-rate loans they wanted, and were systematically deceived about the risks they were facing in doing so.

There were comparatively few cases in which the loan documentation was literally created out of fresh airin most cases, the robosigned documents did represent real mortgages, and the borrowers were actually delinquent on their loans, meaning that the banks had the formal right to repossess. But in lots of cases, the robosigning affair had the effect of depriving the courts of material information that might have inclined the judges to take a more lenient view of the borrowers behavior, and to be more likely to agree to restructuring or repayment plans. The destruction of the original documentation also concealed the identity of the original loan officer, helping to cover up any element of fraud or misstatement in the original sale.

This made the whole problem much worse than it needed to be. Because they were uncertain about the paperwork and knew they were on a very doubtful footing indeed from a legal point of view, the banks went into hedgehog modethey curled into a ball and went all spiky. In a lot of cases, a modification of the loan terms, moving borrowers onto a cheaper deal to take advantage of the interest-rate cuts made in response to the crisis, could have potentially brought them current and avoided the pain of a repossession. But these werent done, for fear of setting a precedent, and the intensity of the banking industrys lobbying meant that they werent forced by the regulators either. There is a temptation to say23 that the robosigning affair was a bit of a technical errorthat the problems with respect to MERS were unfortunate but basically accidental failures to keep up with the unexpected growth of mortgage securitization, and that robosigning was a panicked ad hoc response to an equally unforeseen crisis and an attempt to work around the problems caused by the fundamentally broken and itself rather corrupt land-title system. But this would be wrong.

The courts are entitled to demand that they get paperwork filed honestly and properly. This isnt a nice to have, its fundamental to the workings of the system, and remains true even if it is absurdly costly and inefficient to do sothis is just the legal systems way of telling you that you arent allowed to scale up your economic thing yet. When this convention is broken, everyone is in a state of legal uncertainty and really bad decisions get made. Robosigning was an industrialized fraud, and the fact that the banks hardly benefited from the horrible decisions they made doesnt let them off the hook for the damage that they caused to other people by denying them due process in their mortgage repossessions.

So we have two big deals herethe system of incentives that created the Option ARM market, and the tragicomedy of errors that produced MERS. Nobody ever sat down and decided to do them, but they happened. And while they were happening, a very large amount of money flowed in bonuses and stock options to the C-suite executives. Theres a strong feeling that somebody should have gone to jail over this.

But in order to put someone in jail as society demands, you have to persuade them to meet you halfway by committing a crime. And its just not a crime to run your business really badly. There were massive and systematic crimes of fraud committed, but they were mainly committed by low-level employees, harassed by an impossible system. The robosigners themselves were in a situation largely not of their own making, where someone superior to them had decided that failure was not an option. It might have been possible to investigate how far up the chain of command the decision to falsify mortgage deeds was taken, but the authorities were reluctant to do that because it would raise questions about their own complicity in turning a blind eye to the creation of MERS because they didnt want to take on the title-insurance lobby.

Meanwhile, some of the most fraudulent mortgage brokers were punished by state authorities for the consumer finance laws they broke. But the majority of Option ARMs were not pushed by cocaine-snorting bodybuilders. They were sold in bank branches, by staff who might have aspired to a reasonable bonus or a team-building event in Hawaii, but who were much more likely to have been motivated by the prospect of being fired for failing to meet their targets. There was not much point in prosecuting them, and public sentiment would hardly have been assuaged in any case. And the people at the top of the pyramid, broadly speaking, got away, their share options mostly taking a mauling, but hanging on to their accumulated cash bonuses and whatever shares they sold. Angelo Mozilo, the chief executive of Countrywide, was prosecuted by the SEC and paid a $67.5 million fine, but this was for insider dealing in selling his Countrywide shares on the way up, not for his part in the housing bubble. The blow to public trust does not seem to have been as great as the destruction of the Portuguese economy by Artur Alves dos Reis, but its in the same league. The frustrating thing here is that this all happened without anyone specifically intending it to. The self-organizing tendency of distributed control frauds ties into some very deep ideas about information, incentives, and economics.

1. Specifically, imagine that you are Elizabeth Young (then known as Peter) at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management in 1999, on whose case this stylized example is based. I have abstracted away a lot of the details of the Young case that relate to Ms. Youngs mental breakdown because they are irrelevant and sad.

2. In fact, in the real-life case, it was also a fraud. The tendency of fraudsters to prey on other fraudsters (or of victims to commit frauds in order to invest in frauds) is surprisingly widespread.

3. In the good old days of investment management, along with multiple-martini lunches and investor meetings held in strip clubs, it was not uncommon for mutual funds to be allowed a discretionary allocation of about 10 percent of the portfolio to investments that didnt have anything to do with the mandate but that the portfolio manager thought were cant-miss certainties. This practice has largely been stamped out, as a result of fiascoes like the Young case.

4. In principle or she, but in fact there have so far been no major rogue-trader cases involving female employees. The closest might be Ina Drew of JP Morgan, who was widely blamed (but not held criminally responsible) for the $9 billion London Whale losses in her department in 2012.

5. Actually most of them have changed the system a bit since the global crisis, and bonuses are legally capped at 100 percent of basic salary in Europe, in the hope that this will dull the incentives. But lots of hedge funds still work this way, and (as Ill explain later) I think it changes the actual psychology of rogue trading less than youd imagine.

6. In principle, a rogue trader might also make unauthorized profits by taking excessive risks and being lucky, and should be fired or disciplined for doing so. Maybe this has even happened somewhere once, but not to my knowledge.

7. In fairness to Jett, he has consistently maintained that he was not a rogue and that his managers knew exactly what he was doing. They denied this, though, and Kidder, Peabody can hardly have intended to pay bonuses on phantom profits, so the hat seems to fit.

8. Skating-over-complexity warning. A lot of financial trading doesnt happen on exchanges; its just done between two parties agreeing between themselves. Most of the same daily cash-exchange conventions usually apply, but not always, and this makes things much trickier for the eventual investigators.

9. Goodwill is the key here. If you have a bunch (say $100 million) of mortgages paying 5 percent interest, and the going rate is 10 percent, then your mortgages are actually only worth about $50 million. If you write them down to that value, youre bust. But if someone takes you over for $100 million, they can say that the mortgages are clearly only worth $50 million, but your unique franchise, reputation, etc. is worth another $50 million. It sounds crazy, but even honest auditors will usually go along with itas the acquirer is paying $100 million and he is presumed to know his business. If interest rates subsequently fall to 8 percent, the acquirer can sell your mortgages for $80 million, locking in a real loss of $20 million but declaring an accounting profit of $30 million. The way in which goodwill is accounted for has changed since the 1980s, but its still a big problem area.

10. Having the tendency to incentivize criminal behavior. An excellent coinage of Bill Blacks to describe the state of S&L regulation in the late 1980s.

11. Metaphorically. In the end, there were so many of these things that for them to have had any physical existence at all would have consumed a material proportion of the worlds supply of brass.

12. Fraud here used in an ordinary language sense rather than criminal sense. One of the many disquieting things we discovered during the housing crash was how little legal protection borrowers had against misleading and abusive sales practices.

13. Not the weirdest real-estate insurance product in the world, by the way. In England (and to a lesser extent Wales and Scotland), the original grants of land to feudal lords by the Crown often included an obligation to maintain the churches existing on the land. This obligation was not always detached from the ownership of the land as the great estates were split up, bought, and sold, and the Church of England often enforces it when it believes it has a clear right going back centuries. And so it is that in some regions, chancel repair liability insurance protects the homeowner against the possibility that he may be unwittingly responsible for the upkeep and restoration of a medieval church.

14. Obviously, you need to register the lenders mortgage alongside the identity of the landowner. The whole point to a lender of having a mortgage on a property is that the owner cant sell it without paying you back.

15. In a lot of cases, this was file away in the sense of lose.

16. Usually but not always. Sometimes loans got sold two or three times before transferring into MERS, and if the paperwork had been done wrongly, the name on the mortgage might end up being a bank that literally nobody involved in the foreclosure had heard of.

17. The other biggest snag with it is that the 48 percent rate of return youre earning from milking the minimum payment out of your customer isnt a compound rate. If it was, the snowball effect would take over and your $1,000 would grow to $2.5 million over the course of twenty years, which is unrealistic. But if what youre concerned with is income, thats the income youre getting.

18. Sold by its founders to the much less impressive Wachovia Bank in 2006, which commenced writing a load of amazing garbage under the same brand and going bust.

19. I am indebted for this analysis to Mike Konczal of the Roosevelt Foundation and Professor Jamie Galbraith of the University of Texas, who explained it to me while the scam was going on.

20. Actual quote from a focus group held by Washington Mutual and cited in Kirsten Grinds book on Washington Mutual, The Lost Bank.

21. Mis-sold is a regulatory term of art, popularized in England, where similar shenanigans had gone on for years. It is meant to convey the sense of fraud by misrepresentation of the terms of a financial contract, without implying that the regulator intends to go through the bother of putting anyone on trial.

22. Although in Florida, a notorious court known as the rocket docket for its speedy processing of repossession cases did more or less allow anyone to repossess a house, providing they wore a nice suit and had at least some paperwork from MERS.

23. I have made this argument a couple of times, in print, and in person to David Dayen, whose book Chain of Title is the definitive history of the robosigning scandal. Dave, if youre reading this, I hereby admit you were right.

Chapter 8: The Economics of Fraud I could not think of any man whose spirit was, or needed to be, more enlarged than the spirit of a genuine merchant. What a thing it is to see the order which prevails throughout his business! By means of this he can at any time survey the general whole, without needing to perplex himself in the details.

J. W. von Goethe, Wilhelm Meisters Apprenticeship Imagine you are managing somethingpart of a business, an academic department, a government agency or something. Choose something you know a bit about. Now imagine that you want to defraud someone else. In order to do that, you are going to need to tell some lies in order to gain something of value. What would you try to steal? What would you need to falsify? How would you do it? How would you keep the fraud going over time? How much money could you extract from the fraud?

Once you have written down the list of things you would need to do in order to turn your workplace into a successful fraud, sit down and have a look at it. Isnt this a useful document? It shows you: What the key indicators are that show whether your business is doing well or badly.

What a really good set of numbers (and maybe even nonnumerical performance indicators) would look like.

How growth and compound interest are expected to affect the legitimate business over time.

What questions you should ask of a really good set of numbers to make sure that they reflect a good reality rather than someone manipulating them.

In other words, to understand how to defraud something is to understand how to manage it.

Thats potentially quite a useful mental exerciseif youre ever in the position of taking over a new operation, or thrust into a consulting assignment, or just wanting to renew your understanding of something youre in charge of, thinking like a fraudster might be a way to generate new insights.1 But theres a somewhat more disconcerting aspect to this thought experiment, because it works the other way around too.

Which is to say, if you were to write down a summary of how you manage something, the things you look for and pay attention to, how you expect them to develop, and what you check in order to make sure all is as it should be, then you would have the beginnings of a template to carry out a fraud on the same workplace. The information set is the same; to understand how to manage something is also to understand how to defraud it.

This might suggest a pessimistic conclusionthat anything that can be managed can be stolen from, and that precautions are useless because all manageable entities are equally vulnerable. That would be going too far. Its also true that any lock made by a human can be picked by a human, and that the plans to design a lock are also the template for its vulnerabilities. But that doesnt mean that locks are useless, or that all locks are equally vulnerable.

In fact, we can see that theres almost an inverse relationship between our imaginary pairs of templates (management/fraud and fraud/management). The easier something is to managethe more possible it is to take a comprehensive view of all thats going on, and to check every transaction individuallythe more difficult it is to defraud.

Vulnerability to crime, in other words, tends to scale with the cognitive demands placed on the management of a business. The more things a manager has to pay attention to, the easier it becomes to carry out a commercial fraud. It also gets easier with increasing uncertainty with regard to what a normal or valid transaction looks like; thats why so many big frauds occur in brand-new business lines where there has been no time to establish a baseline of common practice.

We can be even more specific than that. Modern crime is driven by the cognitive demand placed on managers because it exploits the technologies used in an industrial society to manage that cognitive demand. Fraudsters parasitize the economy by attacking the systems we use to economize on knowledge, information, and attention. Its like a stage magic trickthe fraudster has to know where the audience is going to be looking, and make sure that the nefarious action is taking place somewhere else.

A little intellectual history There are some very deep ideas about economics tied up in that rather glib little phrase the systems we use to economize on knowledge. They are in fact so deep that they have more or less resisted attempts to turn them into mathematical formalisms, with the result that they survived their encounter with academic economists and remain reasonably meaningful. Here then, in appropriately brisk and schematic form, is a history of the techniques used in a modern industrial economy to handle the problem of getting a drink from a firehoseto reduce to (literally) manageable proportions the flood of information thrown up by an even moderately complex economy.

We start with F. A. Hayek. Although the Austrian school of economics is, to be frank, not in very good shape today, nobody can take away their greatest achievement, which is noticing that there was a problem to solve here. It arose in the context of (at the time, very live) debates centered on the London School of Economics in the 1920s over whether a centrally planned (i.e., Communist) economy would be so efficiently managed and productive that it would sweep away all democratic societies. Getting this one right was tougher than it sounds today, simply because Hayeks central insight has been so thoroughly absorbed into our intellectual framework that it seems much more obvious than it was at the time. As Hayek noted, the benefit of a market system is that it economizes on information gathering, by allowing aggregate production and consumption decisions to arise organically out of lots of small transactions rather than one big plan: The statistics which such a central authority would have to use would have to be arrived at precisely by abstracting from minor differences between the things, by lumping together, as resources of one kind, items which differ as regards location, quality, and other particulars, in a way which may be very significant for the specific decision There is hardly anything that happens anywhere in the world that might not have an effect on the decision he ought to make.2 Hayek didnt believe that the information problem faced by a socialist planner simply boiled down to a lack of sufficiently powerful computers. That might be solved by technological progress. He thought it was insoluble, because most of the information that you would need to plan an economy was tacitembodied in personal experience, spread out across the production units themselves, and not available, even in principle, to any information-collecting authority. Although this very strong version of tacit knowledge is controversial, a weaker version of the idea has been very influential indeed. And thats the concept of private information, which the planner doesnt have, either because its too costly to collect or because the people who generate the information dont want to share it. The great thing about the market economy is that the information itself can stay privateall the disaggregated system needs to know about it can be summarized in its effect on market prices.

It is worth contemplating for a moment a very simple and commonplace instance of the action of the price system in order to see what precisely it accomplishes. Assume that somewhere in the world a new opportunity for the use of some raw material, say, tin, has arisen, or that one of the sources of the supply of tin has been eliminated. It does not matter for our purposeand it is very significant that it does not matterwhich of these two causes has made tin more scarce. All that the users of tin need to know is that some of the tin they used to consume is now more profitably employed elsewhere and that, in consequence, they must economize tin. There is no need for the great majority of them even to know where the more urgent need has arisen, or in favor of what other needs they ought to husband the supply.

So the Hayekian paradigm was one in which the central planner was replaced by a network of small economic actors, each with private (possibly tacit) information about their own consumption desires and production possibilities. And this private information was gradually revealed and fed into the overall economy by small transactions at constantly changing prices. As a model, this works well to describe a fish market. But you cant build a cathedral or a nuclear power station that way.

Checking prices is a costly and cognitively demanding process itself. For projects that need to make long-term plans and output decisions over time, it is more efficient to draw together resources on the basis of long-term contracts rather than to keep bidding for them in a brand-new market every day. A large cluster of these long-term contracts is what we call a firm, and Ronald Coases contribution to this strand of intellectual history was to set out the circumstances under which firms would form, and how the economy would tend not to the frictionless ideal, but to be made up of islands of central planning linked by bridges of price signals.

Of course, bringing the theory of the firm back into the model brings back a lot of the information problems associated with the socialist planning debate. The price mechanism and decentralized markets work to use private information at the firm level, but within the firms, managers are as blind as Soviet central planners ever were. The problem of trying to make sure your desired outcome happens when you cant directly monitor the person responsible for doing it is, in the most general terms possible, known as the principal/agent problem, and something like three or four Nobel Prizes in economics (Mirrlees, Tirole, and at least half each of Meade and Hansen) have been given out for progress in tackling various versions of it.

The basic idea is usually to create something that works a bit like a price signal, to allow the private information to be revealed, and then to design a contract based on this price signal that aligns the incentives of the agent (the employee) with those of the principal (the manager or owner) as much as possible. So if you wanted someone to trade LIBOR futures on your behalf, but you couldnt tell how good they were at it or how hard they were working, you might design a contract based on something you could measure (like their trading profit) and align their incentives with yours (by paying them a bonus based on it). I have picked this example intentionally to warn the reader that the approach often doesnt work very well.3 Not all bonus schemes or incentive contracts are as bad as the ones you see in investment banks. But the prospect of designing perfect performance-based pay schemes that perfectly align everyones incentives and do away with the need for planning is a chimera; as Coase showed, if this was really possible, there would be no need for the firm to exist. So, while academic economists post-Hayek have tended to stay away from the concept of planning altogether, other specialists have stepped in and developed theories about how production and planning systems could be improved.

As one might expect, these have typically advanced in the business schools and management consultancies rather than the academic economics departments, and have mainly been directed toward the improvement of techniques of measurement. If you cant measure something, you cant manage it is something of a caricature4 of modern management science, but it expresses a deep truth: management is an information-processing job, and the development of large corporations has been made possible by the parallel development of reporting structures, quality and output measures, and other tools for getting that information from the machines into the offices.

Modern management science could fairly be said to have started with The Principles of Scientific Management by Frederick Winslow Taylor in 1911, which first advocated the time and motion study and the scientific analysis of business processes, starting with a famous study of how many rest breaks a man should take while shoveling iron ore onto a truck. And it could almost as fairly be said that a very great proportion of management theory since Taylor has been made up of calls to measure different things, in order to correct for the biases introduced by the previous round of changes. William Edwards Deming, for example, started the quality revolution, based on statistical measures of defect rates in manufacturing, and quickly expanded it into a whole philosophy.

Management theory tends to cycle between trying to deliver efficiency, quality, and customization. If you mainly measure cost indicators, quality tends to suffer. If you mainly measure quality indicators, the cost tends to drift up. If you refuse to compromise and demand both low cost and high quality, you tend to find you have concentrated too much on your own production process and not enough on what the customers want. If you try to achieve all three goals at once, you tend to go mad.

The underlying problem is that most of the time, we are trying to manage or administer things that are too complicated to be aware of every detail at every time, so we need to choose what we hope will be a representative subset of all the information that we have.

As well as refining techniques of measurement of inputs and outputs, the twentieth century also saw the beginnings of an attempt to apply scientific techniques to the organization of the processes themselves. This had always been implicit in the theory of scientific management, but it took a huge step forward with the Second World War, in which operations research began to be recognized as an important field of military planning, with applications from the optimal size of convoys to the effectiveness of area bombing. The military also began to attempt to systematize techniques of gathering and processing information, such as the OODA Loop (observe-orient-decide-act), which proved highly influential in business thinking after the war.

Variety and control Thats a very brief summary of how thinking developed in capitalist economics on the question of information and its use in economic systems. But were not quite done with the intellectual history yet because, at its heart, this is not a purely economic question (as we can see from the fact that the same problem arises in armies, prisons, and other nonmarket areas). At the highest level of abstraction, what were looking at here is a specific application of a general problem in the field of engineering: the problem of designing control systems, known as cybernetics.

One of the foundational ideas of cybernetics is the Law of Sufficient Variety, coined by the psychiatrist and robot builder W. Ross Ashby. This states that: In order to ensure stability, a control system must be able, at a minimum, to represent all possible states of the system it controls.

This sounds a bit mysterious when written down in the middle of a page, but maybe think of vehicles. A train can go backward or forward, so its control system is a single lever. A car can also turn, so it needs a steering wheel as well as an accelerator, to represent this component of its motion state. And an airplane needs a joystick rather than a steering wheel so the control system can represent turns around more than one axis. Thats the intuition here.

If the system you are trying to control has more variety than your control system has ability to keep track of, then you have three choices: expand the variety of the controller, reduce the variety of the system being controlled, or give up on the attempt to control. Most management measurement techniques can be seen, cybernetically, as variety attenuators. Theyre methods of taming the detail and uncertainty of the underlying system, to reduce it to something that can be represented in the head of a responsible managerto, literally, make it manageable.

This reduction in variety comes with costs attached. One is the thing people mean when they talk about managing what you measure. The underlying variety has not gone away; its just been hidden under a set of simplified metrics. At best, they maintain the broad structure.5 When this hope turns out not to be fulfilled, or when the underlying system drifts and changes in such a way that the old set of assumptions is no longer relevant, problems happen. Lots of the pathologies of modern managerialism, in business and out of itgaming the system, teaching to the test, and indeed window-dressing the accountsare basically sins against this law of sufficient variety.

And so it might sound sensible to add more features to the control system. But theres only so far one can take this. In the absence, so far, of artificial intelligences capable of running a business, adding more variety to the control system means adding more managers. When you add managers, you add management problems. Some are simple ones of cost accounting: managers cost money, but its not too hard in principle to decide whether an additional slug of brainpower solves enough problems to justify another salary and expense account. Some are harder ones of cybernetics: adding another manager adds some number of additional communication problems, depending on the network and hierarchical structure of your company.

But the worst thing about adding more managers is that managers are people, and people have their own incentives. A branch of economics called public choice theory is devoted to the question of how people who are embedded in organizations tend to pervert the control systems to their own benefit. At one end of the scale, this shows up as slacking, taking excessive risks, empire building, and so on. At the other, it shows up as fraud. Adding more capacity to manage a system involves adding more people whom you have to trust.

Thats the economic way of thinking about itcrime preys on the systems that make management possible. If something is complicated enough to have more variety than a single individual can hold in his or her head, then this variety needs to be dealt with. There are only two ways of addressing a problem of insufficient variety in the control system. One of them involves reducing the information set, which makes you vulnerable to fraud from the things you are not monitoring. And the other one involves introducing new people to trust, which makes you vulnerable to fraud if they turn out not to be trustworthy.

In other words, the problem of managing fraud is the problem of management itself. Its all about the ways in which you cope with the regrettable tendency of the commercial world to be too big and complicated to deal with all at once.

Fraud and risk If we look at fraud in a framework of information and control, we start to see it as a problem of sufficient variety; fraud is one of the classes of events that fall outside the direct information set, and that the control system needs to be able to respond to. The way in which businesses and control systems usually deal with these sorts of events is to treat them as random events (risks) and manage them on a statistical basis. Risk management is the measurement approach of assuming that your unpredictable events come from a probability distribution that can be guessed or estimated.6 Can a risk-management model work as a way of understanding fraud?

Well some of the time. It is probably necessary to make a distinction between two kinds of fraud. If we consider something like a typical small-time long firm, a drug counterfeiting operation or the usual run of Medicare claims fraud, then the random events drawn from a probability distribution model doesnt look too bad. There is a population of bad people out there, shaking around like the balls in a lottery machine. Every now and then, one of them will bump into your business, and they will try to do something dishonest. The question is, will your control system detect it? Broadly speaking, the answer will depend on the proportion of transactions you check up on.

You can work out, to a degree of accuracy reasonable enough for management, what the cost of a checkup is. You can guesstimate, in the knowledge that your answer might be extremely wrong, what the proportion of bad people in your business is. And you can, if you are thinking in a sophisticated manner, form some sort of idea about how the chance of a bad person arriving at your door might itself be under your controlthe extent to which criminals are deterred by the frequency of checking. If you get it right, you are managing your fraud risk in the same way supermarkets manage the risk of shoplifting. If you get it wrong, youre on the path to 1980s Medicare levels of losses. Thats how the majority of frauds happen, by number, and this model of fraud is one that fits pretty well into a normal risk-management framework. Its basically an issue of quality control.

Risk and quality Quality control is one of the planning disciplines that look like they possibly ought to be part of economics, but that didnt get scooped up into the big intellectual adventure that started with Adam Smith and have therefore remained largely free of ideological and psychological baggage. Thats useful, as its clearly related to the economic concept of risk and return, which has more baggage than a budget flight to a golfing resort. The advantage of a quality-control way of thinking over a risk-management way of thinking is that it is less dependent on making assumptions about the statistical properties of bad events, so you can apply it to things that are sui generis or that havent been seen before.

Quality control is all about the number of defects, or the accuracy of measurements, and the cost of reducing or avoiding them. While theres no direct relationship or single numerical measure of quality, theres a clear definition of what a poor-quality project is going to be: it has inaccurate information, unrealistic or completely unanalyzed assumptions, and important details unspecified or left to chance.

And considered in opposition to risk management as an approach, the key advantage of thinking in quality-control terms is that quality control optimizes for the problem that youre trying to solveto make advantageous transactions and to avoid fraudulent ones. Risk-management approaches have this tendency to drift off in the direction of optimizing for the total cost; the cost of checking minus the cost of fraud losses. And thats a dangerous drift. If youre trying to minimize costs, you will be drawn in the direction of industrialized and standardized approaches that make you very vulnerable to rifle-then-shotgun approaches. Fraud losses fundamentally arent random variables; they are someone elses choice variables and their likelihood is quite likely to be determined by your own actions in trying to prevent them. In general, cost systems should be optimized for cost and decision systems need to be optimized for decisions. Failing to observe this principle gives you outcomes like Medicare and MERS.

Although quality-control and risk-management approaches can encompass the majority of fraudsters in the world by head count, they certainly dont describe the majority of fraudsters in this book. You wouldnt capture the Salad Oil King in this way, or Artur Alves dos Reis, and definitely not Charles Keating. The very big fraudsters designed their crimes specifically around the weaknesses they had identified in the control system itself. They cannot be usefully modeled as random events or defects; to do so is to lose the important structural facts about how they happen.

If American Express had tripled the amount they spent on inspecting Tino De Angeliss tank farm in Bayonne, they would have just dipped into three times as many faked tanks. If Gregor MacGregors victims had found out more of the truth about the Cazique of Poyais, he would have proliferated more excuses. And as well as being the biggest source of anecdotes, the big, entrepreneurial fraudsters are very likely to account for the majority of financial losses from fraud; one thing we know about the statistical description of fraud losses is that they are dominated by large and rare occurrences, and that big frauds tend to come in waves, as a particular set of weaknesses in the control system are found and exploited. A normal risk-management system is not going to cope well with this sort of attack; what is needed is a meta-management system, one capable of changing its own structure and resolving the paradox of responding to threats from outside its information set. Is that possible? Maybe. Well come back to it. But we first need to look at the last category of frauds, the ones in which the victim is not an individual who has lost money, but the system as a whole.

1. This way of thinking about things is related to the via negativa advocated by Nassim Nicholas Taleb. The tendency of people like Medicare administrators to think of fraud as a risk and in general to assume that it is something that can be managed as if it happened at random is also an example of one of Talebs themes: the mismeasure of randomness and the underestimation of events called black swans because they dont fit into the system thats meant to categorize them.

2. These extracts are from The Uses of Knowledge in Society.

3. The English language has an irregular verb to describe the problematic effects of performance contracts, depending on how much sympathy you feel for the person at the sharp end. I respond to incentives / You game the system / He is a crook.

4. The quotation is variously attributed to Peter Drucker, William Edwards Deming, and others. Confusing matters further, the version attributed to Deming is an abbreviated version of a longer but also possibly apocryphal quote to the effect that it is completely wrong to say that if you cant measure something you cant manage it. As always, however, in the context of Demings whole philosophy of statistical management, the fact that he might have felt the need to say something like that gives you a clue that he was probably protesting too much.

5. Homomorphism is a useful mathematical term. It has a rigorous definition that is difficult to understand, but if you use it in contexts where youre looking for something meaning a simplified summary that loses a lot of potentially material detail but hopefully captures the important structural features, you will be broadly correct and sound like a hell of a science nerd.

6. Replacing a large class of events with a probability distribution for their frequency and importance is an example of what we were talking about earlier, when we mentioned how useful a word homomorphism was. Its an example of a variety-reducing transformation that loses a lot of detail but (hopefully) preserves the important structural features.

Chapter 9: Market Crimes The final cause of law is the welfare of society.

Benjamin Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process There is a kind of investment banker who likes to work in a friction-free, first-class-all-the-way world of high finance. It is an exhilarating feeling to concoct schemes and advise the titans of industry on mergers and acquisitions, changing the face of capitalism with every phone call and PowerPoint slide. The day-to-day reality is more prosaic, though. Even the masters of the universe depend on the staff in the print roomthe graphic designers, typesetters, and editors whose efforts are needed to make the magic happen.

John Freeman was one such worker bee,1 laboring as an agency temp for banks like Credit Suisse and Goldman Sachs. He was a stock New York character, trying to keep his head above water with multiple dead-end jobs; he had also waited tables at the Brasserie Les Halles and done data processing for Philip Morris. It was 1997 and Johns lifestyle was kind of working; he had even, as so many Americans did at the time, begun to play the stock market. It didnt go too well, though, and so he found himself logging on to an AOL chat room where investors in a company called Headstrong Group (it made safety helmets) gathered to bemoan the poor performance of their investment.

At some point, while other netizens were inventing the acronym LOL and the concept of cybersex, the conversation in the Headstrong Group stock chat room turned to Johns temp job. Possibly with a winkie emoticon, possibly not, it was suggested that since he was designing the PowerPoint slides used by bankers in negotiations over corporate takeovers, he might share the names of the companies being taken over with his pals on AOL, who could buy the shares ahead of the good news.

John Freeman didnt invest in the stocks himselfhe thought the market was too risky after Alan Greenspan had talked about irrational exuberance, and besides, he was broke. But he was willing to help out his cyberpals in return for a commission of 10 percent of the trading profits. Before long, in response to increasing demand for tips, he was wandering through the building late at night, looking on peoples desks and rifling through shredder bins. He expanded his network beyond the chat room to include some of his former colleagues from the restaurant.

The chat-room network was not exactly subtle about it. Stock-exchange staff, and securities regulators, tended even in those days to react to a takeover announcement by having a quick look through the previous few days trading records to see who was buying ahead of the news. When no fewer than twenty-three consecutive takeovers had significant buying from a single stockbrokers office in Bowling Green, Kentucky, it raised some red flags. It turned out that one of the chat-room crowd had started passing on tips to friends and relatives in his hometown. It didnt help matters that some of Freemans syndicate had decided to name their trading account Blue Horseshoe Investments, after the code name used by Gordon Gekko in the film Wall Street. By 2000, the whole network had been rolled up.

The interesting thing here is that this sort of insider dealing is a relatively modern crime. In the USA, it was banned in 1934, but it remained legal in the UK until 1980 and was only banned in New Zealand in 1998 (and even then, the Kiwis only got around to making it a criminal, rather than civil, offense in 2008). Not only that, but the criminal authorities are not even able to make their minds up as to who it is a crime against. In most of the world, it is regulated as a crime where the victim is the uninformed investor who buys or sells stock from the insider. But in the USA, it is treated as a theft of the intellectual property of the company; information can only be illegal to trade on if it has come from a closely defined insider and has been acquired in exchange for some sort of payment.2 Even quite experienced investors can sometimes fall foul of this, because it means that information which is okay to act upon in America is illegal if you are trading stocks in London.

The non-US concept, which tends to be more restrictive, is the version of the crime that has been outlawed in nearly all of the worlds stock exchanges, usually in response to pressure from large global investors who dont like feeling at a disadvantage. But it is clear on looking at the historical development of these laws that, for all that they are passed under the rhetoric of investor protection, they actually look much more like straightforward commercial decisions taken in order to improve a countrys market share of global investment.

The gradual decline of the principle of caveat emptor from the days of the robber barons to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is not a story of the improving moral development of the Western world; its a reflection of the gradual understanding on the part of capital-market operators that investable wealth was becoming a mass-market phenomenon, and that if you stopped robbing people blind with stock pools and takeover rumors, you would attract more of them into the capital markets, to make more money overall by robbing them through trading commissions and management fees.

Small investors in the stock market legitimately expect that theyre going to have a chance to make a profit; if, instead, theyre systematically going to be filled up with the duds, then theyre going to find something else to do with their savings and/or gambling money. And even in the modern world of huge fund managers and high-frequency robot traders, retail investors are more important than you might think.

Retail investors have one hugely attractive property when considered by a professionaltheyre dumb money. Not only are they unlikely to have private information, a lot of the time they havent taken care to consider all the public information. When the party on the other side of the trade is a small investor (or a lot of orders from small investors all over the country, bundled by a retail stockbroker), you can be reasonably sure that youre not taking too big a risk that the person selling stock to you knows something about it that you dont.

This makes retail orders very valuable to the market. One of the reasons why stockbrokerage commissions are so cheap these days is that retail brokers have finally realized how valuable they are. They charge a quite substantial fee to players like the high-frequency traders for the privilege of dealing against their order flow, and they rebate some of this fee to their customers. But the retail orders would eventually dry up if the customers lost too much or felt that they werent being given a fair chance. And without a steady flow of dumb money lubricating the wheels, the professionals would find it a lot harder to trade, as theyd always suspect each others motives for buying or selling.

So the prohibition on insider dealing has grown up as a result of changes in the market itself that tended to emphasize the importance of retail investors. Its the rough equivalent of letting racehorses walk around the parade ring, to demonstrate to the punters that none of them have been hobbled.

In a way, the moral intuition that the stock market in some way ought to be a fair battlefield of supply and demand among equals might actually be a back-formation from the fact that insider dealing is against the law. Theres no consistent ethical standard herenobody who buys underwear seriously objects to the fact that Calvin Klein has a better understanding of the fair price than they do. Its not so much that the law creates the crime as that the defining characteristic of market crimes is that theyre crimes against peoples legitimate expectations, and that means that context matters a lot. A large part of the work of competition regulation, for example, is in setting out the legitimate expectations for each industry, and deciding whether they have been breached. Thats why cartel cases go on for so long and employ so many experts. And its why its comparatively difficult to find a clear-cut example of a fraudulent cartel agreement.

Cartels It is actually quite difficult, as the senior management of a large company, to communicate to your middle managers that you dont want them to break the law when it comes to illegal price fixing. John Brooks, in his book Business Adventures, tells the story of a hapless Mr. Ginn, a manager at General Electric responsible for making sales of electricity-generating equipment to the Tennessee Valley Authority, in competition with Westinghouse and a number of other equipment manufacturers.

Mr. Ginn was required to sign a GE policy document declaring that he understood the companys rule that employees should not enter into any understanding with competitors about pricing, or even share information. Having signed it, he asked a senior manager (Mr. Paxton) whether he ought to comply. Mr. Paxton told him that he should, and (surprisingly to Mr. Ginn) did not wink as he said this. Mr. Ginn inquired whether Mr. Paxton had intended to wink, and was told that he had not, that he greatly disapproved of GEs culture of winking when giving instructions about important policies, and that Mr. Ginn should definitely obey the policy.

Confused by these mixed messages, Mr. Ginn went to two of his other senior managers, Mr. Fairman and Mr. Erbin. They both told him that Mr. Paxton was being naive, and that Mr. Ginn should continue to attend the regular meetings that GE held with representatives of its competitors. Confident that he had understood company policy correctly, Mr. Ginn proceeded to several meetings at which bids were agreed upon, minimum pricing was enforced, and competitors who had failed to respect agreements were held to account in special griping sessions. A few months later, he confessed to Mr. Paxton, who told him he was a damned fool and promoted him.

With his new promotion, Mr. Ginn was invited down to New York for a meeting with Ralph J. Cordiner, the chairman of the board of GE. Mr. Cordiner took the opportunity to clearly instruct Mr. Ginn that there was to be no ambiguity and the policy on price fixing had to be respected. The message was established so forcefully that there was little Mr. Ginn could do other than walk straight to Mr. Erbens office to have it clarified. Mr. Erben explained that the true meaning of what the chairman had said was Keep on doing what you have been doing, but be sensible about it.

All of this story came out in the course of some congressional hearings, during which GE and its lawyers maintained that the company had a strong culture of compliance and a deep respect for the Sherman Antitrust Act. This point of view did not carry the day and Mr. Ginns career at GE ended with a few weeks in jail.

GEs behavior (and that of its competitors) cost the US public purse3 millions of dollars, by raising the price of vitally needed generation equipment above the level that it reached in normal competitive periods (this was quite easy to ascertain, as the price-fixing system was not well organized and frequently broke down). But did the customer really have a right to that money? The legal point of view is clear that it did, but the law in question is relatively recent; the Sherman Act was passed in 1890, well into the industrial period.

It had been recognized much earlier that collusion between businesspeople tends to raise prices at the expense of the general public. Adam Smiths Wealth of Nations has a famous passage that People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices. These days, the intellectual battles of the Progressive Era have been so comprehensively won by the anticartel side that its hard to convince ourselves that there hasnt always been a sense of moral odor hanging around the practice of price fixing.

But its surprisingly recent. The famous passage from Adam Smith is immediately followed by one saying It is impossible indeed to prevent such meetings, by any law which either could be executed, or would be consistent with liberty and justice. And in identifying anything problematic at all in collusion between tradesmen, Smith was right on the cutting edge of moral thought in his day. For centuries earlier the intuition had been oppositethat a shopkeeper who undercut his fellow merchants was doing a shameful thing. Marxs Capital, nearly a century later, still refers to full-priced bakers denouncing their underselling rivals to a parliamentary committee of inquiry. The prohibition of cartels really is an example of a market crime as distinct from any other type of fraud; it is a rule passed in order to make the overall economy work better, which draws its legal force from a general interest of society rather than a specific right of the injured party.

Another characteristic of the crime of cartel forming is that the boundaries between legal and illegal behavior are blurred and arbitrary. Mr. Ginn and his friends gathered in hotels to decide who would be the lowest bidder for a coming tender and at what price, and so he went to jail. But more subtly organized methods of communication are either entirely legal, or enforced as civil matters by specialist competition authorities rather than as crimes.

The reason why companies inexorably tend to collaborate with their competitors can be explained in terms of elementary economics. One of the first things one learns to prove in price theory is that in a competitive market, the price of a single unit of output will tend to equal the marginal costthe cost to an established producer of increasing output by one more unit.4 But the marginal cost rarely equals the average cost of producing a unit of output, because there are fixed costs, overheads, and the like. This is a rare example in which elementary economics works, by the way; companies in industries with high fixed costs and low marginal costs (like airlines and media) go bust a lot because they cant resist competing prices down to levels that dont cover their overheads.

Even in industries where the problem isnt so drastic, there is always a huge, unbearable tension between objectives of market share and profitability. Its not really all that much of an exaggeration to say that managing the trade-off between these two objectives is at least half of the skill of strategic management. And one of the clearest ways to ease the trade-off is by doing something that decreases the tendency for competition to reduce pricing. You can do this in numerous ways; the most productive and socially valuable one is to make an improvement to the product or get more efficient, allowing you to earn profits. At the other end of the scale, its secret meetings and price fixing. The point at which the line is drawn between legal and illegal behaviorand the point at which a second line is drawn between merely prohibited behavior and an actual crimeis a political-economic decision, made in the perceived interests of the system as a whole. This is true of cartels, even though the cost inflicted on consumers can be very large. Its also true of another area of corporate criminality, which has to be thought of as a market crime (and is typically tried as a civil offense) even though its another example of a case where fraud becomes a crime of violence.

Toxic-waste dumping Fifteen miles from the site of Tino De Angeliss Bayonne facility, and four miles from the Harbor Tank Company where Tinos expansion fraud did business under Joe Lomuscio, there was another oil-storage tank farm in Edgewater, New Jersey, belonging to the Hudson Oil Refining Corporation. This company was run by Russ Mahler, one of the most important producers of recycled petroleum products in the USA. For a number of years, he had been responsible for taking oil and fuel from US military airplanes and ships, re-refining and purifying them, and selling them as engine lubricants.

It was a good business for many years; in the period when the Salad Oil King was his near neighbor, there was no evidence that Russ Mahler was doing anything wrong. But as the 1970s went on, business got tougher. The problem was that engine oil was becoming more sophisticated; additives were being used to improve the performance of brand-new motor oil. Not only did this reduce the value of non-premium recycled oil, the additives themselves caused problems in the purification process and made things uneconomic.

As a re-refiner, you gradually ended up with a large quantity of substandard, hard-to-sell lubricant, and a small quantity of incredibly toxic industrial waste, including cyanides, PCBs, and heavy metals. The small amount of money you could make selling the oil to the few remaining customers willing to buy it would hardly pay for the cost of disposing the industrial wastes safely. And that was before the regulations started to tighten.

In 1976, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act was passed, mandating the Environmental Protection Agency to establish national standards for waste oil, among other things, tightening up the regulations, and establishing a federal standard set at a somewhat higher level than the patchwork of existing state regulations. Disposal of re-refining by-products was about to become a lot more expensive. And shortly afterward, nasty things started showing up in the sewage system.

Russ ran another tank farm in Syracuse, New York. The sewage-pumping plant immediately downstream from this tank farm started to notice that the monitoring equipment on their outflow was consistently being tampered with by Russ Mahlers employees. When they installed tamper-proof sensors, they discovered that around 40,000 gallons of cyanide, benzene, toluene, and xylene had been dumped into the sewage system over the course of a week. Russ had even been importing cyanide from plants in Canada and flushing it down the drain in Syracuse.

This scandal cost Russ his permit from the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, but hardly stopped him. About a hundred miles down the road from the main Hudson plant in Edgewater, there was an abandoned mine shaft in Pittston, Pennsylvania. Russs employees put a total of three million gallons of toxic waste into this hole, which then spent the next few years seeping through watercourses until in 1979 it was found polluting the Susquehanna River. While the three state agencies of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania struggled to close down dumping grounds faster than Russ could find new ones, Ronald Reagan was elected, and Russ had a stroke of luck.

Congress passed a law (in 1980) exempting oil wastes from EPA regulation pending further research into whether they were really all that bad. After paying fines and closing down the Pittston hole, Russ Mahler started a new oil company called Quanta Resources, and somehow convinced the New York authorities that despite having the same owner, employees, and assets, it had nothing to do with the serial polluter that they had banned in 1976.

Meanwhile, heating-oil prices were on the rise, particularly in New York City. While the re-refining of lubricant oil was a tough business and getting tougher, the heating-oil business was potentially a real money spinner. You could get waste oil very cheapbecause of the cost of safe disposal, people would practically pay you to take it away, particularly if they had been dealing with their own PCB and dioxin problems by sticking the toxic waste into their barrels of used lubricant. If you then just relabeled it as heating oil, the profit margin could be huge. All you needed to triple your margins was a robust attitude to any qualms you might feel about sending barrels of dioxins, carcinogens, and heavy metals to be burned and pumped into the atmosphere of one of the biggest and most densely populated cities on earth.

The scam was made even easier by the fact that, although New Jersey had strict regulations treating used lubricant as hazardous waste, Pennsylvania didnt. So it was possible to make a three-cornered trade; take waste oil into your system in New Jersey, complying with all state regulations, ship it a three-hour drive to Pennsylvania and relabel it, then export the heating oil to New York under its Pennsylvania labeling, without mentioning that it had ever been considered dangerous in New Jersey. Not all of the oil was burned, though. Several hundred gallons of dioxin-contaminated heating oil were spread across dirt roads in Times Beach, Missouri, to reduce annoying dust clouds, as a result of which the EPA had to buy up every single house in Times Beach and leave it as a ghost town.

Eventually, Russ Mahlers exploits caught up with him. He served a year in prison for polluting the Susquehanna River, and Quanta Resources went bankrupt after newspaper and television reporters got a tip-off that they ought to commission tests on some of the fuel oil he was supplying. He remains one of a comparatively small number of people to have done jail time for an environmental crime.

The illegal dumping of toxic waste hardly seems like a minor or technical offenseits one of the most serious corporate crimes of violence that there is, and given the orders of magnitude of people affected, it almost certainly significantly exceeds the worst excesses of the Mafia in terms of the number of deaths caused. But it is a kind of fraud (and one that often involves other frauds in counterfeiting safety certification), and as a kind of fraud, it is essentially a market crime. If anything, the inclusion of this category of corporate violence under this heading ought to disabuse the reader of any sense that market crimes are technical or victimless; they include some of the most callous and despicable actions ever to be carried out under the heading of crimes of dishonesty.

As we all know, even when carried out entirely legally, the production, use, and disposal of many modern products kills people in large numbers. The automobile industry, for example, causes thousands of avoidable deaths every day, but it is only guilty of a crime when something like the Volkswagen acoustic function5 scandal occurs and an attempt is made to avoid a specific regulation passed by the bodies whose job it is to decide on the trade-off between economic benefit and human cost. In fact, the decision as to what might constitute an acceptable level of risk to the public is a political one. It is made differently in different places depending on different assessments of the costs and benefitsa defining characteristic of a market crime. Russ Mahler benefited from the fact that there was no federal regulation of waste-oil dumping and the state authorities did not cooperate with one another.

The temptation in looking at crimes of industrial pollution is to assume that the only victims are the people who are actually physically harmed. In fact, the population affected does not stop at the edge of the toxic cloud. The market crime inherent in a pollution case is an attack on the overall framework by which we trade off environmental costs against economic benefits. Its a crime against the control system of the overall economy, the network of trust and agreement that makes an industrial economy livable.

A fraudster of any kind is someone who has managed to subvert that network and operate without the normal constraints of civil society. And the snowball property of fraud tends to ensure that once those controls are escaped, the enterprise will tend to grow at a compound rate, as dishonest profits are reinvested in more dishonest business. In biological contexts, a part of the system that has escaped the normal self-regulatory mechanisms and begun to grow without constraint is called a cancer. Unless they are controlled, fraudulent business units tend to outcompete honest ones and drive them out of business. In doing so, they generate profits, and those profits can be redirected into financing the corruption of the whole system. Runaway corruption is something that does happen, and that can undermine entire societies.

A more typical example of a market crime, though, is something that feels a bit more victimless. Theres not much disputing that there ought to be some regulation of the dumping of toxic waste, but more in regard to where the line should be drawn between interference in commerce and the rights of consumers. Only very intellectually pure libertarians indeed would think that the market could regulate air and water quality. But there can be situations in which a market crime is committed and your instinctive sense of outrage isnt engaged anything like as much. Sometimes it can even be the case that the rules made by the market to protect its own integrity involve pretty palpable injustice to the people who end up on the wrong end.

The Piggly Wiggly Corner Clarence Saunders of Memphis, Tennessee, knew as well as anyone did that theres a trade-off between the precautions you take against being the victim of theft and the amount of business you lose by making things less convenient. He was the inventor of the modern self-service supermarket with his Piggly Wiggly chain, dispensing with the clerks and counters and allowing customers to put things in their own baskets. He used to run advertisements praising his customers for their honesty and rhetorically asking why the downtrodden innocents are marked with suspicion, although his manual for shopkeepers devoted seven pages to the detection and reduction of shoplifting. His key insights were that theft was only one of the costs involved in running a grocery store, that it was by no means the largest one, and that by reducing the price below that of the competition, Piggly Wiggly would attract enough customers to make the overall economics work out.

Rather than losses from shrinkage (as the industry came to euphemize the problem of shoplifting), his biggest problem was making the Piggly Wiggly shops convenient enough that customers would accept that they did not make deliveries, and to keep the shelves filled with popular products and manage the ordering system in the absence of clerks who would naturally notice when stocks were running low as they went to fetch orders. His ergonomic and managerial inventions to solve this problem attracted admirers all over the worldamong the people who visited his stores to understand his doctrines of lean inventories and just in time ordering were Sakichi and Kiichiro Toyoda, the founders of Toyota.

It was not surprising that when Piggly Wiggly Stores Inc. listed on the Chicago Stock Exchange in 1919 it was a sensation. Three years later, it issued more shares and transferred to the New York Stock Exchange, and the problems began almost immediately. Piggly Wiggly Stores Inc. started trading in June of 1922, got into trouble in November, and by 1923 Clarence Saunders had made enough bad decisions to cost him his company.

As we mentioned when looking at accounting fraud, stock markets like clean narratives; its their way of managing the almost infinite variety of the information they have to deal with every day. This often means misfortune to companies that look like they ought to have a simple story (Buy Piggly Wiggly, the chain of self-service stores thats growing across the country!) but actually dont.

Piggly Wiggly Stores Inc., the company that people could buy shares in, didnt own the Piggly Wiggly name or the patents on Saunderss innovations. Those were all owned by the Piggly Wiggly Corporation, which in turn was owned by Clarence Saunders and a group of investor friends. The Stores Company owned the right to create new Piggly Wigglys, which it sold to separate investors in different geographical territories. And it owned just under half of the three hundred Piggly Wiggly shops that had been franchised by Clarence Saunders before 1919. So when a stock-market investor walked down his own Main Street to buy coffee or bacon, he would not necessarily know whether the Piggly Wiggly he went to was one of the ones he had a share in, or one of the ones he had an indirect interest in via a licensing arrangement, or one of the ones that he had no ownership of at all, but that paid the same royalties to Clarence Saunders as his company did. As long as things went fine, of course, this was a happy state of ignorance with few consequences.

Things didnt go fine. Elliott Business Builders Inc., a company that franchised Piggly Wiggly shops in New York some years earlier, went bankrupt on November 18, 1922. The generation of headlines combining the name Piggly Wiggly with the word bankrupt spooked investors greatly, and the share price started to tank. At this point, Clarence Saunders started to do things that no doubt seemed sensible at the time.

Shares are bought and sold on credit. When you make a deal on the stock exchange,6 the buyer has a few days to deliver the cash and the seller has a few days to deliver the shares. This arrangement is quite like trade credit, isnt it? And trade credit is both a necessary administrative convenience and an opportunity for all kinds of misbehavior, as readers will have noticed. In the case of the stock market, buying a share that you dont have enough money to pay for is called trading on margin, and selling a share that you dont own is called short selling. In both cases, the expectation is that you will be able to scrounge up either the cash or the share before the settlement date. You scrounge up cash by borrowing it or selling something else, of course, but how do you scrounge up a Piggly Wiggly share?

The answer, and the source of Clarence Saunderss misfortunes, is that the brokerage community maintains a pool of shares available to be borrowed,7 and makes them available to scrounge up by people who have made short sales. Since, on any given day, buy and sell orders in any given share tend to more or less even out,8 the pool of shares available to borrow tends to be a reasonably constant quantity from day to day. Unless something unusual happens.

Something unusual, like professional traders launching a bear raid on a company that is fundamentally sound, perhaps because of headlines combining its name with the word bankrupt. Short sellers jumped onto the Piggly Wiggly share, borrowing stock from the pool. Their aim, of course, was to wait until the price was much lower, then buy back the shares and return them, meeting their obligations to deliver the shares.

On its own, a bear raid does not affect the size of the pool of shares available to borrow all that much; when short sellers sell their borrowed shares, they sell them to the same brokers who maintain the pool. All that happens is that the same pool of borrowable shares has more IOUs written against itmore obligations to, at some point in the future, deliver a share back to the borrowing pool. What does reduce the size of the pool is if someonesay Clarence Saundersstarts buying shares, and instructing his brokers not to make them available.

When this happens, you can get a situation where the stack of IOUs obliging short sellers to deliver a share is greater than the pool of shares they can borrow to meet them. If you push things really hard, the pool can be totally exhausted and shares can no longer be scrounged up. When that happens, a short seller is in a very nasty placehe has obligations to deliver the shares, but no way of doing so. Rather than borrowing the share, he has to buy it, and the holder of all the shares that used to be in the pool can literally name his price. This is called a corner, the fairly obvious metaphor being for the one that the short seller is trapped in.

Clarence Saunders recruited the advice of Jesse Livingstone, the most celebrated stock-exchange speculator of the Roaring Twenties. Of course he didnt have enough money to buy all the Piggly Wiggly Stores Inc. shares on his own, so he used the funds of the Piggly Wiggly Corporation that he controlled. He also borrowed on his own account, and authorized the corporation to take out new debts as well. Finally, he sold more shares to the general public, on a layaway plan that allowed them to be bought in installments over ninety days.

It worked brilliantly. The shopkeeper from Memphis took on the New York sophisticates at their own game and won. Having initially been as low as $30 a share, the Piggly Wiggly share price rose to a peak of $124 by March 20, 1923, when the shares were suspended because there were none of them left to trade.9 Clarence announced that people who had sold shares to him in the previous week would have to come to him in his office at three oclock with either the stock certificates or $150 in cash.

And then the regulatory authorities of the New York Stock Exchange started to get involved.

From this point on, the reader might start to think poor Clarence Saunders. In many ways he was treated quite scandalously by the financiers. But it is worth looking at things from the perspective of other parties to this affair, and based on the information they had at the time. Using the corporate treasury of Piggly Wiggly Corporation to buy shares in Piggly Wiggly Stores and drive their price up for the benefit of Clarence Saunders is not really great behavior; frankly it looks like the sort of thing that a control fraud would do. Nor is it really all that ethical to sell shares to the public in order to raise funds to inflate their price, but to do so on a layaway plan that ensures that those members of the public cant sell their shares until the corner has finished and the price has fallen back again. And in general, as with the rules against insider dealing, it is not all that good for the image of stock-market investment in general for the prices of popular shares to be pushed about by secret plans made by rich insiders.

It was for this reason that the exchange had passed a rule in 1922 empowering it to take measures to prevent market corners. And Clarence Saunders was the first person to fall foul of this rule. It was not a criminal charge that tripped him up, or even a civil lawsuit. It was a simple extension of the settlement period. The exchange announced that rather than having to deliver the shares to Saunders by 3 p.m. on the twentieth, settlement in Piggly Wiggly would take place on the twenty-sixth, at 5 p.m. The short sellers had another week.

A week is a long time when the majority of the shares are being held by small investors all over the South and Midwest, and when the brokerage houses have regional offices that allowed them to scour the country from Albuquerque to Sioux City. Customers who had bought the shares for fifty dollars on layaway found brokers knocking on their doors willing to pay eighty dollars for the same shares, before they had made the second installment. Clarence realized the game was up as share certificates flooded back into the brokers pool from all over America, and dropped his cash price to one hundred dollars. At this price, he had made a profit of half a million dollars, but this was not enough to cover the interest and fees on the money he had personally borrowed. He ended up having not only to sell the Piggly Wiggly Stores shares he had cornered, but his own stake, and his shares in Piggly Wiggly Corporation. Even this was not enough, particularly as the other directors started asking pointed questions about the use of corporate funds, and Clarence Saunders ended up in bankruptcy. He had played the game and won, but they had changed the rules.

These days, a corner like that would never have been allowed to get started; as soon as it became clear that you were manipulating the share price, the regulators would step in and require you to stop, then start to look through the books to decide which specific charge they were going to bring against you. This is the quintessence of a market crime; all Clarence did was buy shares at the going price, and everyone who dealt with him did so willingly and transparently. He did not deceive anyone; he literally took out advertisements in the newspapers saying what he was doing. But the market wanted to protect itself, and his conduct was disruptive to a set of economic institutions that other people rely on. So tough luck, Clarence. He found other investors and came back with other ideas in convenience retailing; at his death in 1953 he was halfway through patenting a fully automated grocery-shopping machine called Keedoozle. But he died a lot poorer and less happy than if hed never borrowed $10 million to teach Wall Street a lesson.

Of course, that was back in the days when $10 million was a lot of money. Compared to the biggest fraud I ever lived through, though, $10 million was hardly a rounding-off error on the lawyers fees.

A scandal in Mayfair Guys, youve got to hear this, I said. I was sitting in front of my computer, with one eye on a screen of share prices and the other on a live stream of the House of Commons Treasury Select Committee hearings. As the Barclays Bank PLC share price took a graceful swan dive, I pulled the headphones out of the socket and turned up the volume. My colleagues left their terminals and came around to watch BBC Parliament with me. It didnt take long to realize what was happening. Weve got to get hold of Tom. We all agreed. Bobs getting murdered.

Bob Diamond, the swashbuckling chief executive of Barclays, had been called before the committee to explain exactly what his bank had been playing at in the LIBOR scandal. The day before his appearance, he had made things very much worse by seeming to accuse the Deputy Governor of the Bank of England of ordering him to fiddle an important benchmark, then walking back the accusation as soon as it was challenged. He was trying to turn on his legendary charm in front of a committee of angry MPs and it wasnt working.

On our trading floor, calls were coming in from all over the City. Investors needed to understand what was happening and whether the damage was repairable. Tom was our designated expert on Barclays Bank, but he was asleep five time zones away in New York. Without waiting to ask him I called his clients, a pretty serious breach of stockbroking etiquette. But it had to be done. The world was changing. Later that day, as Tom tried to keep in touch between meetings, he and I would exchange some harsh words, some of the only ones between us in a long working friendship.

A couple of weeks later, the damage was done. The money was gone, Bob Diamond was out of his job, and the market, as it always does, had moved on. Over a glass or two of beer, Tom and I were repairing our fences and asking ourselves the unavoidable question: How did we get it so wrong?

He was the markets top analyst of British banks. I was the teams regulation specialist. Both of us had been aware of the LIBOR affair and had written about it on several occasions over the previous months. But we had assumed that it would be the typical kind of regulatory risk for the banksa slap on the wrist, a few hundred million dollars of fines, no more than that.

The first puzzle was that, to start with, it looked like we were right. By the time it caught the attention of the mainstream media, the LIBOR scandal had reached what would usually be the end of the storythe announcement on June 27, 2012, of a regulatory sanction. Barclays had admitted a set of facts, made undertakings not to do anything similar again, and agreed to pay a fine of 59.5 million to the UKs FSA and $160 million to the US Department of Justice. Thats how these things are usually dealt with. If anything, it was considered quite a tough penalty.

But the LIBOR case marked the beginning of a new process for the regulators. As well as publishing their judgment, they gave a long summary of the evidence and reasoning that led to their decision. In the case of the LIBOR fines, the majority of that evidence took the form of transcripts of email and Bloomberg chat.10 Ahhh, the transcripts.

Trader C: The big day [has] arrived My NYK are screaming at me about an unchanged 3m libor. As always, any help wd be greatly appreciated. What do you think youll go for 3m?

Submitter: I am going 90 altho 91 is what I should be posting.

Trader C:  when I retire and write a book about this business your name will be written in golden letters Submitter: I would prefer this [to] not be in any book!

Perhaps its unfair to judge the LIBOR conspirators on their chat records; few of the journalists who covered the story would like to see their own Twitter direct message history paraded in front of an angry public. Trading is, for all its bluster, basically a service industry, and there is no service industry anywhere in the world whose employees dont blow off steam by acting out or insulting the customers behind their backs. But traders tend to have more than the usual level of self-confidence, bordering on arrogance in much the same way that the USA borders on Canada. And in a general climate in which the public was both unhappy with the banking industry and unimpressed with casual banter about ostentatious displays of wealth, the LIBOR transcripts appeared crass beyond belief. Every single popular stereotype about traders was confirmed. An abstruse and technical set of regulatory breaches suddenly became a morality play, a story of swaggering villains who fixed the market as if it was a crooked horse race. The politicians could hardly have failed to get involved.

It is not a pleasant thing to see your industry subjected to criticism that is at once overheated, ill-informed, and entirely justified. In 2012, the financial sector finally got the kind of enemies it deserved. The popular version of events might have been oversimplified and wrong in lots of technical detail, but in the broad sweep it was right. The nuanced and technical version of events that the specialists obsessed over might have been right on the detail, but it missed one utterly crucial point: a massive crime of dishonesty had taken place. There was a word for what had happened and that word was fraud. For a period of months, it seemed to me as if the more you knew about the LIBOR scandal, the less you understood it.

With the perspective of a few years hindsight, the system was always a shoddy piece of work. Some not-very-well-paid clerks from the British Bankers Association called up a few dozen banks and asked, If you were to borrow, say, a million dollars in [a given currency] for a thirty-day loan, what would you expect to pay? They would throw away the highest and lowest outliers and calculate the average of the rest, which would be recorded as 30 day LIBOR for that currency. The process would be repeated for three-month loans, six-month loans, and any other periods of interest, and the rates would be published. You would then have a little table recording the state of the market on that dayyou could decide which currency you wanted to borrow in and how long you wanted the use of the money, and the LIBOR panel would give you a good sense of what high-quality banks were paying to do the same.

Compared to the amount of time and effort that goes into the systems for nearly everything else banks do, not very much trouble was taken over this process. Other markets rose and fell, stock exchanges mutated and were taken over by super-fast robots, but the LIBOR rate for the day was still determined by a process that could only slightly unfairly be termed a quick ring-around. Nobody noticed until it was too late that hundreds of trillions of dollars11 of the world economy rested on a number compiled by the few dozen people in the world with the greatest incentive to fiddle it.

It all fell apart in the immediate aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, when banks were so scared that they effectively stopped lending to each other. Although the market was completely frozen, the daily LIBOR ring-around still took place, and banks still gave, almost entirely speculatively, answers to the question If you were to borrow a reasonable size, what would you expect to pay?

But the daily quotes were published, and that meant everyone could see what everyone else was saying about their funding costs. And one of the telltale signs of a bank in trouble is that its funding costs start to rise. If your LIBOR submission is taken as an indicator of whether youre in trouble or not, you really dont want to be the highest number on the daily list. Naturally, then, quite a few banks started using the LIBOR submission process as a form of false advertising, putting in a lowballed quote in order to make it look like they were still obtaining money easily when they, in fact, could hardly borrow at all. And so it came to pass that several banks created internal-message trails saying, in effect, Dear Lowly Employee, for the benefit of the bank and its shareholders, please start submitting a lower LIBOR quote, signed Senior Executive. This turned out to be a silly thing to do.

All this was known at the time. There was an article in the Wall Street Journal about it. I used to prepare PowerPoint slides with charts on them that had gaps for the year 2008 because the data was somewhat hypothetical. The regulators held a liaison-committee meeting so that representatives from the banks could discuss the issue of LIBOR reporting, and even published its minutes. Nobody seemed to realize for at least two years, as the disciplinary issues made their way through the process and the settlements were agreed upon, that this was going to blow up into such an international scandal.

Part of the reason why it did so was timing. The LIBOR affair hit the headlines at about the point at which everyone was beginning to realize that nobody was going to go to prison over the mortgage scandal. And it didnt take too long to become clear that hardly anyone was going to suffer criminal sanctions for LIBOR either. The general culture of impunity was infuriating. But its not obvious why this scandal should have been seen as being anywhere near the same level as the mortgage-bond one. It was nowhere near as harmful.

After all, the LIBOR scandal had two distinct stages. In the first stage, before the crisis, little clubs of traders and submitters got together to influence the fixing level up or down by a little bit each day, usually of the order of a tenth of a percent. If you multiply that tenth of a percent by a billion dollars worth of futures contracts, then sure enough, it turns into pretty serious money by the end of the year. But how many people are in that position? Or more specifically, how many people were in that position, and were not members of similar LIBOR cartels themselves? Very few. There are class-action lawsuits outstanding, and one shouldnt minimize the wrongness of this action, but it cant be compared to the mortgage frauds. Whether you had a loan or a deposit linked to LIBOR, the rates were manipulated both upward and downward, so many of the moves canceled each other out over the course of a monthly repayment period. The residual manipulation would still have been small. Nobody lost their home or had their household wealth destroyed because dollar LIBOR was 3.45 percent when it should really have been 3.39 percent.

In the second stage, during the crisis, the manipulation was both big and systematic. But the decision to lowball LIBOR certainly didnt do all that much harm. Who would have benefited from having every loan indexed to LIBOR set to 20 percent and higher, at a time when the Fed was trying to cut rates close to zero? Although Bob Diamond was at least partly separated from his job for insinuating that the Bank of England had told him to underreport his funding cost, its certainly true to say not only that the global regulators were pleased to see lower rates, but that they were correct to do so. It would be exaggerating a bit to call LIBOR the fraud that saved the world, but it certainly saved the central banks a lot of trouble.

And a large part of the reason why almost nobody went to jail is that it was hard to make a clear link between crooks and victims. The LIBOR futures trades took place on the basis of a willing buyer and a willing seller. There are laws against market manipulation, but LIBOR was not a marketit was the output of a survey. Prosecutors tended either to try to twist the law on cartels into something that might form the basis of charges, or to cast the net as wide as possible and bring charges of conspiracy in a dishonest scheme. For the most part, when exposed to the detail of the case and cross examination in open court, juries have so far proved reluctant to convict.

So why the rage? The undermining of public trust was not just the banking sectors punishment; it was the crime. Comparatively few people were actually involved in transactions in the LIBOR market. Substantially more had some exposure via the hundreds of trillions of dollars of derivative products linked to the LIBOR survey. But nearly everyone has an interest in maintaining the convention that financial markets operate with a degree of fairness; they may be highly unequal, they may be full of aggressive players acting in their own interests, but it was crucial to the self-interest of the society that we had made to believe that markets were not structurally rigged.

Back in the 1950s, the revelation that radio disk jockeys like Alan Freed were selecting the records to be played based partly on commercial considerations rather than through sincere judgment of how rockin they were was the basis of a national scandal known as payola. With the hindsight of sixty years and a greater degree of cultural familiarity with the music industry, it seems strange to us now, but the payola affair was also an occasion where the criminals were guilty less of commercially disadvantaging consumers than of vandalism to an image of how the world worked. The outpouring of anger that greeted the LIBOR revelations was out of all proportion to the damage done, but it was a natural response in many ways; discovering that you have been systematically deceived is psychologically a very difficult experience to process. Thats the essence of a market crimeit makes you question your trust in humanity, and that trust is a natural resource thats been built up over hundreds of years.

1. Forgive the digression, but the phrase corporate drone is meaningless. Drones dont do the work in beehives. Worker bees do. A corporate drone would be someone whose only purpose was to fertilize the corporate queen and I cant think of a single company thats managed that way.

2. Oversimplifying mightily here of course, and US courts often disagree on their interpretation in specific cases.

3. And, in principle, any other customers in the market, although the vast majority of the equipment for which prices were being fixed were sold to state and municipal buyers.

4. There are various ways of expressing this, and the level of mathematical rigor you find in textbooks runs the gamut from ludicrously simple to simply ludicrous. But the intuition is not hard. If you can produce an extra unit for $X, then youre obviously not going to sell it for less than $X. But if you try to sell it for more than $X, someone will be able to undercut you. So, the only consistent price is exactly $X.

5. In the software system controlling a generation of Volkswagen diesel engines, there was a bit of code that was meant to keep engine noise under control. Researchers found that as well as this, there were a few lines that monitored the engine speed and its variability, and throttled back output in a very particular set of conditions that happened to correspond exactly to those used to test compliance with the particulate emissions standards.

6. If you are a broker or large investor who can make special arrangements with your broker, that is. You or I (unless you are a lot richer than I) pay cash on the nail, and our broker gets the benefit of the free credit. Note also that theyve considerably shortened the settlement period since 1922.

7. Because clients are always being annoying and putting in orders to buy a share that the broker didnt happen to be holding in his inventory, among other reasons.

8. And if the orders are not evening out, you move the price until they do!

9. That is, there were none left with the brokers to buy or sell; all the shares were either with Saunders, or with everyday investors who were happy to hang on to them.

10. Bloomberg terminals, the news and financial-data servers that every trader uses, have a chat-room function as well as being able to give you prices and transmit news. Financial-market professionals are vastly more addicted to this chat than tween girls are to Instagram and many of them failed to realize that if you discussed illegal activity on this medium, you were making things easy for the authorities.

11. Yes hundreds, and yes trillions. LIBOR, as a measure of the general state of short-term interest rates was an incredibly useful number to have, and so it became the industry standard benchmark for floating-rate loans, of which there are a lot.

Chapter 10: Cold Cases For as much as many light-hearted and evil disposed persons not intending to get their living by truth according to the laws of this realm have now of late falsely and deceitfully contrived, devised and imagined privy tokens and counterfeit letters in other names unto divers persons for the obtaining of goods, cattels and jewels into their hands and possession, contrary to right and conscience.

An Act Against Such Persons as do make Bankrupt, from the reign of Henry VIII, quoted in The Phantom Capitalists by Michael Levi A summary of the book so far might be that fraud is what happens when you cant check up on everything. And the economics of fraud are all about the best ways to organize the process of checking up on things, given the state of the world you find yourself in. It shouldnt be surprising, then, that both fraud itself and the techniques with which we combat it have grown up and developed alongside the development of the capitalist economy. So having looked at the principles, lets take a quick survey of the practice, starting way back at the beginning. There is only one real commercial fraud in the Bible, but it is a doozy of a public procurement scam.

There are quite a few Bible verses that suggest that there was a background climate in which it was recognized that dishonesty in business existed (Unequal weights and measures are an abomination unto the Lord, Proverbs 20:10, and You shall not have in your bag differing weights, a large and a small, Deuteronomy 25:13). There are also many references to debts and to the different arrangements for forgiving borrowers who were genuinely unable to pay through misfortune, while harshly punishing defaulters; although dishonesty is not specifically mentioned as a motive for defaulting on debt, it is implicit. And there is the story of Jacob and Esau, which (depending on which of the two brothers you see as the villain) might be thought of as an inheritance fraud.

There are also several particular condemnations by Leviticus and Deuteronomy of the practice of hiring laborers and then failing to pay their wages, and the God of the Old Testament is always entering into bargains with people like Jonah who fail to deliver as per contract. But there is one clear case where not only was there a crime of dishonesty, but one that exploited the arrangements of the economy of the time in a reasonably sophisticated way, and where considerable value was transferred and then dishonestly appropriated. Its in the Second Book of Kings, chapter 12, verses 4 to 8: Then Jehoash said to the priests, All the money of the sacred things which is brought into the house of the LORD, in current money, both the money of each mans assessment and all the money which any mans heart prompts him to bring into the house of the LORD, let the priests take it for themselves, each from his acquaintance; and they shall repair the damages of the house wherever any damage may be found. But it came about that in the twenty-third year of King Jehoash the priests had not repaired the damages of the house.

Skimming profits from a public-sector maintenance contractits literally older than Christianity. Jehoash and Jehioda, the high priest, later dealt with the problem by forcing the priests to place all their offerings into a chest with a hole bored in its lid, and then disbursing the money themselves directly to the masons and tradesmen.1 It is interesting, though, that this is the only real commercial crime in the Bible, and it happens against a public-sector institution (and the government has some very distinctive characteristics in its capacity as a victim of fraud, see Chapter 11). This suggests that, despite the existence of a relatively sophisticated economy, fraud in the modern sense was not so common compared to straightforward theft. Fraud is possible to the extent that people are prepared to trust strangers, or to leave valuable objects out of their immediate control; the ancients had much less occasion to do this than we did. There was less to check up on.

Inheritances and princesses If you take the extreme case of a society of single-family agricultural production, like ancient Iceland, the kind of fraud that was possible was even more circumscribed than it was in the Bible. The Icelandic sagas are perhaps our best record of a literate society in which the main economic unit was still the size of a single extended family (including its slaves). And the sagas are, of course, full of feuds and conflicts in which dishonesty plays a part; the importance of oath breaking in these ancient stories is a clue that people did not always keep their word. But it was a lot more difficult to get hold of valuable things just by telling lies in the ancient Nordic world.

The most valuable things around were ships, slaves, and land, and the currency was barter and precious metal. Ships and slaves were difficult to steal, and land ownership was tied up with families and had considerable restrictions on its sale. There were limited amounts of something that looked a lot like informal credityou could agree to pay compensation for a field of hay at harvesttime by driving oxen to your neighbor several months later. But most transactions were face-to-face and happened without the necessary dimension of time; if someone stole a field of your hay, it was immediately obvious that it had gone and hardly any less clear who had taken it.

The main frauds in the sagas involve things like inheritances, because the right to an inheritance was one of the first abstract stores of value to emerge as legal systems became codified. Land is physical and tangible and hard to steal, but an inheritance right is something different; you cant always tell whether its been stolen from you and promised to someone else. As soon as the concept of a property right was invented, as soon as ownership got more complicated than simply the ability to control things by fighting anyone else who wanted them, there is a need for a social web of trust that the rights will be respected and not misused. And where theres trust, theres the opportunity for fraud.

Inheritances also have another important property when we look at them as potential loci of fraud; they were one of the few ways in which abstract property rights over large and valuable things could come to be owned by women. Weve noted at various points during this book that the overwhelming majority of commercial fraudsters are men,2 and this was even more the case when we look back into the past. Its only comparatively recently that property ownership has been possible for women at all (particularly married women) in most of the world, and the small number of exceptions to the rule that commerce was a mans game have, for obvious reasons, tended to be exceptional people of extremely strong will rather than the kind of glib, weak, damaged personalities that make up the ranks of the fraudsters. The exception that proves this rule is that in surveys of the great female fraudsters of history, an extraordinary proportion of them ran the same scamthey pretended to be princesses.

Being a phony princess was about the only way a woman could pretend to be rich for much of recorded history, and the social structure of European nobility meant that you could get quite a lot of formal and informal credit based on the assumption that your royal family would pay it back. If nothing else, you might be able to secure a good marriage. So history records the fraud trials of Mary Carleton (1663, pretended to be orphaned Princess von Wolway of Cologne), Helga de la Brache (1876, pretended to be secret daughter of Gustav of Sweden), Mary Baker (1817, Princess Caraboo of the fictitious Indian Ocean island of Javasu), and in the modern age Elizabeth Bigley (1905, pretended to be the illegitimate daughter of Andrew Carnegie). Even as recently as 2004, Lisa Walker extracted substantial amounts of jewelry-store credit as Antoinette Millard, purportedly a Saudi princess who had converted to Judaism.

There have been plenty of male phony peers too; the social network of nobility is just the right kind of system for a fraudster as it is robust enough an arrangement to be able to support material amounts of trust and credit, but unsystematic enough to be comparatively easy to use to fool people if you have the pluck and chutzpah. Its something of a digression from the development of the modern economy, though, except inasmuch as the correspondence networks of the upper class mirrored similar networks of merchants and traders, which were a very necessary component of the development of maritime capitalism.

Seas of commerce It was a black day for fraudsters when Archimedes leaped out of his bath; the shout of Eureka! and the invention of the principle of displacement was the beginning of the end for the previously profitable game of alloying silver with gold to skim profits off jewelry commissions. The Greeks had a comparatively advanced economic and political system, and as a result they had some comparatively complex and sophisticated forms of fraud. The kind of white-toga crime3 that is best documented is one that is surprisingly little changed to the present day: various forms of long-firm and control fraud related to the ownership and use of ships.

Unlike a land caravan, a ships cargo is very difficult to monitor in between leaving its point of origin and arriving at its destinationeven if the merchant were to personally accompany the cargo or send an agent to do so, he is still wholly at the mercy of the captain. Even in the absence of dishonest dealing, all sorts of bad things can happen to a cargo at sea. It is for this reason that the maritime industry was significantly ahead of the rest of the economy in history, both in the development of mechanisms to handle risk4 and in the parallel development of fraud. Shipowners formed the first syndicates or companies to raise capital and pool their risks. They invented insurance and were the first people to seriously think about forms of financing.

The history of shipping finance is a joy for scholars of a puerile cast of mind, because of the prevalence of the glorious word bottomry (from an old sense of bottom meaning the hull of a ship, naturally), a practice that was in existence from ancient Greece to the Hanseatic League, only dying out around the sixteenth century as it was overtaken by more modern forms of insurance. A bottomry was a loan secured against a ship, which had the particular provision that if the ship was sunk, the loan did not need to be repaid. This made it a very unusual kind of credit; for most of recorded history there was no such thing as bankruptcy or limited liability and a loan once agreed upon had to be repaid whatever the cost. In Athens and Rome, a defaulting debtor could lose his status as a citizen and be assigned to his creditor as a slave; even in the early days of European capitalism the debtors prison beckoned. Bottomry loans, of course, charged a significant premium over normal loans to reflect the fact that nonpayment was a real likelihood.

This practice of bottomry, however, is obviously vulnerable to fraud, and this indeed happened all the time, even in the ancient world. The Athenian orator Demosthenes got his start as a lawyer in marine fraud cases; his speech Against Zenothemis recounts the story of two men who borrowed a lot of bottomry money on the basis of a ship with a valuable cargo of grain. They then set sail with an empty ship and scuppered it. The aim was to pretend to their creditors that they had shared the loss, while actually hiding the money somewhere else; one of the conspirators was unlucky enough to drown in the course of the sinking, while the other one, Zenothemis himself, ended up on the receiving end of Demostheness oratory.

It can immediately be seen that this kind of fraud is very difficult to defend againstbecause ships move from place to place, it was possible for a crooked captain or owner to raise multiple bottomries in different ports. Since news traveled slowly in the ancient world and there were no central registers, even proving that a ship had actually sunk (rather than being hidden in a different port and renamed, a fraud that still happens today) was no trivial task.

But we can also see that it would be really difficult for maritime trade to take place without something like bottomrythe dangers of the sea were very real, and any merchant who borrowed money without the special provisions that made fraud possible would surely end up a slave before long. The only merchants who would be able to trade by sea would be those with sufficient personal wealth to bear the risk all on their own. This would place severe constraints on any society organized so as to be invulnerable to fraudthey would be able to grow only very slowly, as there would be no ability to pool resources together for large ventures. The largest and most advanced human society to have existed without material fraud may have been one of the pre-Columbian American societies such as the Incas, who appear to have organized their economy entirely on the basis of directed labor and shared consumption.5 This comparison suggests another important point: the prevention of fraud is a means to an end, not an end in itself. It is highly unlikely that the optimal level of fraud is zero. Bottomry might have been susceptible to huge amounts of abuse but something like it was a precondition for the development of a modern economy. While the victims of fraud tend to get nasty surprisesremember Mr. Gauger, up to his knees in a Honduran swampthey cannot be anything like as great as when the fraud-free Incas, believing themselves to be the pinnacle of human civilization at the time, came face-to-face with Europeans wearing metal armor, carrying firearms, and using wheeled vehicles drawn by horses.

So there might be another means for a society to deal with fraud and its preventionto deal with it by more or less ignoring it and relying on a combination of social stigma and harsh punishment after the fact to stop it from getting totally out of control. Something not far off this experiment was carried out in New York City in the nineteenth century.

The Scarlet Woman of Wall Street If Sir Gregor MacGregor had been launching the Poyais scam in New York in 1821 rather than in London, he might never have needed to invent a fictional country. In England at the time, you couldnt just start up a company if you wanted to raise money from investorsthe South Sea Bubble had been a hundred years earlier, but the sting was still felt, and it was illegal to form any sort of corporate entity other than a partnership unless you had a specific Act of Parliament permitting you to do so. But the USA had allowed companies since independence and New York State in particular had been the first place in the world to grant the benefit of limited liability, in 1811. The new country was far in advance of old Europe in its adoption of financial technology, and by the time of the Civil War, there was not only a thriving New York Stock Exchange but plenty of futures markets that allowed the Union to manage the cost of feeding its army in the field.

There were also railway companies in great number, the shares of which were traded on an active market, albeit one that was as unfair as one can imagine. There was no such thing as regulation; insider dealing was legal, as were stock corners and much more besides. The main reason for the lack of regulation was that nobody wanted it; its an interesting fact of financial history that the lobbying interest for financial deregulation, is if anything slightly older than financial regulation itself. In particular, one argumentthat regulation makes things worse by giving a false impression of protection to investors who need to be more alert themselvessignificantly predates any such effective regulation. One newspaper thundered in response to a relatively mild proposal to require companies to produce audited accounts that: In the face of all that has been shown of the effect of legislative attempts to keep men prudent there are always a number of persons ready whenever any financial disaster occurs to propose measures of control, the fact being wholly lost sight of that a multitude of regulations serves merely to confuse the general public.

It took the Crash of 1929 sixty years later to make people change their minds. Back in 1868, investors had to put up with the Erie Railroad Company, a corporation whose affairs were so bad, even by the standards of the day, that it was nicknamed The Scarlet Woman of Wall Street.

The Erie was an unfortunate railroad. As a contemporary chronicler put it, stretching from New York across Pennsylvania to the lake ports for the Midwest, it ought to have been an artery of commerce greater than the Appian Way. In fact, it was shoddy, poorly maintained, and overindebted, having already gone bankrupt under the previous name of the New York and Erie Railroad Company. Its shares, however, continued to trade and were one of the more active gambling counters on the New York Stock Exchange.

The poor state of the rails was unfortunately related to the poor state of the balance sheet. The company at the time was controlled by Daniel Drew, a stock speculator and former steamboat owner who used the Erie mainly for its ability to borrow money through its corporate treasury, and as a plaything for his stock speculations. One of his characteristic games was to convince the other board members that bonds needed to be issued in order to buy steel rails, then to put the money to unrelated purposes6 and instruct the railway workers to flip the existing iron rails over so that the relatively unworn inside edge was presented to the flanges of the engine wheels. Engineers thought of the railway as two streaks of rust on which it was not safe to drive at more than fifteen miles an hour, and the financial machinations of the stock price were occasionally interrupted for news of a serious or fatal accident.

The other way in which Drew profited from the Erie was through bear raids. As well as the companys treasurer, he was also one of the Eries largest creditors, having extended loans and bought some of the bonds he issued, and he personally held several mortgages on its assets. So it was not difficult for him to sell what shares he owned and establish significant short positions in the Erie stock, then announce that an interest payment had been missed and that as mortgage holder he intended to foreclose. Once the stock price had plummeted on this news, he could take his short-selling profits and buy as many Erie shares as he could afford at the new lower price (and even more on margin by taking advantage of the trade credit that stockbrokers already offered). Now that he had increased his ownership of the company, it was time to announce that the interest payment had been made, the mortgage issue resolved, and everything was fine, and watch the share price soar back up again. This was regarded by the commercial morality of the day as legal, but irritating.

One person who found them a little more than irritating was Cornelius Vanderbilt, the railroad magnate. After a particularly egregious bear raid, during which Drew had manipulated the price of Erie stock by using a block of shares that was not even his to sell, Vanderbilt decided to act. He teamed up with a group of investors from Boston and began acquiring shares, with the aim of gaining a controlling interest, stacking the board of directors, and removing Drew from his post as treasurer.

This was not one of the philanthropic works for which the Vanderbilts later became famous. The Bostonians owned another railway, which was in even worse financial shape. They wanted to control the post of treasurer so they could get the Erie Railroad to acquire the Boston, Hartford & Erie Railroad and assume its debts, some of which they had personally guaranteed. Its a move oddly reminiscent of the way in which Trump Hotels & Resorts bought the Trump Castle from Donald Trump, and shows that nothing is new under the sun. Cornelius Vanderbilt, on the other hand, owned the New York Central Railroad, which ran along much the same route as the Erie and competed with it. He identified the main problem with the Erie Railroad Company as that it wasnt part of a price-fixing agreement controlled by Cornelius Vanderbilt. With such clearly conflicting interests, the anti-Drew coalition was always fragile, and it indeed fell apart. Vanderbilt decided that the Bostonians were incorrigible but that Uncle Danl could be managed and allowed himself to be swayed by the two mens long-term frenemies relationship going back to the days when they ran steamboat lines. This proved to be an almost unbelievably costly mistake.

Vanderbilt kicked the Bostonians off the board, kept Dan Drew, and even allowed him to recruit two new directors. One of Drews friends was the stockbroker who had helped him in his raids on the market, Jim Fisk. The other was a young businessman who had recently come out best in a series of incidents related to the Panic of 1857, which left his business partner dead of suicide and Jay Gould the owner of a profitable leather tannery. Pretty much right away, Cornelius Vanderbilt started strategizing to take sole control of the Erie, while the Drew syndicate started working out how to separate him from both the railroad and his money.

Back in the 1860s, trading stocks meant exactly thatbuying and selling paper stock certificates, not entries in a database. The register of shareholders was meant to be kept up-to-date, but if you had the paperwork and someone else had ready cash, you could do the deal right there. It was not even always easy for a corporation to know how many shares it had outstanding. With this in mind, it was a bad idea for Cornelius Vanderbilt to decide not to join the board himself and instead place his nephew, a man called Frank Work, there instead. Work was not particularly canny, and the Drew group was able to organize a secret directors meeting without him, to authorize (on the pretext of the old steel-rails trick) the issuance of $10 million of convertible bonds. The issuance of the bonds allowed Drew, Fisk, and Gould to go down to the printing works and have a hundred thousand share certificates run off, just in case the bonds were ever converted. In the meantime, they were kept safely in the hands of the company treasurer, who was still Daniel Drew.

Cornelius started buying shares in the market, while Drew and Gould started selling them short, using the brokerage services of Fisk. Vanderbilts men were instructed to buy any and all Erie shares that came up for sale, almost regardless of price. Vanderbilt presumed that his share purchases would drive the price up, but that before long he would have sucked up all the shares there were and would own the Erie. However, every time he thought he had succeeded, new shares started to drip onto the market. When the hapless Frank Work brought him the minutes of the directors meeting he had shirked, Vanderbilt immediately suspected what was going on. Then things got really farcical.

In New York City at the time there was a judge called George G. Barnard, who, not to put too fine a point on it, was a crook. He was in the pocket of William Tweed, the chairman of the Democratic General Committee, Grand Sachem of the Tammany Society, and known to anyone who wanted to deal with the state or city government as Boss. The most notorious thing Judge Barnard did that year was the night that he worked until 4 a.m. in a makeshift courthouse, naturalizing as many as ten thousand Irish immigrants in groups of forty so that they could vote for Tweeds men in the election next day, and starting the process that changed the ethnic and religious balance of Tammany Hall forever. But he was also available to do favors for Cornelius Vanderbilt.

By chance, the injunction Judge Barnard was bribed to make was on this occasion not far from the spirit of justice. He passed a judgment suspending Drew as a director, forbidding the issuance of new stock, and preventing the directors from carrying out any more deals until all the share certificates were accounted for. This was a well-earned bribe and a ruling that ought to have restored an orderly market in Erie shares. Vanderbilt resumed buying them accordingly.

But Gould and Fisk were ready for it. They had their own judge ready, Judge Ransom Balcom, who issued an order staying Judge Barnards order and, for good measure, removing Frank Work from the board. Vanderbilt went straight back to Judge Barnards courthouse to get another ruling that suspended the entire board, forbade any meetings to take place without Frank Work, and reiterated the prohibition on issuing new stock. Judge Balcom declined to overrule his colleague a second time. This would have been the last word, except the legal code of the State of New York was itself something of a mess.

Under the state constitution, all thirty-three of New Yorks courts were bound to recognize each others rulings. So having exhausted options in Manhattan, the Drew/Gould/Fisk party crossed over to Brooklyn to plead their case in front of Judge J. W. Gilbert that Vanderbilt was the true crook, and that he was trying to swallow the Erie Railroad for the benefit of the New York Central. Judge Gilbert, as far as anyone can tell, was not bribed, but his decision might have been swayed by the revelation that Judge Barnard had begun speculating in Erie stock for his own account. He passed a ruling forbidding Work to act as a director and permitting the Erie board to issue as much stock as they felt necessary. In this almost perfect confusion, Daniel Drew, ever the pragmatist, felt that since all options had been forbidden by at least one judge, and all of them mandated as well, he might as well pick the one most convenient to him. He went back to the corporate treasury and picked up the bundles of stock certificates.

Vanderbilt was still buying, possibly unaware of the full legal position and acting in the belief that he had locked down the number of Erie shares to a finite quantity. The price climbed up from 60 to 83, putting the Drew syndicates short positions in terrible loss. Then at the last moment, Fisk not only dropped another five thousand shares onto the market, but drew his fellow brokers attention to the fact that they had been printed the previous week. In the environment of chaos, the three bear raiders took off to New Jersey with roughly $8 million of profits, while Cornelius Vanderbilt received the news that he was not appreciably closer to control of the railroad as he had spent more or less exactly that amount on shares that were worthless because they had been fraudulently issued.

Almost unaccountably, and even though Jim Fisk died four years later, this episode appears only in the fifth of twenty-seven chapters of his biography (Jim Fisk: The Career of an Improbable Rascal by W. A. Swanberg) and even earlier in biographies of Gould. It was not only not his biggest fraud, it was not his biggest fraud involving the Erie Railroad Company. The syndicate of Drew, Fisk, and Gould soon split up as they managed to bribe their way to getting the fraud charges set aside7 so they could return to New York. They spent the next years knocking financial lumps out of each other. Drew went bankrupt after Fisk and Gould double-crossed him in another bear raid. Gould and Fisk attempted to bankrupt the United States by cornering the gold market and only stayed out of prison with the help of Boss Tweed. Fisk was shot dead by a rival for the affections of his mistress. And Gould kept almost recreationally looting the Erie to fund his other ambitions until it declared bankruptcy in 1874. He even paid a million-dollar bribe to Lord Gordon Gordon, a con man posing as a representative of British investors in Erie bonds, who then disappeared with the cash.

Meanwhile, in Victorian London, things were just as bad; hypocrisy in the service of moral squalor was the defining characteristic of the age in the financial world as well as all other spheres. There were local tastes and flavors of fraud, as there is always economic geography. The British had come much later than the New Yorkers to the concept of the limited liability company, and so to the stock market (they still used the word stock to refer to bonds, a fact that makes research much more irritating than it ought to be.)8 The domestic investing class was much more inclined to be buy-and-hold investors than to trade the market actively, possibly because horse-race betting was legal and so there was less gambling instinct to be sublimated. All of which meant that British crooks tended to promote entirely bogus companies rather than to carry out maneuvers using real ones. Autre pays, autre mores, and theres not much need to go through the same lessons all over again with a different accent, except to note that if you read the Financial Times and see its motto, Without Fear and Without Favour, it might amuse you to know that at its launch this was a unique selling point and was commonly understood to have the implication Unlike All Other Newspapers, We Do Not Take Bribes from Stock Promoters. Because the most interesting fraud going on in Victorian Londonand certainly the one with most relevance to the present dayinvolved Germans, not Brits.

Rollo versus the sledge drivers The German term for the perpetrator of a long-firm fraud is a schlittenfahrer, literally sledge driver, with etymology even more obscure than the long firm itself. The scourge of the sledge drivers was a Prussian merchant called Stanislaus Reu, who wrote under the pen name Rollo Reuschel as the correspondent of the Klnische Volkszeitung in nineteenth-century London.

Rollo was a born detective. His successful business meant that unlike most journalists of the time he did not have to compromise his principles and he was able to spend time, effort, and money on finding sources and completing his investigations. He made it his business to mingle with the lowest orders of the German expatriate community in beer halls and clubs on the City Road where they congregated. On one occasion he had to produce his press card to avoid being arrested for vagrancy when dressed in particularly shabby clothes.

There were plenty of the lowest orders to mingle with too. As students of the life of Karl Marx will recall, England did not check passports in the nineteenth century, and was one of a very few nations where foreigners were neither registered nor monitored by the police. This made London the destination of choice for Germans in troublea few revolutionaries and political thinkers but a lot of embezzling clerks, disgraced army officers, and underemployed, overeducated neer-do-wells.9 As Rollo put it: England is a free country. Everybody can come and settle here, without being troubled to produce papers, to give notice to the police, to say who he is, where he comes from, what his business. No questions are asked Herr Hans Schulz may fly today from Germany, arrive in the morning as Mr Robinson in London and open in the afternoon as Messrs Dumas, Grosvenor & Co. somewhere in a small back room. Nobody troubles about it, and English liberty becomes thus the greatest protection to the swindling fraternity. If Herr Schulz, alias Robinson has occasion to get tired of his firm then a pennyworth of paint is all that is needed and a new grand firm appears in the place of the vanished one.

Rollo was mainly complaining here about the fact that bankruptcy in England at the time was a civil affair; unlike in Germany, state prosecutors rarely got involved in the winding-up of companies and lawsuits against suspected fraudsters could be expensive. This was, however, more of a risk to the merchants of Cologne than to the British themselves, and the reason why sheds a bit more light on our Canadian Paradox. The British merchants were used to the system and dealt on trust and reputation. The sledge drivers tended not to bother trying long firms against Londoners, because it was too difficult for an impoverished foreigner to get trade credit locally.

It was much easier to take advantage of the longer periods of settlement for international trade and to set ones sights on the folks back home. German manufacturers were (then as now) always searching for export markets,10 and were often sufficiently well capitalized to extend a lot of credit to their overseas agents. And when the long firm was folded up, they tended to be surprised and appalled that there was no public authority to help them get their money back; the sledge drivers could take comfort in the fact that few of their creditors felt like throwing good money after bad with an expensive court case. (Those who did tended to end up regarding their British solicitors as worse crooks than the original fraudsters.) Rollo had fallen victim to a sledge driver early in his London career, and developed a hatred of the breed. He exposed many of them in his dispatches for the Volkszeitung, and did his best to help fellow German merchants get their money back. His most famous battle, though, written about in his book The Knights of Industry, was not directly with a firm of long-firm fraudsters, but with a crooked credit agency.

Because they were exposed to significant risk in dealing with London merchants on ninety-day credit, German manufacturers would employ the services of inquiry-agents who would, for a few shillings, respond with opinions on the business and standing of merchants, their profitability and stock levels, and so on. A typical one might read something like: Re: Gustav Opitz, 22 St Mary-Axe, London EC G. O. is established since 1883 and is exporting goods of all kinds, especially cloth to the East Indies. According to the official shipping-list he exported last year considerable quantities and there is no doubt that his business is a prosperous one It is not doubted that he is possessed of means and a short time ago it is said he came in for a considerable amount of money at the death of his father.11 Besides he is representing in London one of the largest Manchester firms. It is thought that the mentioned amount of 500 could be credited to him.

Other reports were shorter: G. O. is rotten. Hands off.

The second of these reports was written by the firm of Stubbs Limited in 1886. Mr. Stubbss clients were surprised to get it, as many of them had been relying on opinions similar to the first one, written by L. Lehnert of 46 Queen Victoria Street. If a merchant wanted a third opinion, they might have gone to Liman & Co. of 23 St. Pancras Lane. No such opinion was ever written, but if it had been, it would probably have agreed with the more favorable example above for two reasons. First, 46 Queen Victoria Street and 23 St. Pancras Lane were the addresses of two doors of the same building, occupied only by Lothar Lehnert and his business partner. And second, that business partner was not anyone called Liman, but was in fact the convicted fraudster Gustav Opitz. A few months later, Lehnert sent out a circular to his regular subscribers revising his opinion somewhat: Re: G. Opitz, 22 St Mary-Axe. This firm has suffered great losses and will hardly be able to overcome the crisis. I should advise not to give any further credit.

At more or less exactly the time when these circulars went into the post, a pennyworth of paint was being applied to change the signage of G. Opitz to that of Walter Arnold & Co., and the creditors lost their money. This was Lehnerts main way of working; he would provide solid references for Opitz and a select crew of friends, then look prescient by tipping off his clients that they were rotten, just at the moment when it was too late to do anything. His reports had very wide currency among manufacturers, partly because he sold them considerably cheaper than his competitors, but also because established inquiry agents back in Germany would often find it inconvenient and expensive to handle all their London business, and would subcontract either to Lehnert under his own name or to Liman & Co., his other front door. Lehnert managed his own workload by allowing Opitz to sign his name to letters of reference when his hands got tired.

Pretty soon, the firms of L. Lehnert and of Liman & Co. attracted the attention of Rollo Reuschel and were denounced in the Klnische Volkszeitung. As well as detailing his links with Opitz, his many bad references, and the double front doors, Rollo made it clear that he expected to be sued for libel if his stories were not true, and that he and the Volkszeitung welcomed the challenge in their crusade on behalf of honest German merchants. Lehnert initially retaliated by publishing slanders in other newspapers (mainly anti-Catholic ones, as the Volkszeitung was generally known as the voice of the Vatican in Germany), but his reputation and business suffered badly and he realized that he would have to sue or shut up. He then made a series of bad strategic mistakes.

His first mistake was to encourage Gustav Opitz to sue for libel as well as doing so himself. This allowed many of Opitzs past frauds to be read into evidence. His second mistake was to repeatedly misidentify the person behind the pseudonym, and to assume that Rollo Reuschel must be one of his fellow sledge drivers acting out of professional jealousy. This ensured that the opposing witness box was full of people who had no need to be involved in the case, but who had reams of information about Lehnerts complicity in their frauds. And finally, he mistakenly assumed that Reuschel was an impecunious hack who might be intimidated by the vast expense of the English libel bar, rather than a very successful businessman who was not only able to finance his own defense, but to pay the costs of his employer as well. Rollos barrister showed up in court with over a thousand items of correspondence between Lehnert and various sledge drivers, but the jury was asking to end the trial before he had been cross-examined on the first two. Because of the award for costs, Rollo briefly became a creditor of both Lehnert and Opitz; he didnt expect to get paid and indeed he wasnt.

The escapades in Knights of Industry make fine reading, but the overall perspective of the book underlines something we have been emphasizing since the first introduction to the frauds of 9THWONDER on the secret internetthat the pattern of credit and information in a trading economy reflects a pattern of trust and power. All through the book, Rollo continually asserts that trade credit is overused and manufacturers made the victim of sledge drivers because other forms of financing are very difficult to obtain. As a description of what financial conditions were like in Victorian London, this is very much counter to the normal view; it was a time of reckless financial expansion. What Rollo is describing, though, of course, is the state of financial affairs as seen by the German expatriate merchant community at the time. English merchants and manufacturers dealt with each other on credit all the time, but they did it by a system of IOUs and of acceptance houses that exchanged them for ready cash. The German merchants, apart from the very biggest and best, were almost entirely shut out of this system.

Rollos book ends with a set of recommendations for licensing and regulation of the inquiry-agent system, to govern conflicts of interest and to ensure that shoddy or dishonest agents cannot drive good ones out of the market by underselling them. He identifies the key problem of the industrythat the business of providing credit ratings is marginally profitable, and that therefore there is always the temptation to cut corners. He also notes that the inquiry agents of London were subject to severe conflicts of interest and would tend to give favorable ratings in order to gain business. It is fascinating and disturbing to notice that not only were none of his recommendations adopted, but that with only small updates to the language, all of them could have been published in the last ten years as a critique of the credit-rating agencies that gave AAA recommendations to worthless mortgage-backed securities. Once more, the same economic conditions generated a similar balance of market power, with similar consequences in terms of the kinds of frauds that were made possible. To a large extent, what society gets in terms of large-scale commercial fraud is determined by what it is prepared to legislate for.

1. It is noted in 2 Kings 12:15 that they did not require accounts from the tradesmen they directly hired, for they dealt faithfully. I cannot help but wonder whether the writer of the Books of Kings might have been a bit naive here.

2. Some exceptions are Barbara Golden Boos Erni, Sarah Howe of the Boston Ladies Deposit Company, and the unknown originator of the Women Empowering Women pyramid scheme.

3. The author requests that all correspondence on whether or not the Greeks wore togas be directed to someone who cares.

4. Jonathan Levy notes in his book Freaks of Fortune that risk, as an everyday word to describe the general consequences of uncertain chance, is a relatively modern adoption of a specialist term drawn from the shipping and insurance industries, simply as the name of the commodity that they bought and sold at Lloyds Coffee House and similar insurance markets.

5. They had a relatively advanced accounting system (using knotted ropes called khipu to administer their command economy), though; as they developed technologically, they might have developed forms of fraud. The Soviet Union certainly did.

6. In his memoirs he notes that having issued the bonds, I decided that I was more in need of the ten million dollars than the railroad was.

7. The charges were dealt with using the assistance of that noble jurist George G. Barnard. Boss Tweed joined the board of the Erie shortly afterward.

8. Historically, of course, a stock is a stick. The olde English way of keeping financial records was to mark the numbers by cutting notches into a piece of wood, which was then split lengthways to provide two records that could verify each other in a way that was impossible to forge. The creditors half was the stock and the debtors half was the stub. When the tax-record system switched over to paper from stocks and stubs, they decided to burn all the old wooden records. Infelicities in the fire safety precautions taken during this exercise are the reason why the Palace of Westminster, where the British Parliament sits, is a nineteenth-century building rather than the one in which the Gunpowder Plot took place.

9. Some overlap here. Rollo boasts of having helped to eight months hard labour a sledge driver called Popert who pleased himself to pose as the leader of the social-democrats.

10. And of course, this was the high period of the Empire. London was the first port of shipping for goods to be exported to half the globe. Some manufacturers avoided the sledge drivers by sending a family member to live in Britain and supervise their interestsFriedrich Engels, for example.

11. As well as this sort of thing, it was often mentioned in inquiry agents reports if the merchant in question had a wife from a good family, or one who might expect to get an inheritance soon. This was, as was normal in the day, naturally considered to be money that was at the disposal of the husband.

Chapter 11: Fraud Against the Government Some cases are humorous, some sad, and all are real. Some will anger you as a Federal employee and some will anger you as an American taxpayer.

From the introduction to the US Department of Defenses Encyclopedia of Ethical Failure Bradley Birkenfeld had driven to the chalet up winding roads in his bright red Ferrari. Taking the perfectly chilled champagne from the fridge and putting it into an ice bucket, he threw open the blinds and saw the alpine vista spread out before him. He turned to his Brazilian supermodel girlfriend and smiled, pointing out to the mountains. Then he did an Austin Powers voice and said, Does it make you Matter-horny, baby?

He really did. He even wrote about it in his autobiography as if he was proud of it. Although these days he has gone straight and lives a life of quiet philanthropy, the character of Birkenfeld in Lucifers Banker is definitely one on whom the reader gets a sense that the finest things in life were a bit wasted.

I preferred his earlier work. His contributions to a piece of theater called United States Internal Revenue Services vs UBS AG, played out in the Southern District Court of Florida, were spot-on. It even had a happy ending, as Bradley Birkenfeld managed to get $75 million transferred into his pocket, free, clear, and legal. Some of the people in this book got away with the money and some went to jail; by a quirk of the system, Bradley did both.

The source of the money in this case was indeed the US tax authorities. The government has one attractive property as a target for someone aiming to commit a fraudit is prepared to take on nearly anyone as a customer. While most private-sector businesses can refuse you credit terms or turn away your business just because they dont like the look of you or they heard a rumor, the government usually feels like it has to give a reason. In very low-trust societies, government corruption is even more rife than you might expect, precisely for this reason; it is the economic actor that cannot, by definition, be part of a small personal trust network, but that has to, also by definition, get involved in the economic life of nearly everyone.

Some qualifications are needed to this sweeping statement. In cases where the government deals with private companies simply on a normal commercial basisas a purchaser of paper clips or janitorial services, sayit is not necessarily more vulnerable to crime than a similarly sized and equally well-managed private company. Not necessarily, that is, but in fact public-sector organizations usually are a bit more vulnerable, because there are no private companies of similar size and organizational style to an industrialized countrys government. Public-sector bodies are usually very big, and they have senior-management functions delegated to nonspecialists who were usually elected to office for reasons unrelated to their competence in financial control. This tends to matter more in big defense contracts than in paper-clip procurement.

But if you spot these disadvantages, theres no reason why the purchasing and commercial departments of a public-sector body shouldnt be able to control fraud almost as well as their private-sector counterparts. They can choose who they buy from or supply; they can decide who gets terms and who pays cash, which of their contractors get cash up front and which are paid on completion. In these parts of the government, which do the same sorts of things as normal businesses, the government doesnt have to deal with crooks, its just a bit more likely to.

Where the government cant turn away business, though, is in its involvement with the rest of us through the tax system. Everyone pays tax, so everyone has an opportunity to avoid tax, and the only way that the tax authorities can avoid dealing with someone is through the counterproductive means of letting them off their tax liability. And tax fraud is big business.

The distinction between tax avoidance and tax evasion is a commonplaceavoidance is usually taken to be the (usually legal) use of technicalities and corporate structures to minimize a tax liability, while evasion is the (usually illegal) act of providing false information to the tax authorities in order to conceal the existence of a liability in the first place. Of course, the two categories overlap. If you are a really aggressive avoider, you may believe you have no tax liability to declare, but the taxman may disagree and consider you to be an evader.

Some countries (most importantly Switzerland) have recognized a third category of offensethat of tax fraud. The distinction is between a mere neglect to inform the tax authorities of a source of income, and the actual presentation of a fraudulent document. Although it might be thought that this is a distinction without a difference (and in general, the tax collectors of countries that are home to holders of Swiss bank accounts have tended to be scathing about it), this has on occasion had considerable legal importance. Under Swiss law only felonies (like tax fraud) are extraditable offenses, and minor peccadilloes like mere tax evasion were until quite recently not considered to be important enough to outweigh the constitutional protection of bank secrecy.

This distinction was the basis of Bradley Birkenfelds crime. He was an employee of UBS, the big Swiss bank, who had responsibility for finding American clients. And he was very good at it, which is why the usually rather staid Swiss tolerated his exuberant pursuit of cars, girls, and mediocre sex comedies. His modus operandi was really simple: find a rich person, pal up to him, and promise him that you can achieve the three zeroes (zero income tax, capital-gains tax, and inheritance tax). Then get your new friend to send his money to Switzerland, tell the Swiss authorities that he is a US citizen and so wont be paying Swiss tax, and dont tell the US authorities anything about him at all.

Having stuck the money in Switzerland, Birkenfelds clients had the problem of what to do if they wanted to spend it. Although there were some attractively spy-ish solutions attempted, like small-carat diamonds hidden in tubes of toothpaste, the most efficient method turned out to be a simple onethe bank that had the deposit, because it could take cash as collateral, would be prepared to give the customer a loan, charging interest on it equal to the interest that the deposit was earning, plus a fee for the service. This not only allowed the tax evader to bring the money onshore in a legal account with an ATM card and all the other useful payment technologies, it even generated an interest expense that could be set off against income on the clients declared onshore investments.

Everything was going fine until Bradley Birkenfeld fell out with his Swiss bosses. In his book, he suggests that this was the result of motiveless malice with an element of jealousy at his talent (its also possible that they just got sick of his jokes). In any case, he resigned and shortly after showed up in Washington, DC, with a lawyer and a determination to talk to the authorities about tax evasion facilitated by UBS. The IRS, it is fair to say, hit the roof. They immediately demanded that UBS provide them with a full list of all their clients who were US citizens. UBS, in a decision that presumably seemed sensible at the time, said no.

Telling Uncle Sam to get lost is usually a bad move, and indeed it turned out to be, but it was not as crazy as it seemed. The old order was changing, and not everyone had realized it.

In the aftermath of the Second World War, it was understandable that many people, particularly in Europe, would want to hold some of their wealth away from possible confiscation by the government, particularly in countries close to the Iron Curtain. The Cold War itself created many situations in which the diplomatic and intelligence communities were glad of the existence of a world of secret money and unaccountable transactions. And the gradual decolonization of places like the Dutch Antilles and the Cayman Islands left many small countries with few natural economic advantages other than a set of tax treaties and a legal structure familiar to First World bankers. It was only in 2003 that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development made it any sort of priority at all to do something about tax havens.

Over the following years, the US authorities had gotten tougher and tougher on tax crime (in particular, Swiss-regulated bankers like Birkenfeld were absolutely not meant to be touting for business in the USA, and they were instructed to tell immigration authorities that they were only on pleasure trips). But bank secrecy was still a core principle of Swiss law, and that distinction between evasion and fraud made all the difference. Not only did UBS expect to have the full diplomatic weight of their government behind them, they were possibly in a situation where they could not comply with the US request even if they wanted to; handing over bank-account details was against Swiss law outside of very tightly drawn exceptions. This was the point where I began to take an interest.

At the time, I was an investment analyst with a specialty in making enemies at UBS by writing nasty things about the outlook for their business after the global financial crisis. I was also one of only a few people in the City of London who subscribed to the PACER US court records system. So I saw it all happen, in slow motion. There are a few cases in this book where I was peripherally involved but failed to see the forest for the trees. This is not one of themI had my eyes entirely open, and it was not a pleasant experience. Denial, when you are not part of it, is actually quite a terrifying thing. One watches ones fellow human beings doing things that will damage themselves, while being wholly unable to help. Its even more acute if, as was the case for me, you have to write about it every day and get your facts checked by people who disagree with you.

During the few weeks of IRS vs UBS, I spoke to bankers with twice my experience, executives with decades more experience, and professors of Swiss tax law who had literally drafted the treaties governing their relationship with the USA. All of them told me that it was inconceivable that the names would be handed over. Sooner or later, the IRS would realize that it could not bully a sovereign state, and give up. They started to change their minds at about the time when Raoul Weil, their Head of Global Wealth Management, was declared a fugitive from justice.1 Within the year, Switzerland and the USA had a new tax treaty and UBS had agreed to pay a fine of $780 million to the USA.

For his part, Bradley Birkenfeld did not have a happy experience with the IRS. He had been unwise enough to start providing them with information before ensuring that he had immunity from prosecution. Unsportingly, the IRS investigators effectively used the information he had given them as a lever to get more; he had effectively confessed to aiding and abetting tax crimes in the USA, and the agents on the case did not feel like using their discretion to do Bradley a favor. In his book he claims that the IRS guys just simply hated him, a believable hypothesis. He was sentenced to forty months in prison and served thirty-one of them before being let out for good behavior.

On his exit, though, he picked up a big check. While he was in jail, the courts had ruled that, although he had admitted his own crimes, he was entitled to whistle-blower status for informing the authorities about the crimes committed by his employer. And the relevant whistle-blower statute entitles an informer to between 15 percent and 30 percent of the money collected as a result of their information. Of the UBS fine, some had been paid to securities and banking regulators and was ineligible for the program, but there was enough left for the IRS to make an offer of $104 million. Net of tax (which Birkenfeld actually whined about having to pay), that left $75 million.

There was no particular reason why the Swiss offshore tax-evasion franchise collapsedit wasnt a cumulating, snowballing fraud like most of them. It was just not useful anymore. The Cold War was over, and so the governments of the developed world had less interest in maintaining plausibly deniable bolt holes with which one could fund shady things. Top rates of tax had been falling for decades, so there was less urgency felt by the global elite. And so tax evasion is a bit of a boring business these days; there are hardly any Birkenfelds left, to the chagrin of Ferrari dealers and the joy of people who like peace and quiet in restaurants.

There are not very many countries left where you can deposit money in a bank and feel sure that its concealment from your domestic tax authorities is guaranteed by the force of law. Secrecy is forced to work through obscurity: layers of trusts owning trusts owning companies that own companies, making it more and more difficult for the taxman to establish the true owner of an asset, and creating uncertainty and legal expense for anyone wanting to prove that tax is due, and due to them rather than to another country. In this way, the whole field drifts into the hands of lawyers and accountants and starts looking more like avoidance than evasion. The creation of reasonable doubt over the existence and magnitude of a tax liability tends to move the whole operation in the direction of the civil rather than criminal courts, and to make the question one of what steps it is reasonable for the public purse to take to guard its tax revenues.

Modern tax evasion, then, occupies a borderline between a market crime and an old-fashioned long firm against the government, with the credit extended by the fact that tax is paid in arrears. But the need for tax evaders to hide their money from governments is pernicious in itself, because it provides both a motive and a pretext for people and banks to create an infrastructure of concealment that can be used for much more straightforwardly criminal purposes.

Money laundering As well as its power to tax, the government can get things it wants and provide benefits to the community it serves by enacting and enforcing laws. One of the key advantages enjoyed by people who obey the law is that (as well as avoiding direct punishment) they can use the legitimate market economy to make and spend their money and get rich. If your main source of income is criminal activity, however, then there is a sense in which your money is as dirty as you are.

Crime, or at least crimes other than the ones that are the subject of this book, is a cash business. Banking records can be subpoenaed and used to identify parties to an illegal transaction. Criminals tend to prefer a more anonymous means of payment. However, precisely because the ownership of large piles of cash is associated with criminality, it can be inconvenient if you want to make large purchases or investmentspeople tend to notice and investigate. The inability to conveniently use the modern banking and payments system is a huge disadvantage for criminals when compared to the legitimate economy.

So the governments ability to use the banking system and its records as a tool of law enforcement is an important part of its overall power to enforce its laws. It is also, to return to a theme, a significant check on the growth of criminal enterprises; a drug ring cannot grow faster than its cash-handling capability. Undermining this system and trying to make dirty money appear clean is a fraud against the government, and the name of the crime is money laundering.

Money laundering tends to carry harsh penalties because the nature of the crime is to erase evidence of other crimes, and the assumption is that anyone willing to go to the trouble of laundering their cash must be trying to avoid investigation for something very serious indeed. This presumption is also born out by the typical loss rates in a money-laundering operation; the initial pile of cash can shrink by up to 50 percent in the process of being converted into clean-looking bank deposits. This is also a measure of the extreme usefulness of the electronic payments system compared to having to do everything in cash, of course. The coronavirus epidemic, by the way, was an absolute disaster for the money laundering industryit became immediately impossible for a neighborhood pizza restaurant to report $50,000 of cash takings every week without anyone noticing.

Like so many other offenses, money laundering relies on the fact that once the circle of trust is penetrated, there are few or no further checks to pass. In the context of money laundering, the objective is to get cash transformed into a deposit held with a reputable bank. Once that objective has been achieved, the money is effectively clean and can be spent or invested; a criminal may have other problems in explaining to the authorities how he is able to support a lifestyle well out of proportion to his honest income, but the payments system will not generate red flags.

And the example of money laundering also demonstrates one way in which systems of mutual trust break down. Call it the Trainspotting problem, after the novel and film in which heroin addicts shared needles and therefore ended up catching the same diseases. If the purpose of a trust system is to avoid the need for checking, then you need to take into account that when you allow a new entity into the circle of trust, you are also, implicitly, making the decision to trust everyone that they trust. The way this works for money launderers is that good banks dont accept large deposits of dirty cash. They also tend to check up on transfers from banks that are known to be high risk (in context, a euphemism for probably crooked). But there is a tier of mediocre banks, who are not so bad as to be the subject of aggressive checking by the good banks, but neither are they so good as to be unwilling to deal with the bad banks. Plotting a path through a chain of financial institutions from one that is prepared to take a suitcaseful of cash to one that will allow you to conveniently use the money is a big part of the skill of money laundering. (Of course, there are also shortcuts, especially when good banks have corrupt branches. In 2011, HSBC was fined $1.9 billion for not properly supervising its Mexican subsidiary. Branch managers had made special adjustments to the windows at their counters to accommodate the metal briefcases that the drug cartels favored for carrying cash. More recently, Danske Banks Estonian branch processed $234 billion in offshore deposits from counterparties who had been turned down at every other bank in Europe. This is roughly equal to the GDP of Denmark and ten times that of Estonia.) The other crucial component of a money-laundering strategy is a list of the ways in which something valuable can be owned, bought, and sold without the identity of its owners being a matter of public record. This is particularly important when you are laundering payments not because their source is dirty (proceeds of crime) but because their eventual destination is (terrorist financing, for example). The list seems to shorten every year, as the international authorities crack down on the last remaining secrecy jurisdictions, and as reputable banks get more and more frightened of the consequences of money-laundering convictions and reduce the size of their circle of trust.2 But it is still possible to find small (and not so small) countries (and US states) that allow the creation of companies with nominee directors and no register of shareholders, places with no land registry and so on. Anywhere that you can find lawyers who are prepared to conceal the names of those who pay them, and a legal system that allows them to get away with it, you will find money laundering.

Obfuscation of this sort can turn simple, even crude thefts into complex cases. For example, it was reported recently that several multimillion-dollar condos in Trump SoHo3 had been bought by Mukhtar Ablyazov, the former owner and chairman of BTA Bank of Kazakhstan. Which was unfortunate, because by the time it was discovered, BTA Bank was bust after massive fraud, while its chairman was fighting multiple simultaneous court cases against extradition back to Kazakhstan and had $4.9 billion (and counting) worth of judgments made against him in a London court.

And the interesting thing about the BTA Bank fraud is that it is so uninteresting. From the point of view of economics, there was hardly anything to analyze. SomeoneAblyazov says that it was not himapproved billions of dollars of loans to brass-plate shell companies, lied about the use of proceeds (in one case, claiming that they were financing the purchase of a type of oil rig that has not been invented yet), and stood by as those shell companies transferred the loan proceeds to companies of which the beneficial owner appears to be Mr. Ablyazov. This scenario is hardly even a fraud, its just an embezzlement. Technically, there is an element of the long firm to it, as the shell companies obviously defaulted on these loans and thereby drove BTA Bank into insolvency, but the essence of the alleged crime was simply to write a check to yourself from a bank you control. Its hardly different from just walking into the vault and helping yourself to the money.

If, of course, it had been as simple as that, it would never have worked. Any bank that would be of any use for sending money to buy a condo in New York would certainly refuse (or would investigate, which is in many ways just as bad) a transfer coming from a newly formed company with no tangible assets and a hundred-million-dollar loan from a bank connected to the person it was transferring the money to. Even real-estate agents are not quite as slack as they used to be. The intermediate stages are absolutely crucial, not only in impeding investigators, but in allowing the whole transfer to work.

And in many cases, a jurisdiction where the verification of ownership is really difficult and inconvenient can do a lot of the work of one where the information is not available at all. It slows down any eventual criminal investigation, and the time gained can be used to create further and further layers of obfuscation, until the criminal is adding layers of concealment faster than the authorities can peel them away. The determination of authorities to do things properly can often work against themit takes less than a minute to be subjectively sure that an alcoholic street dweller or a grandmother suffering from dementia who is listed as serving on the board of over a thousand companies is not playing any meaningful role in the ownership of any of them, but to actually prove that this is the case for one specific entity can take a few weeks even if the paperwork hasnt been lost.

And more than this, a jurisdiction where verification is difficult or time-consuming is one that changes the trade-off between checking and trust, the trade-off that is at the center of the crime of fraud. The decision as to whether to process a particular transaction is always one of risk against return, and the aspirant money launderer can search around until he finds a financial institution that is willing to take the risk. Once that step has been achieved, the process of navigating up the quality spectrum can begin.

Money laundering is basically a market crime. It has been decided that, because the global financial system is so ubiquitous, it makes sense to use it as a tool of law enforcement. That decision having been made, the creation of a new set of crimes was an inevitable consequence. Airlines are not prosecuted for helping criminals flee justice4 and the sellers of guns and balaclavas are not held liable for robberies, but financial institutions have, in return for their many privileges in the wider economic system, been delegated certain investigative tasks. Failing to meet those obligations, and gaining market share by allowing bad actors to use the honest economys financial system, is a crime of dishonesty against the government. Its also, like the dumping of toxic chemicals, a crime in which someone gains a business advantage by creating a public nuisance. The money-laundering infrastructure is not just a parallel payments system for bad people, it actually makes crimes like the looting of BTA Bank possible.

Plunkitt of Tammany Hall Of course, one of the bodies that commits the most fraud against the government is the government. Public-sector bodies tend to have people in senior positions with major financial responsibility who have become used to a lifestyle totally out of proportion to what they might be able to enjoy if they were not an elected representative, and who have ambitions for a lot more. And the conversion of political power into money is not difficult; if you have the ability to put people in jail or destroy their businesses and youre not getting rich off it, Id say youre not trying. Not all corruption is fraud in an economically interesting sense, though. A great deal of public-sector malfeasance just consists of straightforward bribery and corruption,5 which is really just a form of crude theft, where someone steals a bit of the coercive power of the state to use it in their own interest. But it is also possible to use certain kinds of political positions to carry out something that looks quite like a control fraud, and so we have the category of what might be called graft.

George Washington Plunkitt, of the Seventeenth District of the New York state legislature, was perhaps the original theorist of graft. He served between 1869 and 1884, overlapping with Boss Tweed at the start of his political career but mainly during the era of Irish American dominance that had followed from the mass naturalizations of 1868. In his memoir, Plunkitt of Tammany Hall, he distinguished between the two kindsdishonest graft and honest graftand opined that the dishonest type was for fools. Honest graft, on the other hand, he defined by the phrase he claimed to want for an epitaph: I seen my opportunities and I took em. The process of honest graft is best described by examples: My partys in power in the city, and its goin to undertake a lot of public improvements. Well, Im tipped off, say, that theyre going to layout a new park at a certain place. I see my opportunity and I take it. I go to that place and I buy up all the land I can in the neighborhood. Then the board of this or that makes its plan public, and there is a rush to get my land, which nobody cared particular for before.

Aint it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a profit on my investment and foresight? Of course, it is. Well, thats honest graft.

Readers who have the perception and sense that God gave a whelk will notice quickly that the word honest here is delusional. However, inasmuch as one can untangle Plunkitts curious personal moral code, the point of this anecdote from his Very Plain Talks on Very Practical Politics is that it would have been dishonest if he had gouged the city authorities, or used his political position to induce the commissioners of public parks to pay an excessive price. In the deal he describes, somebody was going to get a windfall, and it might as well be Plunkitt rather than anyone else. There is a sort of twisted logic to it, perhaps better illustrated by the same approach when applied to the job market; the post needs to be filled, so why not reward a loyal constituent who votes the Tammany Hall ticket? Plunkitt in fact believed that civil-service reform was the curse of his age, and that patriotic young Americans who were disappointed in finding out that their democratically elected representatives could not deliver patronage to them were losing faith in democracy itself and turning to anarchism.

The trouble is, of course, that it is a slippery slope and would take superhuman probity to maintain the distinction between using your position to profit merely from delivering the services expected from your constituents and the sort of thing that Plunkitt discusses in the same talk as an alternative example of honest graft, in a context in which its clear he doesnt understand the difference.

For instance, the city is repavin a street and has several hundred thousand old granite blocks to sell. I am on hand to buy, and I know just what they are worth. How? Never mind that. I had a sort of monopoly of this business for a while, but once a newspaper tried to do me. It got some outside men to come over from Brooklyn and New Jersey to bid against me.

Was I done? Not much. I went to each of the men and said: How many of these 250,000 stones do you want? One said 20,000, and another wanted 15,000, and other wanted 10,000. I said: All right, let me bid for the lot, and Ill give each of you all you want for nothin.

They agreed, of course. Then the auctioneer yelled: How much am I bid for these 250,000 fine pavin stones?

Two dollars and fifty cents, says I.

Two dollars and fifty cents! screamed the auctioneer. Oh, thats a joke! Give me a real bid.

He found the bid was real enough. My rivals stood silent. I got the lot for $2.50 and gave them their share. Thats how the attempt to do Plunkitt ended, and thats how all such attempts end.

Not only is this clearly not a case where a profit would have been made at the citys expense anyway, it raises a lot of other unsettling questions: How was Plunkitt able to get all the other bidders to stay away? The distinction between honest and dishonest graft just cant be sustained, and even if it could, given the characters involved it wouldnt. The priests of Jehoash could not resist the temptation to slide into pilfering, so its unreasonable to expect an elected representative to do so.

Of course, the story of George Washington Plunkitt (and of Boss Tweed and the Erie Railroad Company gang) has to be put into the broader historical context that, comically and ubiquitously corrupt though it was, a story of the development of New York City in the second half of the nineteenth century that concentrates wholly on local government corruption and stock-market fraud is in some way missing the big picture. It is the Canadian Paradox in action; the very reason that there was so much dishonesty is that there was so much to steal because so much wealth was being created. The railroads did actually get built, and so did the telegrams and later the automobiles and radios. As we briefly mentioned, the Victorian period in Britain was equally beset by fraud and dishonesty, but the global empire did happen. Its not necessarily a correct analysis to look only at the amount of corruption and assume that all corruption is bad; you need to take a holistic view of the relationship between corruption and the rest of society, which incorporates the overall level of trust that the corruption is exploiting. Fraud and dishonesty in a high-trust society with strong institutions can be evidence that something good is happening, so quickly that people dont find it worth their while to waste time minimizing their fraud losses.

This attractively contrarian idea that fraud can be a positive sign should not be pushed too far, though. Ideas of this sort were once popular in development economics to describe the postcolonial states of Africa and Asia, and having failed there, they were revived in post-Soviet Russia and Central Asia. The idea was that corruption was a rough-justice form of deregulation and that in the absence of effective state institutions, things might go better if people simply stepped around what institutions there were. It didnt work at all. What actually happened was first, that the corrupt economy swallowed the honest economy. And second, the level of stealing got big enough to have macroeconomic effects of its own; when a significant proportion of the money supply is being transferred overseas to be hidden, it pushes the exchange rate down and this creates huge difficulties for the real economy in buying raw materials. A corrupt imperial or Communist bureaucracy is bad, but the combination of corruption and an open capital account removes any physical limit on what can be stolen.

The trouble here is that government corruption faces a similar information problem as that which characterizes a normal kind of control fraud; once there is a channel set up for the controlling party to channel money by apparently legitimate means to his or her own pocket, it is there to be used and difficult to prevent its being abused. And since the subversion of controls on the corrupt transactions happening at all is necessarily also going to subvert any checks on their growth, corrupt schemes tend to grow quickly, like control frauds. Episodes like Tammany Hall and Victorian England should probably be seen as rare and providential cases when the snowball growth of the corrupt economy happened to be outstripped by the growth of the real economy. The opposite is usually the case.

And when there are no effective controls, things tend to get out of control. As the Communist system broke down in Russia, for example, effectively the entire economy was lying in the street like so many of Plunkitts paving stones,6 waiting for someone to pick it up. And as in the days of Tammany Hall, there was a semigenuine question of whether what happened next was honest or dishonest graft. People were encouraged to form new cooperatives around workplaces or affinity groups, and to start to carry out open-market transactions alongside their efforts for the output plan. And these cooperatives ended up turning into corporations. And some of the more enterprising founders took over their former factories, or started banks, or collected together a lot of valuable assets in a holding group. Was this theft on a continental scale? Or was it the whole idea of moving to a capitalist economy? Many people who could reasonably be identified as kleptocrats might equally reasonably object that the worst they could be accused of is seeing their opportunities and taking them.

1. He was found not guilty in the end, in 2014, but something like that tends to concentrate the mind.

2. The relevant regulations are called KYC rules, for know your customer. The principle is that as a bank (or lawyer, real-estate broker, etc.), you are not meant to do any transactions where you are not sure of the true identity of the beneficial owner (as in, not a lawyers office or a front corporation) on both sides. Thats hugely inconvenient, but every year the extent to which the regulators and cops are prepared to accept excuses seems to diminish.

3. President Trump seems to have a lot of bad luck in this area. Both the Trump SoHo (now the Dominick Hotel) and Trump International Hotel & Tower in Moscow were developed with the assistance of Felix Sater, a convicted felon accused of laundering money from the BTA fraud. As many as three-quarters of the apartments in the SoHo tower were sold to shell companies paying cash, something which FinCEN, the US money laundering regulator, tells you is a risky thing to do. Ablyazovs bank also financed some Trump-branded developments in Georgia, in partnership with an investment group that was implicated in fraud by leaks in the Panama Papers, while a Financial Times investigation into Trump International Hotel & Tower Toronto uncovered evidence of improper and opaque payments. We would note that these days, the Trump Organization does not usually take part in the building or financing of these assets, and so has less direct involvement; the owners of the buildings have denied all allegations. There just seems to be something about the Trump brand that makes it attractive to post-Soviet developers and investors with friends who want to conceal the source of their money.

4. Although sometimes freight companies are held responsible for failing to take precautions against illegal immigration and people smuggling.

5. It is a bit of a linguistic shame that there are two commonly used words herebribery and corruptionand two intuitively separate types of crimedemanding money in order to do your job properly, and demanding money to do something you shouldnt dobut there isnt a neat mapping of one word onto one concept.

6. The parallels have often been noted, and David Hoffmans book The Oligarchs notes that the Russian translation of Theodore Dreisers The Financier, in which Gould, Drew, and Vanderbilt are all referenced, was highly influential on the first generation of Russian capitalists.

Chapter 12: When It All Comes to an End See they conducted experiments on convicts I dont know on what grounds they reason a man in jail is a bigger liar than one out of jail The chances are telling the truth is what got him there.

Will Rogers Toward the end of the story, chronicles of the great frauds tend to turn dark. Possibly the bleakest passages in any business history ever written come toward the end of The Smartest Guys in the Room by Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind. The Enron stock price is falling, cash flow is turning negative, and its CEO, Jeff Skilling, knows that the only thing that could possibly be done is to rebase expectations and ask for time, admitting that the boasts of the recent past were a fantasy. Instead, he develops the habit of going absent from work, sipping white wine in Houston bars, and acquiring the nickname Quiet Jeff. When he shows up, he is often unshaven. The recurring phrase in his conversation is this isnt fun anymore.

The rogue trader Nick Leeson fell apart in a similar way. The detail that sticks in my mind from accounts of the collapse of Barings Bank is that he had begun to stress-eat sour candies as the market moved against his unauthorized positions. By the time he went on the run in the hope of being tried in a British rather than Singaporean court, he had gobbled so many of them that the enamel had been eaten away from his teeth. The physical sickness, the compulsions, and the lethargies; in many cases the failure of a big fraud starts to look like a form of mental illness.

But theres nothing really special, in my view, about the emotional cost suffered by white-collar criminals. All they are experiencing are the normal unpleasant sensations of failure, familiar to anyone who has been stuck in an unprofitable company, a losing sports game, or a bad relationship. The difference is one of intensity rather than quality. If fraudsters get it worse than most of us, this is probably just because part of the process that set them on the road in the first place was the construction of a wall between their self-perception and the reality of their actions and the collapse of this wall releases all of the negative emotions and shame that were being piled up on the other side.

And the social shame is very real too. Ive only ever known one person who was arrested for a crime of fraud and its a sad story. Early in my career as a stock analyst, I made about as many mistakes as any junior, but had the misfortune to make nearly all of them within the space of six days, and during a period when my boss was absent and the trading desk was left with me as their only source of information. Being blamed for about ten million euros of cumulative trading losses is not a nice feeling, and even though we later lost touch, Ill always be grateful to the guy who bought me a drink, calmed me down, and told the rest of the angry traders to cut me a break. We lost touch over time, as one does in an industry where job moves are frequent, so I only heard about it from the newswires that he had been dragged off his trading floornot literally in handcuffs, but in the company of police officersas a suspected member of an insider-dealing ring.

Im not including his name here, because he was innocent. Four years later, the regulators dropped all charges and informed him about the compensation arrangements for people who had lost their earnings and reputations as a result of a mistaken investigationthere arent any. And his ostracism had been totalfor all that period, everyone in a regulated financial job was well aware that it was career suicide to talk to someone who was under investigation, and after the charges turned out to be a crock, we had all lost his number and most of us were too embarrassed to look it up again. I later worked on the trading floor that he had been arrested on, and none of his colleagues at the time felt any better than I did about the whole affair. It was something that really wasnt mentioned; the sensation of even thinking about our former friend felt almost ritually impure, despite the dropped charge. The socialization of the professional and business classes is not totally dissimilar to that of Polynesian islanders, and fraud is the ultimate taboo. Anything that touches it is unclean.

Obviously, there are solid reasons why this social and psychological barrier exists; its an evolved phenomenon, reinforced by training and ritual, which is meant to encourage aggressive and sharp practice up to the limit of the law, while inculcating a terror and revulsion toward anything that is marked as a step too far. As with many other forms of ritual cleanliness, the standard by which things are declared to be pure and impure is determined in complicated social and historical terms rather than by any scientific standard of what might cause damage. So, to make mortgage loans to borrowers that become effectively unpayable after three years is fine. And bundling those toxic loans into a security that is designed to implode is also fine, in most circumstances, in the sense that nobody involved in the great American mortgage crisis regards it as their finest hour, but to have been a CDO banker in 2006 is not something to erase from ones rsum and hang ones head in shame for.

But if you designed one of those securities with help from a hedge fund that wanted to bet on its failure, and made technical errors in the documentation that was meant to disclose this fact to its buyers, then shame on you, Fabrice Tourre of Goldman Sachs! Depart from our industry and take a vow of poverty!1 It would take a team of anthropologists years to work out why the line is drawn where it is. As we saw earlier, it changes with the law; insider dealing was the normal way of the world surprisingly recently. But the line is there, and not just in the financial markets. In any business community, the idea of being thought of by others as a dishonest person is a powerful source of shame and revulsion.

Face-to-face But the trouble about taboo places is that nobody goes there. Ironically, the strong social barriers that are put in place to stop people from committing fraud are also strong barriers that stop people from thinking about fraud at all. One of the strongest defenses in a criminals arsenal is the ability to look someone in the eye and indignantly ask, Are you calling me a liar?

The only occasion when Ive done this is described on page 225 (the Swiss Bank UBS, whom I accused of being involved in a conspiracy to avoid tax) and as briefly mentioned in that chapter, it was absolutely no fun. As it happens, I did so indirectly, via their media-relations office and that was heart-stoppingly stressful enough when they asked me to confirm what I meant behind all the layers of politesse and caveats that my bosses had insisted on. If I had needed to directly sit in a room with the executive responsible and say to his face, Your company is conspiring to commit tax fraud, then even though I had a pile of documents an inch thick from the US Internal Revenue Service that clearly proved the fact, I dont think I could have done it.

The reason I say this is that I was also witness to one of the biggest frauds in the history of the United Kingdom, and did almost nothing about that one either. I was covering the British banking industry during the period when the sale of Payment Protection Insurance (PPI) accounted for more than half of their profits.

As advertised, PPI was meant to be a sort of private-sector unemployment insurance. If you lost your job, it would make your loan payments. In principle, not a bad idea. It became a bad idea when the banks decided firstly, to charge roughly four times the going rate for it. Secondly, to sell it with loads of nasty exclusions (it often didnt cover unemployment as a result of sickness, for example, and self-employed people couldnt claim at all). And thirdly, to lie massively in the sales process, either claiming that the PPI policy was a legal requirement, that it was a requirement for getting the loan, or, all too often, just chucking it in at the back of the documentation and relying on momentum to guide the customers pen through one more signature without noticing that there was a separate insurance policy being sold at all.

Anyway, the problems of PPI matched pretty exactly those of subprime-mortgage origination; a fundamentally screwed-up incentive system, criminogenically aggressive sales targets, and an annoying absence of a single obvious controlling mind behind the channel that took cash earned from systematically deceiving consumers and channeled it into dividends and earnings. I had a front-row seat for the whole thing. But since I was in London, and the British banks had a more relaxed attitude to management access than the Swiss banks, I was regularly given the opportunity to sit down in one-to-one meetings with knights of industry like Fred Goodwin2 of RBS.

Did I ask about PPI? Oh, absolutely yes. I banged on, for ages, about the correct accounting treatment of insurance premiums. I was absolutely obsessed by that. I wrote pages of research notes for investors, full of statistics and details about the policies. They were all about trivial matters of accounting policy. Looking back, I really think that this was a psychological defense mechanism whereby my brain protected me from itself. I clearly, at some level, knew that something horribly fraudulent was happening. But I also knew that to think too clearly about this fraud would be intolerably stressful and taxing, and might end up requiring me to take very unpalatable actions in directly accusing someone much more powerful than me of committing a particularly shameful crime. Most animals have strong mechanisms regulating the initiation of same-species conflict, particularly when it comes to males challenging higher-status males, and I think this might have been the biological basis3 of the very extreme form of cognitive dissonance that I experienced.

In a nutshell, this is one of the ways in which control systems failthey have to be administered by people, and people often have really strong revulsion instincts that prevent them from doing their job properly. Control systems that arent administered by people fail, when they fail, because they are algorithms and, as we keep discussing, every algorithm is implicitly a negative template that tells a bad actor how to get around it. Is there maybe a general way of thinking about how fraud gets into a system?

Triangle fraud and entrepreneurial fraud In passing, at the end of Chapter 8, we started thinking about the extent to which frauds could be thought of as random events that happen when a bad person bumps into a structural control weakness. Things can be made a little more psychologically and sociologically complex than that. But not too much: Donald Cresseys model of the fraud triangle, set out in his 1953 classic, Other Peoples Money, has never been surpassed.4 The fraud-triangle model is the equivalent of the classic murder triangle beloved of detective novelists. Rather than means, motive, and opportunity, it suggests that a fraud happens when the following conditions are simultaneously met: Need. Bankers commit acts of dishonesty for the same reason that heroin addicts do; they have been put in a position where they need to come up with larger sums of money than they can generate by honest means. This side of the triangle is agnostic as to the reason for the need; simple greed, institutional pressure, fear of admitting failure, or whatever underlying cause, the first component of a fraud is someone who needs the money.

Opportunity. An opportunity to commit fraud is a weakness in a control and checking systemeither one that exists because of the way in which the intrinsic variety of the system has been reduced to make it manageable, or one that the fraudster himself has created by exploiting a position of control.

Rationalization. White-collar crime is committed by people who have been trusted with something, and there are psychological barriers to breaking a trust. Usually, before an opportunity to commit fraud is exploited by a person with a need, the fraudster will have to come up with a way of overcoming these barriers. This is a rationalizationa way of redescribing the crime so as to make it less emotionally repellent. Something like Its only a temporary measure to put trades in this errors and omissions account, or If I get enough colonists to Poyais there will be a viable community. Once the capability to rationalize is in place, its there for good, seemingly; this accounts for the propensity of fraudsters to keep coming back to the well.5 We can think, as we did in Chapter 8 when we were talking about risk management and quality control, of the overall climate of fraud as being made up of little bits of the triangle, floating about. And that can begin to explain how things like the Canadian Paradox come about. Places like Greece have lots of needs and a high propensity to rationalize. As a result, they need to run in a way that creates very few opportunities; in a low-trust society, you dont do business with strangers. Places like Canada can afford to provide lots of opportunities because a prosperous and egalitarian society creates fewer needs, and a high-trust economy is one in which the propensity to rationalize is low.

But the fraud-triangle model only takes us part of the way. Its a good basis for a risk-management system, but weve already noticed that risk-management solutions tend to miss the kinds of frauds that we have mainly been talking about. The fraud triangle does not distinguish between frauds launched against targets of opportunity, and frauds that are designed against specific targets by people who know what theyre doing. And thats a really important distinction. Most of the fraud that happens in the world, by head count of fraudsters, is the sort of thing that the triangle describes well: a crook spots a weakness, rationalizes, and embezzles some money. But most of the stories in this book are of frauds where the relationship between the criminal mind and the control weakness isnt really very well described by a simple model of finding a flaw in the armor. The big fraudsters create their frauds, design and sustain them. They build them around the cognitive environment of their victims and take pains to manipulate the environment so that they can remain undetected and grow. They dont see their opportunities and take em, no matter whether Plunkitt of Tammany Hall claims thats all he did. They make their opportunities; in a really important sense, the big-ticket corporate criminals are every bit as much entrepreneurs as the honest companies they parasitize. We need to make a distinction between incidental fraud, the kind that can be controlled by a risk-management system, and entrepreneurial fraud, which cant be controlled by any kind of system, because the control and information system is precisely what it is made of.

Another way of looking at this is to note that the fraud triangle is a model of the incidence of fraud rather than one of its severity. The amount of money you lose in the event of your becoming a victim of a crime is dependent on two things: how long it takes you to discover the fraud, and the rate at which the fraudster can extract value from you while the crime is going on. These two factors are why entrepreneurial fraud, as opposed to incidental fraud, is such a difficult management problem. Its hard to make estimates of how long it will take you to find out that someones deceiving you and its hard to guess what will go on in the meantime. (If it wasnt, nobody would get married.) In other words, were not going to get anywhere trying to make a model of entrepreneurial frauds. Like any other kind of entrepreneurship, they defy analysis precisely because they create a new reality to which previous principles cant be assumed to apply. So lets look at this a different way. Rather than trying to model the birth of frauds, lets look at them in death.

How big frauds fail People who are able to catch fraudsters when they are employed to do so are quite unusual. The only consistently successful example I can think of is Bill Black, the S&L regulator who busted Charles Keating and a number of other bank frauds, and it is very clear from his autobiography of the period that he is an uncommonly persistent and blunt individual and not always necessarily someone who got on well with his colleagues. (I once described the book, cattily but in my view not wholly unfairly, as the tale of how Bill Black was right about literally everything and how other people occasionally managed to overcome their moral and intellectual weaknesses to admit it.) It would be unwise for anyone to base their fraud strategy on being able to recruit a Bill Black.

In fact, catching a big, entrepreneurial fraudster is usually done by accident. The most common form of accident is that the fraud grows too fast for its perpetrators ability, has a cash liability falling due that it cannot pay, and collapses. In bankruptcy, people check up on things that they had been happy to take on trust when they were dealing with a solvent counterparty, and once it has been discovered that there is not enough money to pay all the creditors, the story comes out pretty quickly.

The other kind of accidental discovery is potentially more interesting, though. As a fraud grows, it usually needs to expand the number of people exposed to it, because its significance increases in its local economy. After a while (or even quite early on, if the fraudster was unlucky or careless), it grows beyond the domain of its initial planning, and the fraudster can no longer be confident in his initial work designing around the checking and control processes to which the fraud would be subject. The fraud reaches the front door of someone who is in the habit of doing things a little bit differently. That person carries out their standard checksthey ask for a site visit on a weekend, rather than a weekday, for example, or call up the insurer of a ship rather than the port to find out when it set sail. And suddenly everything is apparent. The essence of fraud is stagecraft and the creation of facades that look utterly convincing, but only when viewed from the right angle.

This kind of happy accident might potentially lead us to some usable principles for fraud detection. In the first place, it implies that diversity in methods makes a system less vulnerable to deceit. Recall that the biggest frauds ever to have taken placesubprime, LIBOR, and Medicareall worked in the context of very standardized systems that were (over) optimized for economies of scale in the processing of huge numbers of transactions. There actually were some state-level medical insurers during the 1980s that had claims expenses less than a twentieth of Medicares, and they achieved it by largely ignoring cost efficiency and concentrating on processing their claims correctly, rather than efficiently. And they tended to be staffed by loss adjusters and appraisers who were given a large degree of independence and allowed to do things their own wayif you managed to get a fraudulent claim past Bob, that wouldnt necessarily mean that your next similar claim would get through when it was processed by Sally.

Secondly, we can combine two insights. The defining characteristic of entrepreneurial fraud is growth, and an entrepreneurial fraud is one that has been designed for a particular control environment. So we know that candidate frauds have to be things that demonstrate the growth characteristic, and we know that fraudsters are vulnerable to a change of perspective. Or to put it in simple terms: Anything that is growing unusually fast, for the type of thing that it is, needs to be checked out. And it needs to be checked out in a way that it hasnt been checked out before.

If there is a Golden Rule for fraud detection, thats my best guess at it.

But do you want to be rich?

I have to confess, I generally find commercial fraud pretty amusing. Theres something about the fantasy of it all that appeals to me; the game of wits involved in creating an illusion of something, then choosing the right moment to whisk everything away, and disappear somewhere warm with the hot money. And youre stealing generally from rich people, without using violence. Its got a bit of the appeal of Robin Hood, with less danger of an arrow in the vitals. The criminologist Michael Levi once wrote that, if you have no convictions or bankruptcies on your record, everyone gets one free shot at a long firm, and Id be lying if I said Id never daydreamed.

I have two friends who spend a lot more time than me looking at the subject, though, and they dont share this outlook at all. One is a hedge-fund manager who augments his returns by short-selling the shares of fraudulent stock promotions, and the other is a computer expert who writes programs to trawl through email archives and to catch online poker cheats. Both of them independently confirm something that you can check up yourself by randomly choosing a first-person account from the bibliography; the more time you spend trying to get inside a criminals head, the less attractive you find them. Theyre cheats, is what they are, and like people who cheat at sports, they spoil the game for the rest of us.

Its not by any means a victimless crime either. Long-firm frauds often end up bankrupting their suppliers, who then often have insult added to injury by being suspected of complicity in the fraud. Stock promoters steal peoples lifetime savings and pension funds. Pyramid schemes victimize people who cant afford to lose the money, and tear apart communities and affinity groups in the process. Even when the immediate victim is someone like American Express Warehousing, who really look like they deserved to meet a Tino De Angelis, there are other victims we dont hear about. How many perfectly honest traders in agricultural commodities were unable to get working capital because all the lenders were scared of the next Salad Oil scam? We can actually guess that there were quite a lot, because the COVID-19 crisis ended up exposing a lot of very similar warehouse-receipt frauds, some of them even in the soya bean industry, and a number of large global banks exited the commodities financing business completely as a result. There are too many of these parasites, and they dont get caught or sentenced nearly enough.

Its a sad fact, as my friends confirm, that if you want to find frauds, your best asset is a list of existing fraudsters. You might have noticed that comparatively few of the case studies weve looked at were first offenses. Theres something about commercial fraudsters that keeps them coming back to the same pattern of behavior. And theres something about the modern economic system that keeps giving fraudsters second chances and putting people back into positions of responsibility when theyve proved themselves dishonest. This is white-collar crime were talking about after all; one of its defining characteristics is that its carried out by people of the same social class as those responsible for making decisions about crime and punishment. Were too easy on people who look and act like ourselves.

However, this isnt the end of the storynot quite. The Golden Rule might help to protect us from ongoing frauds, but weve seen from Chapter 9 on market crimes that frauds can be defined retrospectively; there can be cases where the decision that needs to be made is not how to check transactions against a set of standards, but about what those standards themselves ought to be. And we already know that the standards of business propriety are their own world, which intersect with the criminal law in one way without fully overlapping it, and intersect with commonsense concepts of morality in a wholly different way. Theres no way of avoiding the fact that the optimal level of fraud is not zero, and so were going to have to decidehow much fraud, of what kinds, do we want?

And that decision has to be a pragmatic one. We face the same dilemma that the Victorians did: Do you want to reduce fraud to a minimum, or do you want to be rich? If youre not going to take the risk of Poyais, youre not going to end up like Canada. If you want railroads, you might have to put up with the Erie Ring, just as if you want high-speed broadband youre likely to end up with WorldCom and Enron. The decision about what market crimes to create is not so different from the decision about how strictly to enforce laws against unambiguous crimes of dishonesty. The cost of eliminating dishonesty has much more to do with the amount of legitimate business that never gets done. The cost of dishonesty itself is inseparable from the extent to which bad actors drive out good. The trade-off that we need to make at the level of society is between these two quantities. Perhaps the best that we can do is to accept that fraud is an inevitable part of society, bring up our children to be honest, and adopt a skepticalbut not too cynicalattitude to things that seem too good to be true.

1. Not a literal vow of poverty, although he is currently an adjunct professor.

2. I call him Fred because thats what he was called at the time. Its also what hes called now. There was an interim period during which he was Sir Fred Goodwin, but the knighthood was stripped from him around the time that the UK taxpayer spent a lot of money bailing out the banking system. The British honors system dodged a bullet here, as he would have been odds on to become Lord Goodwin in a few years, and its much more difficult to revoke a peerage.

3. See The Hour Between Dog and Wolf by John Coates on the application of physiology and the adrenaline/cortisone cycle to financial markets, and Mistakes Were Made by Tavris and Aronson on the phenomenon of cognitive dissonance and its importance in explaining all manner of institutions.

4. Although in the typical way of management consultants looking for proprietary solutions to sell, there have been all sorts of proposals for fraud squares, double triangles, and all manner of other polygons. By the way, at the time of writing, Other Peoples Money could not be ordered to the reading rooms at the British Library, because their copy had been mislaid. Thats one possible explanation 5. The failure to come up with a convincing rationalization is also presumably the reason that my own designs at a long firm have never gotten beyond the pipe-dream stage.

Acknowledgments Fraud is a slightly touchy subject for people who want to maintain a commercial career, so there is an element of no names, no pack-drill to these acknowledgments. The head of forensic data analysis at a leading accountancy firm helped me out a great deal with suggestions, as did several senior bank regulators, all on the condition that I keep their names out of it. Thanks very much.

I owe a lot to my colleagues from when I was a banking analyst; Tom Rayner is mentioned in the relevant chapter but Id also like to thank Andreas Hakansson for explaining the history of Swiss banking to me and Guillaume Tiberghien for allowing me to spend so much of my career doing obscure research into quirky little areas rather than doing something about the disgraceful state of my earnings models. Jonathan Pierce and Hugh Pye taught me everything I know about UK banks, although I would have been considerably richer if they had taught me everything they knew. Darren Sharma was a constant source of encouragement. I would like to thank John Hempton for explaining a few frauds to me and buying me an excellent dinner in Sydney and Nassim Taleb for an excellent lunch in London. My shout next time, guys.

Henry Farrell read an early draft and, along with my superb editor Ed Lake, helped considerably in arranging a collection of facts and jokes into something resembling an actual book. Tess Read viewed the very earliest drafts of many of the sections and helped me keep the digressions under some semblance of control. Hilary Davies, my beloved mum, and Glendra Read, my mother-in-law, both encouraged me during occasional dark moments.

For the American edition, Colin Harrison and Sarah Goldberg at Scribner encouraged me to do a bit more than removing extraneous letters and I think the book is a lot better as a result. Thanks very much to Colin for challenging me to think a bit deeper about some key issues. As mentioned in the text, I hereby admit that David Dayen was right about mortgage documentation fraud. Thanks to Doug Henwood and Mike Pollak for general inspiration over the years to look at the skeleton of the economy, stripped of all pretense.

The dedication at the front of the book is to Tess, as it should be, but this book is also dedicated to all the many victims of commercial fraud over the years. As I hope it makes clear, we are all in debt to those who trust; they are the basis of anything approaching a prosperous and civilized society.

A Note on Sources As mentioned on a few occasions in the text, stories of frauds often make amusing reading, once you have overcome the miasma of self-pity and exculpation. Criminological, sociological, and economic works on financial crime tend to be somewhat less exciting, and the selection is not very wide; it is a subject that the academic literature tends to shy away from. This is something of a pity, given the actual importance of white-collar crime, when compared to the relatively minor forms of social deviance which make up the run of the mill of criminological research. A highly honored exception is Michael Levi, whose book on long-firm fraud, The Phantom Capitalists (Routledge, 1981), is essential reading and one of the only really satisfying treatments of crime as an economic phenomenon. His Regulating Fraud (Routledge, 2014) is also well worth reading.

The other classicif you can find itis Donald Cresseys Other Peoples Money (1953), which introduced the fraud-triangle psychological model. Since this one is out of print and widely stolen from libraries, it might be easier to read Why They Do It: Inside the Mind of White Collar Criminals by Eugene Soltes (PublicAffairs, 2016). The Economics of Innocent Fraud by John Kenneth Galbraith (Houghton Mifflin, 2004) provides some clues to the location of the boundary between criminal deception and the ordinary operation of a capitalist economy, while the novel The Shipping Man by Matthew McCleery (Marine Money Inc., 2011) is a lightly fictionalized account of how trust and deception work when hedge-fund managers try to get involved with Greek shipowners.

On specific frauds, most of the stories in this book come from crimes big enough to have at least one good book written about them; it is a genre with something of a short shelf life as the progress of economic growth tends to render the amounts of money involved in scams from ten years ago almost quaint. On the land of Poyais, I read The Land That Never Was by David Sinclair (Da Capo Press, 2004) and the accounts in Forging Capitalism by Ian Klaus (Yale University Press, 2014) and The First Latin American Debt Crisis by Frank Griffith Dawson (Yale University Press, 1990). I also found the book review in the 1822 Quarterly Review which showed that people were on to Thomas Strangeways early on.

Barry Minkows adventures in carpet cleaning were made into a movie in 2018 (Con Man, directed by Bruce Caulk), although it was not released in England so I cant vouch for its quality yet. There were several contemporary books written about ZZZZBest, of which the best is Faking It in America by Joe Domanick (McGraw-Hill, 1989). Vincent Teresas My Life in the Mafia (Doubleday, 1973) is very clear on the mechanics of a number of scams, but in all honesty its not a great work of literature. The definitive account of The Great Salad Oil Swindle is the book of that name by Norman Miller (Coward McCann, 1965) (contemporary newspaper accounts of Tino De Angelis also demonstrate the extent to which he generated anecdotes, and the Life magazine interview on his release from prison is a classic). A similar laugh-a-minute account of the OPM Leasing affair is given in Other Peoples Money by Stephen Fenichell (Anchor Books, 1985), although Bad Business by Robert Gandossy (Basic Books, 1985) gives a somewhat more sober account of the way that Mordy and Myron managed to bypass all controls that people should have put on them. Readers who dont want to plow through countless Reddit pages on dark markets might prefer to read about them in DarkMarket by Misha Glenny (Vintage 2012).

Malcolm K. Sparrows License to Steal (Basic Books, 2007) is the definitive work on Medicare fraud and the source of the alarming statistic that up to a third of the program was stolen at the peak in the 1990s. His analysis of the methods of Medicare fraudsters is also invaluable in general application to the relationship between controls and the crooks who work around them. As far as I can tell, Trumped! by John ODonnell with James Rutherford (Simon & Schuster, 1991) is the definitive account of what went on in Atlantic Citythe author clearly has an axe to grind from his time as a Trump employee, but everything he says seems to check out with contemporary records.

On pyramid schemes, Charles Ponzis own autobiography, The Rise of Mr. Ponzi (Public Domain, 1936), is a detailed if slightly disturbing read; he appeared to believe that he could allay suspicions simply by asserting that he was honest immediately after detailing an obviously dishonest act. Patrick Halleys Dapper Dan (CreateSpace, 2015) gives a lot of the necessary background on how the city of Boston worked at the time, in the form of a biography of Ponzis lawyer. The depressing reality of small-ticket pyramid schemes is brought home by False Profits by Robert Fitzpatrick and Joyce Reynolds (Herald Press, 1997) and by Ponzi Schemes in the Church by Dr. Sidney Stewart (independently published, 2017). Guy Lawsons book on Sam Israel, Octopus (Oneworld Publications, 2013), includes a lot of fascinating detail on Bayou Capital and on the prime bank guarantee fraud community that was not available in contemporary newspaper coverage. The story of Pigeon King International was covered from start to finish in Better Farming magazine, although Jon Mooallems 2015 story in the New York Times Magazine is more fun to read. The Federal Reserve conspiracy theories mentioned on p. 101 are described in The Secrets of the Federal Reserve by Eustace Mullins (Bridger House Publishers Inc., 2009) and The Federal Reserve Conspiracy by Anthony Sutton (Dauphin Publications Inc., 2014), but really, dont bother.

Murray Teigh Blooms The Man Who Stole Portugal (Secker & Warburg, 1967) is the best work in English on the Banknote Affair, although Thomas Giffords novel The Man from Lisbon (McGraw-Hill, 1977) seems to get all the key facts right in exploring Alves dos Reiss psychology. Of the many corporate histories of the Bre-X scandal, my favorite is Bre-X by Jennifer Wells (Orion Business, 1999); on drug counterfeiting and Vioxx, I would choose Poison Pills by Tom Nesi (Thomas Dunne Books, 2008) and Dangerous Doses by Katherine Eban (Mariner Books, 2006), although there are many excellent retrospectives on what went wrong in medical journals.

For most of the accounting and stock market frauds, I watched them happen in real time and had my own records. Confessions of a Wall Street Analyst by Dan Reingold (Collins, 2006) gives an excellent summary of the 00s telecom frauds, as well as a clear portrait of why analysts are such weak protection; it should be read alongside Bethany McLean and Peter Elkinds business classic The Smartest Guys in the Room on Enron (Portfolio Trade, 2003). I cannot bring myself to recommend The Wolf of Wall Street by Jordan Belfort (Bantam Books, 2007), but it is out there. As a description of how the stock market works, Supermoney by the pseudonymous Adam Smith (actually George Goodman) (Michael Joseph, 1972) is much better. John Carreyrous Bad Blood (Knopf, 2018) is a solid narrative account of the Theranos affair, but genuinely excellent in its description of how hard life gets for people who start to challenge a fraud.

Bill Blacks The Best Way to Rob a Bank is to Own One (University of Texas Press, 2005) brought the concept of a control fraud to us, although the book is very much from Blacks own perspective within the Federal Home Loan Bank system. Charles Keatings biography, Trust Me by Michael Binstein and Charles Bowden (Random House, 1993), gives the other side of the picture, and Inside Job by Stephen Pizzo, Mary Fricker, and Paul Muolo (McGraw-Hill, 1989) is a fair history of the S&L disaster. Rogue Trader by Nick Leeson (Little, Brown & Co., 1996) is another example of the rogue trader autobiography genre, but really needs to be read alongside a more objective history such as All That Glitters by John Gapper and Nicholas Denton (Hamish Hamilton Ltd, 1996). If you can find a library which has a full run of the Bank of England Financial Stability Report, then you can have a look for my article Remuneration and Risk, which discusses the perverse incentives of rogue traders, although dont trouble yourself too much as I dont really believe its right anymore. Chain of Title by David Dayen (The New Press, 2016) is the best history of the MERS scandal, while The Lost Bank by Kirsten Grind (Simon & Schuster, 2012) describes the fall of Washington Mutual and really goes into detail on the environment created by its sales practices.

Mike Freemans Clarence Saunders & The Founding of Piggly Wiggly (History Press Inc., 2011) gives the bones of the market corner, while the GE cartel is described in The Great Price Conspiracy by John Herling (R. B. Luce, 1962) and the unique management style which supported it in John Brookss Business Adventures (Hodder & Stoughton Ltd., 2014). The John Freeman insider dealing ring was put together from contemporary newspaper reports which are easily available online and Russ Mahlers crimes are summarized in Crime in the Waste Oil Industry, a journal article by Alan Block and Thomas Bernard (1988).

As a former employee of a Swiss bank myself, I received a comprehensive and tedious series of training courses in money laundering and tax fraud (how to report it, rather than how to do it!) and how to recognize some of the key phrases, as demonstrated in Bradley Birkenfelds Lucifers Banker (Greenleaf Book Group, 2016)he clearly did some of the same courses. On money laundering in general, The Laundrymen by Jeffrey Robinson (Arcade Publishing, 1997) is still relevant, while Rachel Ehrenfelds Evil Money (HarperCollins, 1992) is slightly more up to date.

For historical crimes, Jonathan Levys Freaks of Fortune (Harvard University Press, 2012) and Frederick Martins The History of Lloyds and of Marine Insurance (Macmillan, 1876) give a lot of the background on how capitalism developed to the point of being able to support really big frauds. Rollo Reuschels The Knights of Industry (Public Domain, 1895) is still available in an electronic edition. Jim Fisk: The Career of an Improbable Rascal (Charles Scribners Sons, 1959) has a lot more verve and action than most histories of the Robber Baron era, which tend toward the academic and preachy. Nobody who is interested in politics should pass up reading Plunkitt of Tammany Hall by William Riordan, which is also available gratis on Project Gutenberg.

About the Author Courtesy of The Author Dan Davies is a former regulatory economist at the Bank of England and analyst for a number of investment banks. His career has seen him tackle all manner of financial crookedness, including the LIBOR and FX scandals, the collapse of Anglo Irish Bank, and the Swiss Nazi gold scandal. He has written for the Financial Times and the New Yorker, among other publications.

SimonandSchuster.com www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Dan-Davies @ScribnerBooks We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster ebook.

Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.

Index A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the beginning of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or phrase, use your reading systems search function.

Abagnale, Frank, 36 Ablyazov, Mukhtar, 243, 244 accounting fraud, 13233 accounting scams, 45, 50, 85, 127, 128, 129n, 131, 132, 135, 136, 141, 147, 15051, 152 accounting standards, 56, 90, 132, 13435, 137, 139, 140n, 142, 155, 156n, 221n, 255 accounts receivable, 30, 73. See also credit control accruals principle, 135n actuaries, 117 adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs), 16970, 173, 174, 177 Adoboli, Kweku, 153 affidavits, 11 affinity groups, 7980, 82, 83n, 84, 99, 118, 249, 261 Against Zenothemis (Demosthenes), 220 Allfirst, 151 Allied Crude Vegetable Oil, 4553 Alves dos Reis, Artur Virgilio, 105109, 178, 190 American Continental Corporation (AAC), 156, 160 American Express, 4754 Amway, 84 analysts, securities, 14143, 23839, 252 AOL, 19192 appraisal fraud, 15859, 160 dead-horse-for-dead-cow, 159 cash-for-trash, 159 Archimedes, 219 Aronson, Elliot, 255n Arthur Andersen, 136, 140n Art of the Deal, The (Trump), 68, 70 Ashby, W. Ross, 186 audits and auditors, 18, 20, 49, 53, 79, 117, 12122, 13234, 13738, 13940, 141, 158, 160, 222 AVEO Pharmaceuticals Inc., 11617 Baker, Mary, 218 bankers, 19, 34, 65, 79, 80, 92-93, 154, 157, 171, 238, 239, 256. See also Alves dos Reis, Artur; Birkenfeld, Bradley; Diamond, Bob; Keating, Charles; Pitman, Sir Brian; Purves, Sir Willy nineteenth century, British, 8 investment bankers, 55, 57, 127, 128n, 191 bank loans, 20, 29, 55, 134, 137, 244. See also mortgages banknotes escudo, 1069 Portuguese, 1059 Poyais dollars, 89, 106n Bank of Angola and Metropole, 108 Bank of England, 2, 11, 106, 150, 207, 212 Bank of Portugal, 1059 bank runs, 78, 81n, 155 bankruptcy, 28, 34, 5152, 59, 6364, 68, 6971, 81, 96, 135, 136, 137, 149, 156, 16869, 200, 203, 204, 206, 220, 223, 227, 229, 259, 26061 banks, 4, 5, 8, 19, 36, 3738, 39, 46, 4748, 5758, 69, 70, 78, 8081, 8687, 9293, 95, 1013, 104, 133, 13637, 14849, 151, 152, 15354, 156, 157, 16667, 17177, 208, 20911, 238, 24042. See also Savings and Loans (S&Ls) and specific banks investment, 101, 142, 14849, 153, 16465, 173, 184 Swiss, 49, 237, 238, 240 Barclays Bank, 2078 Barings Bank, 18, 15152, 251 Barnard, George G., 22526, 227n Bayou Capital, 98, 99101 bear raids, 204, 223 bees, 191n Belfort, Jordan, 12931 Benebit, 14 Better Farming magazine, 96 bezzle, the, 27 Bible, 82, 108, 145, 21517 Big Four accountancy firms, 140 Bigley, Elizabeth, 218 biotech fraud, 11517 Birkenfeld, Bradley, 23538, 23940 Br, Lszl, 79 bitcoin, 36, 78, 12, 15 Black, Bill, 15960, 162n, 258 Blockbuster Video, 135 blockchain, 1314 Bloomberg, 208 blue-sky laws, 96 bonds, 15051, 164, 227 junk, 68, 69, 156, 160 Latin American, in 1820s, 14 mortgage-backed, 16365, 169, 173, 175, 233 Poyais, 9, 11, 71 Ponzi and, 78, 79 railway, 22324, 225 toxic-waste, 164 Treasury, 90 Trumps projects using, 65, 6768, 69, 70 bonuses, 21, 69, 148, 14950, 15253, 161, 162, 171, 17778, 184 Boston, 3233, 7577, 80n, 118, 224 Boston Ladies Deposit Company, 8081, 218n Boston Womens Bank, 81 bottomry, 22021 Bourdain, Anthony, 30n brass-plate companies, 138, 16465, 175, 244 Brazilian straddle, 14748, 151 Bre-X mining fraud, 10912, 113, 131 bribery, 31, 34, 72, 79, 22526, 227, 246 British Bankers Association, 209 British Biotech (company), 116 Brooks, John, 19495 BTA Bank of Kazakhstan, 24344 Busang mine, Borneo, 11013 Business Adventures (Brooks), 19495 bust-outs, 2728, 30n, 35, 72, 84, 91 Calvin Klein, 184 Canada, 15n, 16, 17, 42, 95, 112, 257 Canadian Paradox, 1516, 31, 43, 118, 229, 248, 257 Capital (Marx), 196 capital-gains tax, 237 capitalism, 8, 28, 81, 191, 220 maritime, 219, 224 Caraboo, Princess. See Baker, Mary Cardozo, Benjamin, 191 Carleton, Mary, 218 Carnegie, Andrew, 218 Carreyrou, John, 119 cartels, 21, 19497, 21112, 242 cash flow, 30, 31, 38, 57, 64, 66, 68, 87, 251 Catain, Jack, 32, 40 Catch Me If You Can (Abagnale), 36 Cazique of Poyais. See MacGregor, Gregor central banks, 103, 108, 212. See also Bank of England; Bank of Portugal; Federal Reserve channel stuffing, 141 chat-rooms, 192, 208n check kiting, 3539, 40, 41, 95 CheckRelay, 37 chief executives, 72 circles of trust, 98, 11720, 122, 242, 243 Citizens for Decent Literature, 157 Coakley, Dapper Dan, 79 Coase, Ronald, 18384 Coates, John, 255 collateral, 3135, 4748, 53, 58, 65, 66, 128, 134, 171, 237 communism, 160, 181, 249 complex fraud trials, 1819 compound growth, 87, 95, 103 compound interest, 95, 101, 179 consolidation (accounting principle), 137 conspiracy theories, 103 control fraud, 21, 22, 79, 91, 98, 14578, 205, 219, 236, 246, 249 distributed, 21, 16163 cooling out the mark, 71 Cordiner, Ralph J., 195 corporate drone, 191n corruption, 42, 118, 201, 236, 24546, 24849 costs, delayed recognition of, 13536 counterfeiting, 2021, 22, 52, 91, 98, 10525 of banknotes, 1059 of drugs, 188, 12022 Countrywide, 178 credit, trade, 4, 6, 2627, 28, 2930, 32, 33, 35, 55, 60, 72, 88, 164, 170, 174, 176, 217, 21819, 220 bottomry, 22021 financial system and, 2034, 223, 22930 patterns reflecting commercial power, 31, 232 credit cards, 62, 86, 16869, 171 credit control, 3031, 73, credit rating agencies, 73, 233 credit ratings, 60, 92n Credit Suisse, 191 Cressey, Donald, 256, 265 criminogenic systems, 21, 16263, 168, 17274 criminologists, 15n, 193, 265 criminology, 2, 22 cryptocurrency, 1215 cybernetics, 18687 dark markets, 1, 38. See also Evolution; Silk Road darknet, 78, 122 Danske Bank, 242 Davies, Dan anecdotes from career of, 13, 15n, 96n, 2078, 23839, 252, 25355 Dayen, David, 176 de Angelis, Anthony Tino,4552, 5354, 190, 261 debt, unreported, 13738 debtors prison, 63, 220 de Guzman, Miguel, 11013 De la Brache, Helga, 218 Deming, William Edwards, 184n, 185 Demosthenes, 220 Department of Justice (US), 208 deregulation, 15455, 157, 167, 222, 248 Diamond, Bob, 2078, 212 Diesel, Rudolf, 79 DiPascali, Frank, 98, 117 directors, company, 64, 78, 133, 149, 206, 22426, 243 Dirty Harry (film), 66 Dirty Rotten Scoundrels (film), 17 distributed control fraud, 21, 16163 Dixon, Don, 173 doctors, 32, 117, 11920, 12425, 142 vulnerability to biotech stock frauds, 115 Drew, Daniel, 22324, 22526, 227, 249n Drew, Ina, 148n Drucker, Peter, 194n drugs illegal, 12, 38, 4448, 241 pharmaceutical, counterfeit, 12022 pharmaceutical, not counterfeit, 11517, 12225 economics, 2, 6, 8, 15, 16, 42, 66, 88, 118, 139, 17990, 197, 202, 217, 236 unsatisfactory treatment of fraud by, 17, 20, 27, 74, 84, 91, 98, 215, 219, 233, 244, 248, 261 Economist, 109 EF Hutton, 3839 Elkind, Peter, 251 Elliott Business Builders, 203 embezzlers, 86, 87, 136, 14546 Enron, 3, 18, 87, 127, 135, 136, 138, 140n, 141, 251, 262 entrepreneurial fraud, 190, 258, 25960 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 198, 199, 200 equilibrium, 17, 43, 5253, 119, 122, 139 Erie Railroad Company, 22227, 248 Erni, Barbara, 33 escrow, in online fraud, 46, 7 Evolution (online market), 1, 7 exit fraud, 122 exit scam, 7 fake assets, 13637, 158 fake demos, 11415, 118 fake sales, 13234 FE (finalize early, fast execution) payments, 68 Federal Home Loan Bank, San Francisco, 157 Board of, 159, 160 Federal Reserve System, 16, 37, 58, 100, 1013, 106 Felderhof, John, 112 fences, 7374 Financial Times, 228, 243n Fisk, Jim, 224, 22527 Fitzgerald, Ella, 122n Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 115, 11617, 123, 124 Food for Peace, 46, 50, 53 fraud triangle, 25558 Freaks of Fortune (Levy), 219n Freeman, John 19192 Freeport McMoRan, 113 fronts, 7273 Galbraith, Arlan, 9597 Galbraith, Jamie, 170n Galbraith, J. K., 27, 104 gambling commissions, 6566, 68, 69 Gauger, Mr., 89, 16, 221 gelang firma, 28. See also long firms General Electric, 19495 geologists, 11012 German community, London, 22833 Gilbert, J. W., 226 Global Crossing, 133 Goethe, J. W. von, 179 Goffman, Erving, 71n gold, alluvial, 111 Golden Boos. See Erni, Barbara golden rule of fraud detection, 260 Golden West Financial, 16970 gold jewelry, 219 Goldman Sachs, 55, 57, 191, 253 gold market, 227 gold mines, 109, 11013, 115, 13132 gold standard, 103 Gonzlez, Henry, 103 Goodfellas (film), 72 Goodman, George, 127, 268 Goodman, Myron, 5460 goodwill (accounting), 15556n Goodwin, Fred, 254 Gordon, Lord Gordon, 227 Gould, Jay, 224, 22527, 249n government in general, 47, 62, 8990, 154, 179, 216, 23549 Indonesian, 11213 Nigerian, 42 Portugal, 105, 107, 109 South American, possibly fictitious, 10 US, 45, 50, 90 Gowex, 133, 136 graft, 24648, 249 gray market, 121 Great Salad Oil Swindle, The (Miller), 46 Greece, 1516, 257 ancient, 2, 220 Greenspan, Alan, 192 Grind, Kirsten, 172n Hanover Trust Company, 879 Hanseatic League, 220 Hasin, Sidney, 56, 58 Hayek, F. A., 18183 health-care frauds, 113 hedge-funds, 98101, 149n Heerema, Edward, 102n Henry VIII, King of England, 181 Henwood, Doug, 65 high-trust economy, 31, 42, 53, 257 high-trust societies, 15, 17, 109, 236, 248 Hilton, Barron, 67 Hippocratic oath, 120 Hoffman, David, 139n Holiday Inn, 6667 Holmes, Elizabeth, 11314, 119 Holmes, Larry, 145 homomorphism, 187n, 188n hotel fraud, 33 House of Commons, 207 Howe, Sarah, 8081, 82, 8788, 95, 118, 218n HSBC, 242 Hudson Oil Refining Corporation, 19899 IBM, 5458 Iceland, 217 Icelandic sagas, 21718 implicit price, 6 Inca Empire, 221 incentives, 11, 21, 55, 61n, 12021, 14041, 150, 153, 155, 162, 163, 168, 177, 184, 254 incentives theory of rogue traders, 152 incidental fraud, 258 income tax, 237 Infinity Game, 8283 information, 22, 62, 92, 173, 178, 181, 18284, 185, 186, 188, 193, 2023, 232 control of by fraudsters, 55, 96, 9899, 154, 188, 258 insider, securities fraud, 19293, 2056 inheritance, 80, 216, 21718, 230n inheritance tax, 237 Initial Coin Offering (ICO), 1314, 16 inquiry agents, 230, 23133 insider dealing, 21, 100, 178, 19294, 2056, 222, 252, 253 insurance, 26, 28, 31, 34, 3940, 41, 55, 62, 95, 113, 219, 220, 259 medical, 75, 259 Payment Protection Insurance (PPI), 25455 title, 16567, 177 International Reply Coupons (IRCs). See also Ponzi, Charles Interstate Appraisal Services, 31, 32 investment bankers, 55, 57, 127, 128n, 191 investment banks, 101, 142, 14849, 153, 16465, 173, 184 investment fraud, 9, 8586, 129 investors, 13, 85, 93, 99, 113, 117, 11819, 134, 139, 142, 222 in Bayou Capital, 99100, 101 in cryptocurrency, 13, 14 insider dealing and, 19293 in investment schemes, 9697 in Ladies Deposit Company, 80, 81 Madoffs, 9798 mining, 109, 110, 11112 in mortgage bonds, 16465, 166 19th century female, 8081 in OPM leases, 5556, 58, 59 in pension plans, 8990, 164 in pigeons, 9596 in Piggly Wiggly Stores, 2027 Ponzis, 7677, 7879, 9495, 118 in Portuguese Banknote Affair, 107 in prime bank securities, 102 in pyramid schemes, 87 railways and, 222, 224, 227 Social Security and, 88, 89 stock market and, 127, 12829, 130, 131, 193, 194 in Theranos, 113, 11415 Trumps, 68, 243n Victorian, 228 in ZZZZBest, 3435, 3940, 41, 95 IRS vs. UBS, 23536, 23940, 25354 Israel, Sam, 98100 Jehoash (high priest), 216 Jett, Joseph, 15051, 152, 153 JP Morgan, 148n junk bonds, 68, 69, 156, 160 Keating, Charles, 15661, 258 Keating Five, 160 Keedoozle, 207 Kennedy, John Fitzgerald, 52 Kerviel, Jerome, 153 kickbacks, 54, 14546 Kidder, Peabody, 150, 152, 153 King, Don, 145 kiting checks, 3539, 40, 41, 95 Knights of Industry, The (Reuschel), 230, 232 Kolnische Volkszeitung, 228, 231 Konczal, Mike, 170n KPMG, 133 Kutz Method, 13435 KYC (know your customer), 243n Lab fraud anemia, 61n Ladies Deposit Company, Boston, 8081, 91, 218n Laverty, John, 14 Law of Sufficient Variety, 18687 Lawson, Guy, 98n lawyers, 4, 19, 34, 50, 64, 80, 118, 159, 167, 175, 195, 220, 238, 240, 243 professional qualifications of, 117 extreme expensiveness of, 207 Leasing. See also OPM Leasing importance of residual value in, 56 tax advantages of, 55n Leeson, Nick, 18, 15153, 251 Lehman Brothers collapse of, 210 relationship with OPM Leasing, 55, 59 Lehnert, Lothar, 23132 Lernout & Hauspie, 133 Lets Gowex. See Gowex letterhead, 58, 73, 107 Levi, Michael, 215, 260 Levy, Jonathan, 219n libel, 71, 23132 LIBOR, 20713, 259 License to Steal (Sparrow), 60n Liman & Co, 231 limited liability, 64, 68, 220, 222 limited liability company, 92, 227 Lincoln Savings & Loan, 15657, 158, 16061 livestock, 96 Livingstone, Jesse, 205 Lomuscio, Joe, 51, 198 London, 2, 22833 London Stock Exchange, 10, 11, 116n London Whale, 148n long firms, 2021, 22, 27, 28, 29, 31, 4574, 8687, 91, 124, 127, 149, 18889, 219, 229, 230, 240, 244, 26061 sledge-drivers, 22830, 232 low-trust societies, 15, 236, 257 Lucifers Banker (Birkenfeld), 235 MacGregor, Gregor, 8, 9, 910, 11, 71, 190 dubious knighthood of, 10, 143 military career of, 8, 143 previous frauds of, 18n, 143 MacGregor, Rob Roy, 910 Madden, Steve, 131n Madoff, Bernard, 87, 9798, 99, 1001, 117 Mafia, 2728, 32, 72, 200 Mahler, Russ, 198201 mail fraud, 39n management public sector, 236 risk, 18889, 190, 257 scientific, 185 strategic, 197 management fees, 68, 69, 70, 99, 193 Manufacturers Hanover, 67 Mori, 11n marginal cost pricing, 197 Marino, Dan (fraudster), 9899 maritime capitalism, 64, 21921 market corner, 206 market crimes, 2122, 91, 111, 191213, 240, 245, 26162 markets, 10, 219n drugs, illegal, 1, 38, 17 financial, 1314, 15, 16, 37, 45, 50, 96, 97n, 111, 115, 12732, 149, 151, 152, 155, 15659, 183, 222, 22526, 233, 251, 255n general characteristics of, 2122, 4647, 50, 5152, 56, 134, 142, 14748, 197 pharmaceutical, 121, 12324 pharmaceutical, prescription drugs, 12224 prime bank securities, 1013, 267 real estate, 13839 Marx, Groucho, 55 Marx, Karl, 75, 196, 238 maturity dates, 9295, 101, 169 McLean, Bethany, 251 medical insurance, 75, 259 Medicare, 6162, 83, 11920, 180n, 189, 190, 259 Merchant of Venice, The (Shakespeare), 63, 92 Merck Pharmaceuticals, 12224, 125 MERS (Mortgage Electronic Registration System), 16667, 17273, 175n, 176, 177 Microsoft, 115 military planning, 186 Milken, Michael, 156, 160 Millard, Antoinette, 218 Miller, Donald, 49 Miller, Norman, 46 Minkow, Barry, 2527, 3134, 36n, 3941, 57, 60, 94, 95, 97 Minsky, Hyman, 88 mis-selling, 174 money laundering, 24145 Moores Law, 57 Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, 146n mortgage-backed securities, 16365, 169, 173, 175, 233 mortgages, 34, 62, 89n, 155, 157, 158, 166, 211, 253. See also MERS subprime, 16978 Morze, Mark, 31, 41, 60, 94 Mozilo, Angelo, 178 multilevel marketing, 8485 multisignature escrow, 78 My Life in the Mafia (Teresa), 27 NASDAQ, 98 negative amortization, 170, 173, 174 New England Journal of Medicine, 123 New Granada, 10 New York Stock Exchange, 202, 2057, 22223 New Zealand, 11n, 192 newspapers, 11, 32, 108, 135n, 200, 206, 222, 23132 Nichols, Robert Booth, 98n Nigerian advance-fee fraud, 42 9THWONDER (online scammer), 1, 2, 37 nobility phony, 21819 phony Scottish, 10, 143 Nobre, Luis, 102n notaries, 1067, 109, 117 ODonnel, Jack, 68 oil recycling, 198 Ontario Securities Commission, 42 OODA Loop, 186 operations research, 18586 Opitz, Gustav, 23032 OPM Leasing, 5460, 87 accounting trick used by, 13435 snowball effect of interest expense and, 86 Option ARM mortgages, 16970, 173, 174, 177 options markets, 14748, 15152 Opus Dei, 47 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 238 Original Dinner Party, in pyramid scheme, 82n Osaka Exchange, 151 ostrich-meat investment schemes, 96 Other Peoples Money (Cressey), 256, 265 Padgett, Tom, 31, 32, 35 paper hanging, 36. See also check kiting Parmalat, 137 patsies, 72 Payment Protection Insurance (PPI), 25455 payment terms, 2930 Payne, Leslie, 25 PayPal, 5 pensions, 8890, 164, 261 Perkins, Bacon & Co., 106n pharmaceutical industry, 11925 track and trace systems in, 12122 Philadelphia Savings Fund, 5859 Pigeon King International (PKI), 9596 pigeons, racing, 9596 Piggly Wiggly Stores, 2027 pilots, in pyramid schemes, 8283 Plunkitt, George Washington, 24648, 249, 257 Plunkitt of Tammany Hall (Plunkitt), 24647 Pony Express, 37 Ponzi, Charles, 7579, 82, 88, 91, 9495, 97, 118 launch of scheme, 7677 takeover of Hanover Trust, 7879 Ponzi schemes, 40n, 79, 85, 8788, 90, 9193, 94, 97, 101, 103 Portuguese Banknote Affair, 1059 Poyais (fictional country), 811, 1415, 71, 143, 190, 221 prepayment penalty, in mortgages, 17071, 173 prime bank securities, 1013, 267 Prince, 120 princesses, 9, 218 principal/agent problem, 184 Principles of Scientific Management, The (Taylor), 185 prison, 18n, 27, 52, 108, 200, 211, 227, 239 debtors, 63, 220 private equity industry, 129n psychology, 18, 25253 public choice theory, 18788 pyramid schemes, 23, 8284, 87, 9192, 178, 261 Quakers, 80 quality control, 122, 161, 18990, 257 Quanta Resources, 199200 Quarterly Review, 143 Queenan, Joe, 15, 109n Qwest Communications, 133 Rabelais, Franois, 105 racing pigeons, 9596 railways, 22227, 248 Ranbaxy Laboratories, 122 rationalization, 25658 Reagan, Ronald, 155, 156, 199 real estate, 65, 70, 88, 138, 15759, 167, 244 Reddit, 266 regulators and regulation, 18, 95, 96, 115 deregulation, 15455, 157, 167, 222, 248 environmental, 194, 19899, 201 financial, 1314, 36, 42, 76n, 9697, 116, 130, 140n, 150, 156, 160, 173, 17475, 176, 192, 205, 206, 2089, 211, 23233, 240, 243n, 252, 258 pharmaceutical, 121, 125 Renner, Thomas, 27 Resorts International, 67 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 198 Reuschel, Rollo (Stanislaus Reu), 22833 libel case against, 23132 revenue recognition, 13435 reverse take-overs, 42 Richmond-Fairfield (fictitious audit partnership), 8889 Rind, Maurice, 32, 34 risk, 148 credit, 171 wrong-way, 34 risk management, 18889, 190, 257 robosigning, 17577 Rockwell Industries, 5659 Roddy, Mark, 32 Rogers, Will, 251 rogue traders, 8687, 14854, 251 rollovers, 41, 85, 93, 94, 97, 101 Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 42 Rusnak, John, 151, 152, 153 sagas, Icelandic, 21718 St. Joseph (fictitious city), in MacGregors fraud, 89 Salad Oil Swindle, 4554 Salazar, Antnio, 109 salting (mining fraud technique), 110, 115 Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 193 Saunders, Clarence, 2026 Savings and Loans (S&Ls), 15461, 162, 164, 173, 258 scientific management, 185 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 13n, 8788, 93, 100, 152, 178 settlement, securities, 51, 203n, 204, 206, 211, 229 Sherman Antitrust Act, 19596 shipowners, 15, 80n, 118, 145, 219 ships, 49, 78, 102n, 145, 217, 21921 short firm clinics, 61 short selling, 131n, 2046, 223, 260 shotgun/rifle technique, 6263, 120, 190 signatures, forged, 56, 107n, 175, 254 Silk Road (online market), 1, 4, 5n, 6, 7, 17 Singapore Mercantile Exchange, 152 Sketch of the Mosquito Shore (Strangeways), 10, 143 Skilling, Jeff, 18, 127, 135, 251 slaves, 63, 217, 22021 sledge-drivers, 22830, 232 Smartest Guys in the Room, The (McLean and Elkind), 251 Smith, Adam, 16, 189 on cartels, 196 snowball effect, 8485, 86, 87. See also compound interest Social Security, 8890 Socit Gnrale, 153 societies high-trust, 15, 17, 109, 236, 248 low-trust, 15, 236, 257 South Sea Bubble, 22122 Sparrow, Malcolm, 60n, 62 Sting, The (film), 17 stockbrokers, 3839, 130, 194 stock exchanges Canadian, 15n, 109n London, 10, 11, 116n NASDAQ, 98 New York, 202, 2057, 22223 Osaka, 151 Singapore, 152 Toronto, 42 Vancouver, 109 stock markets, 227 straddles, 14748 Strangeways, Thomas, 10, 143. See also MacGregor, Gregor strategic management, 197 Strathclyde Genetics, 96. See also Galbraith, Arlan Stratton Oakmont, 12932 Stubbs Limited, 231 subprime mortgages, 16978, 254, 259 Sufficient Variety, Law of, 18687 Sullivan, Scott, 136 Sultana, Paul, 102n supermarkets, 189, 202 Susquehanna River, 199, 200 Swiss bank accounts, 49, 237, 238, 240 tacit knowledge, 18283 Tammany Hall, 225, 247, 249, 25758 Taleb, Nassim, 3, 180n Tavris, Carol, 255n tax avoidance, 236, 240 taxes and taxation, 42, 55, 8990, 136n, 141n, 156, 227n, 23640 UBS case, 23536, 23940, 25354 tax evasion, 236, 237, 238, 240 Taylor, Frederick Winslow, 185 technical fraud protection, 12n TennesSee Valley Authority, 195 Teresa, Vincent, 2728, 3031, 32, 72, 91 Theranos, 11315, 119 Thomas Jenkins & Co., 8 3-6-3 banking, 155 Times Beach, Missouri (polluted town), 200 title insurance, 16567, 177 Toronto Stock Exchange, 42 Tourre, Fabrice, 253 toxic waste, 198201, 245 toxic-waste bonds, 164 Toyoda, Sakichi and Kiichio, 202 track and trace systems, 12122 trade credit, 45, 2627, 2930, 203, 223, 229, 232 traders, financial, 14, 50, 75, 147, 193, 194, 204, 20811, 219 rogue, 8687, 14854, 251 Trainspotting problem, 242 Treasury Bonds, 90 Trump, Donald, 6570, 138, 224, 243 Trump, Ivanka, 68 Trump Castle, 65, 67, 6869, 70, 224 Trump Entertainment Resorts Holdings, 65, 69 Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts, 65, 69, 70, 224 Trump Organization, 68, 138, 243n Trump Plaza Hotel, 65 Trump Soho, 243 Trump Taj Mahal, 65, 6768, 69, 70 trust, 6, 8, 1619, 2022, 27, 34, 35, 43, 62, 9798, 104, 109, 12425, 154, 158, 178, 188, 201, 213, 21718, 229, 232, 236, 242, 245, 256, 259 circles of, 98, 11720, 122, 242, 243 trusts, 240 Tupperware, 84 Turquands Rule, 149 Tweed, William, 225, 227, 246, 248 UBS, 23536, 23940, 25354 US Department of Justice, 208 US Navy, 78 US Treasury Bonds, 90 unprotected females, 80 Uses of Knowledge in Society, The (Hayek), 182 Vancouver Stock Exchange, 109 Vanderbilt, Cornelius, 22326, 249n Venezuela, 10 venture capitalists, 11819, 129 Victorian era, 80, 227, 228, 232, 248, 249, 262 VIGOR (research study), 12324 Vioxx, 12225 Volkswagen, 200 Wachovia Bank, 169n Walker, Lisa, 218 Wall Street (film), 192 Wall Street Journal, 119, 211 Walsh, David, 11011 warehouse lending, 4748 Washington Mutual, 172n Waterlow, Sir William, 107 Waterlow & Sons, 106, 1078 Wealth of Nations (Adams), 16, 196 Weil, Raoul, 239 Weissman, Mordecai, 5460, 135 Westinghouse, 195 white collar crime, 17, 1819, 2022, 39n, 47, 52, 14548, 251, 256 Wilmott, Paul, 150 Wirecard, 137 wire fraud, 39n Wolf of Wall Street, The (Belfort), 12930 women, 80, 81, 83n, 91, 218 Women Empowering Women pyramid scheme, 83n, 87, 218n Work, Frank, 225, 226 World of Giving, in pyramid scheme, 82n Worldcom, 134, 13536 wrongful trading, 64 wrong-way risk, 34 Young, Elizabeth, 146n ZZZZBest, 2527, 3134, 3940, 87, 94, 95 Scribner An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

1230 Avenue of the Americas New York, NY 10020 www.SimonandSchuster.com Copyright  2018 by Daniel Davies Originally published in Great Britain in 2018 by Profile Books All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information, address Scribner Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.

First Scribner hardcover edition March 2021 SCRIBNER and design are registered trademarks of The Gale Group, Inc., used under license by Simon & Schuster, Inc., the publisher of this work.

For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.

The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.

Interior design by Wendy Blum Jacket design by Jonathan Bush Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.

ISBN 978-1-9821-1493-0 ISBN 978-1-9821-1495-4 (ebook)