Nationalism and Modernity BY LIAH GREENFELD SocioLoGy is a modern discipline. It was called into being by the emergence of a new type of social reality, heralded by the French Revolution and accompanied (some would say pro duced) by the Industrial one (Berger, Berger, and Kellner, 1973; Nisbet, 1966), which both prompted and made possible the reexamination of society as such. The new society replaced the traditional social order in Europe, the ancient regime, and, the opposition between ancients and moderns being a long tradition (Black, 1966), was called "modern." The nature of modern society and the conditions of transition to modernity (of modernization) have been at the center of concerns that preoccupied sociology since its earliest days (Eisenstadt, 1985, pp. 7-24). It was on this, after all, although perhaps differently phrased, that the great proto-sociologists, Tocqueville and Marx, as well as the founding fathers of the discipline, Durkheim and Weber, focused. This venerable tradition has been continued on this continent the form of modernization theory and later, somewhat euphemistically, theory of develop ment. Tradition weighs heavily on the study of modern society. Our views of it are still to a large extent defined by the ideas of our (disciplinary) fathers. It is rarely recognized that the perspective reflected in these ideas was necessarily limited, that for the lack of empirical evidence (the newness of modernity and the lack of experience with it) they had to be highly speculative. The only thing that was known to the first theorists of modernity was the nature of the social order came to replace. Its own nature was still unclear, and many of its assumed features were hypostatized by opposition to the fading features of the old order. As the memories of the old order dimmed, the image of modern society arrived at by way of such hypostatization became the basis for imagining the old order. And as a result, the bases for our understanding of modernity have been the dichotomies such as Feudalism/ Capitalism (Marx, 1848, pp. 331-362; 1859, pp. 3-6; [1863] 1972, pp. 94-442), Gemeinschaft/Gesellschaft (Toennies, [1887] 1963), and Organic versus Mechanical solidarity (Durkheim, [1893] 1964), both sides of which are only tenuously related to the social systems they are supposed to mirror. Each of the classical dichotomies is organized around what it proposed as the constitutive element of modernity, whether industrialization driven by capitalism, organic solidarity, or rational will. In each case, this constitutive element is closely related to (if it does not represent) the mechanism of transition from traditional to modern society or of the process of modernization. It should be noted that the Marxist account of the mechanism is much more satisfactory than that proposed by either Durkheim or Toennies, and this could be the reason, quite apart from its ideological appeal, for the dominance of historical materialism among theories of modernity.

The modernization theory of the 1950s and 1960s, composed as it was predominantly of structuralist-functionalist as well as Marxist and neo-Marxist approaches (which, it should be kept in mind, are also structuralist and functional- ist), was at its basis a variety of historical materialism. In the framework of the modernization theory, as in the framework of classical Marxism, history was viewed as a linear progression through definite stages, culminating in a particular, known stage (modernity) in which all societies would at some point converge. The mechanism behind this progression, in modern- ization theory as in Marxism, was assumed to be economic: industrialization driven by capitalist (or commercial) interests was the fundamental factor in the process, and it was thisfactor that for one reason or another (here Marxists and structuralist-functionalists differed) called into being other features, or "structures," of modernity (Eisenstadt, 1985). Again, although Marxists and structuralist-functionalists might disagree in their evaluation of these other features, their lists of them were very similar (Inkeles, 1983). These features were political and cultural and minimally included the modern bureaucratic state and secular culture, specifically the spread of literacy and modern science. Also noted was the change in the nature of social stratification expressed in the dramatically increased rate of social mobility in modern societies; it too was interpreted as a result (a response to the needs) of industrialization. Finally, both Marxists and structural- functionalists expected modern societies to become ideologi- cally homogeneous. The nature of this convergence was, obviously, different: while Marxists, depending on the specific denomination, expected the victory of communism or social- ism, structuralist-functionalists were certain that industrializa- tion implied liberal democracy.

Speculation was the way of social philosophy. In sociology speculation is supposed to be checked by examination against evidence, only corroboration by the latter being a sufficient ground for retaining one or another idea. In practice it does not always work this way, and the chances that it would decrease as the scope of the theory increases. The staying power of a theory often depends more on its ability to adapt to different political agendae, than on the degree of its consistency with empirical data. In this respect theories of modernity of the historical materialist derivation on the whole proved very adaptable. Such political adaptability may be attributed on the one hand to their general vagueness, and, on the other, to the fact that they either incorporated or could be interpreted easily as social critique. Still, it was not only the changing standards of political correctness which caused the abandonment of the modernization theory in the mid-1960s and its replacement with "development" studies, but the abundance of evidence that contradicted its fundamental premises.

The anomalies which were the undoing of the moderniza- tion theory were several. Successful industrialization proved able to coexist with a remarkable variety of social, political, and cultural arrangements. Some countries failed to industrialize. And there were no signs of ideological convergence. As time went by and increasing numbers of societies (or rather numbers of societies which increasingly came into focus) stubbornly refused to comply with the requirements of the theory, it lost respectability. However, only some of its notions were abandoned, most have been perpetuated within neo- Marxist and development theories as well as carried on within much of the research in historical macrosociology.

Today, it appears, it is no longer theoretically comme il faut to expect ideological convergence of the developing societies (the recent transformations in Eastern Europe changed the climate of opinion in this regard but temporarily). However, industrialization is still considered the constitutive element, the Unterbau, of modern society and the mechanism behind the transition to modernity. The inability of the economic factors to determine the supposedly superstructural (social, political, and cultural) elements of society did not result in a serious questioning of its fundamental nature but, paradoxically, elevated its conceptual status. Often industrialization appeared to be not only the most important, but the only quality modern societies shared. In many texts, industrialization was effectively (though more often than not implicitly) equated with modernization and development. Modern societies were defined as industrial societies, and since their other character- istics by definition belonged to the superstructure, they were fundamentally similar (as the theory of modernization pre- dicted), even if they were different.

The failure of certain societies to industrialize (and thus to become modern) was not necessarily interpreted as a sign of multilinear historical development. The world-system theory attributed it to the successful industrialization and moderniza- tion of other societies; in this framework, the industrialization of the West-driven by capitalism-implied European expan- sion which resulted in the creation of a modern social system on the global scale, in which some societies were hegemonic and others dependent, the dependent societies being used to satisfy the industrial, capitalist needs of the hegemonic ones (Wallerstein, 1974).

Although not all of the theories of modern society after the demise of the modernization theory have been as explicit in their adherence to its central theses, implicitly most have accepted them. The assumption of the primacy of the economic factors in the process of modernization is shared, sometimes it seems almost unconsciously, even by authors who identify with the Weberian tradition and explicitly deny adherence to the principles of historical materialism (Bendix, 1978).

Weber, characteristically, while he discussed many aspects of modernization, did not have a "theory" of modern society, but it is not too difficult to guess upon what a Weberian theory of modernity would be based. At its core would lie the exploration of orientations which transformed the nature of social action. It clearly would not be a variant of historical materialism, because "merely economic" phenomena, in Weber's thought, did not amount to "social" phenomena which were, rather, constituted by meanings actors imputed to their behavior, and because methodological individualism precluded reification of composite entities and therefore thinking in terms of systemic needs. It would not distinguish between "real" and "ideal" factors or between "bases" and "superstruc- tures." It would define modern society as an historical individual, located in time and space, and contingent on possibly unique historical circumstances rather than predeter- mined. It would be multidimensional and assume multidirec- tional causality. Its description of modern society (its ideal type) would be based on the empirical comparison of the features of societies commonly seen as modern and those commonly seen as traditional. Its explanation of its emergence would be based on empirical historical research.

The purpose of this paper is to contribute toward the construction of such a theory of modernity. Its thesis, which defies the dominant sociological tradition, is that nationalism, not industrialization, lies at the basis of modern society and represents its constitutive element.

After decades of relative neglect, nationalism has once again become a focus of sociological theorizing (Anderson, [1983] 1991; Gellner, 1983; Hechter, 1975; Hobsbawm, 1990; Nairn, 1977; Smith, 1986, 1995; Tiryakian and Rogwoski, 1985). It has been widely recognized that it is not a relic of the past, bound to disappear with the advancement of the modern order, as Marx has prophesied in the Communist Manifesto, and today it is usually included among the elements of modernity. The nature of this recent theorizing, however, is not new. Essentially, as in earlier sociological attempts to conceptualize nationalism within the framework of the modernization paradigm (Deutsch, 1953), nationalism is viewed as a cultural and psychological function of the process of modernization, a superstructural product of its basic "objective" structures. The emergence of nationalism is seen as tightly connected to the modern phenomenon of state-formation and as related to the trend of the secularization of culture. But almost invariably the factor truly responsible for its rise (as well as for the development of the state and secularization) is believed to be economic: in the final analysis (to use an appropriate turn of speech) nationalism is explained as a functional prerequisite or product of industrialization and capitalism.2 And yet historically nationalism (the emergence of national identities and ideologies of nationalism) preceded industrial- ization and institutionalization of capitalism as well as the development of the state and secularization of culture. Thus, unless we resort to teleological reasoning, nationalism cannot be considered the effect of these later developments. It is far more plausible to suppose that it was one of their causes. I shall return to the empirical links between nationalism and other components of modernity later.

The sociological considerations behind the present thesis are the following. It assumes that a transformation in the conception of social order is necessary for the development of new forms of economic and political organization. For example, both capital- ism and modern science could only emerge (as social institutions) in a society conceived as fundamentally egalitarian, and, there- fore, one in which transition from one stratum or sector to an- other (social mobility) would be not only possible, but legitimate. (It is true that both capitalism and industrialization require a flexible stratification system, but they cannot call such a system into being in some mysterious way, as is assumed by many the- ories that view industrialization as the basic element of moder- nity; a flexible system of stratification emerges independently from industrialization and capitalism and makes the develop- ment of the latter possible.) A society conceived in the form of a hierarchical structure composed of hermetically closed compart- ments-as was the society of orders could import capitalism and science but would not be able to produce them in the first place. Similarly, the state, which is distinguished from other, non-modern forms of political authority by its impersonal char- acter, would not be possible unless sovereignty was separated from the person (and/or lineage) of the Sovereign (or Prince) and became an attribute of the community.

Nationalism: The Definition Both of these conditions, the egalitarian conception of the social order and-related to it-collectivization of authority, were accomplished by nationalism. Nationalism was a response of individuals affected by dysfunctions of the society of orders-the traditional structure modern society replaced to the sense of disorder they created. Many other responses were possible; the choice of nationalism was not inevitable, but contingent. Neither,certainly not in the form it took or the pace it proceeded, was the dissolution of the old society. Instead, it was to a large extent due to the nationalist response to its dysfunction. Once chosen, nationalism accelerated the process of change, limited the possibilities of future development, and became a major factor in it. It thus both reflected and realized the grand transformation from the old order to modernity.Elsewhere (Greenfeld, 1992) I have defined "nationalism," in its general, neutral sense, as an umbrella term which subsumes related phenomena of national identity (or national- ity) and consciousness and collectivities based on them- nations. Most specifically, it refers to the set of ideas and sentiments which form the conceptual framework of national identity. National identity is one among many possible, and often coexisting and overlapping, identities-such as religious, estate, occupational, tribal, linguistic, territorial, class, gender, and more. In the modern world, national identity represents what may be called the "fundamental identity," the one that is believed to define the very essence of the individual, which the other identities may modify but slightly, and to which they are consequently considered secondary. Modern societies are "nations" by definition. Those that do not view themselves as nations are believed to be not (yet) modern. But all contemporary "nations" are derived from entities which previously possessed quite different identities.The specificity of nationalism derives from the fact that in its framework the source of identity, whether individual or collective, is located within a "people" which is seen as the bearer of sovereignty, the central object of loyalty, and the basis of collective solidarity. The "people" is a mass of population whose boundaries and nature are defined in various ways, but which is usually perceived as larger than any concrete community and always as fundamentally homoge- neous (essentially a community of equals) and only superfi- cially divided by the lines of status, class, locality, or, in rare cases, even ethnicity. Thus, the specificity of nationalism is conceptual. Its foundation-and the only factor without which it cannot develop-is the presence of this particular concept of the "people" and the idea of the "nation" in which it is implied.

At the time when the word "nation" acquired its modern meaning and became the synonym of the "people," it meant "an elite" and specifically referred to an elite of representatives of cultural and political authority (Zernatto, 1944, pp. 351-66).4 It was in this meaning that it was applied, in the early sixteenth century, to the people of England. The equation of the two concepts-"people" and "nation"-signified a conce- tual revolution, for, while the general referent of the word "people" prior to its "nationalization" was the population of a region, specifically it applied to the lower classes and was most frequently used in the sense of "rabble" or "plebs." The redefinition of the "people" as a "nation" symbolically elevated the populace to the dignity of an elite. Every member of the "people" so interpreted partakes in its superior, elite quality, and it is in consequence that a stratified national population is perceived as essentially homogeneous and the people as sovereign. This principle lies at the basis of all nationalisms and justifies viewing them as expressions of the same general phenomenon, even though apart from it they share little. Modern society is a society based on this principle of nationality. It is this principle that made possible and in some instances caused the development of major economic and political "structures of modernity." Nationalism: The Process of Development The concept of the "nation" as "an elite" was a result of a long series of transformations which combined structural and semantic elements. At each stage in this process, the concept evolved out of usage within a particular set of structural constraints. The dominant meaning of the word at any given time was applied within circumstances to a certain aspect of which it corresponded. However, other aspects of these circumstances, which did not originally correspond to this dominant meaning, became associated with the word, creating a duality of meaning. The initially dominant meaning was gradually eclipsed, a new one emerged as dominant, and, while the word was retained, one concept gave way to another. This process of semantic transformation was constantly redirected by structural constraints which formed new concepts. At the same time, the structural constraints were conceptualized, interpreted, or defined in terms of the inherited concepts, which oriented social action. As the concepts evolved, the definition of the situation changed, changing orientations too. The concept "nation," meaning "an elite," emerged in the setting of the medieval church councils, the parties of which, called "nations," represented political and cultural authority- increasingly interpreted as sovereignty-of various ecclesiasti- cal and secular principalities. Such a concept could only be applied to the people of England if it corresponded to some aspect of this people. This means that the people of England had to act as an elite in some way prior to the application of the concept "nation" and could no longer be just "plebs," which presupposed a profound change in the structural conditions of the English society. Specifically, this change expressed itself in the number of individuals who rose from the "people" and could be defined as of it, finding themselves in positions of greatest authority. The Wars of the Roses decimated the traditional, feudal aristocracy and created a vacuum on the top of the social hierarchy. The emergence of the new aristocracy-the official elite of the Tudors-in the 1530s coincided with the elimination of the clergy from the key positions in the administration, which made the Crown dependent on the services of the university-trained laymen. The members of the new aristocracy, people of exceptional abilities and education, were recruited from minor gentry and even lower strata: elite status, at least temporarily, became dependent on merit rather than birth.

Ultimately, nationalism can be traced back to the state of anomie in which this fundamental transformation resulted. The traditional image of society, which allowed no place for upward mobility, no longer corresponded to reality. Members of the new English elite, commoners by birth, found it uncongenial and substituted for it the idea of a homogeneously noble people-the nation. Had they responded more conven- tionally-for instance, by forging genealogies-we would live today in a very different world.

The idea of the nation took root. It elevated every member of the community which it made sovereign; therefore, it appealed to broad social strata and was applicable to many societies. The ascendancy of England ensured the salience of the novel view of social reality beyond its shores. It was imported to other countries when structural contradictions, for independent reasons, appeared there, and then became the force that transformed the old order.

In the old order (the feudal society or "the society of orders"), pride and self-respect as well as the claim to status or the respect of others were privileges of the small elite placed high above the rest. The lot of the rest was "humility and abnegation," which they tried to rationalize and make tolerable in one way or another and sometimes even managed to enjoy, but could never escape. Even the elite was not safe from degradation. Its status depended on the preservation of rigid distinctions between orders and the strict observance of the rules of precedence. Any breach of these rules threatened it, because status is entirely a matter of social convention and easily deconstructs if the convention is broken.

The adoption of national identity in every major European case-France, Russia, Germany-was indeed predicated upon a condition of status-inconsistency among the relevant elite group (or groups), which resulted from the obfuscation, for one reason or another, of status distinctions and was accompanied by a profound sense of insecurity and anxiety. The group was either threatened in its social superiority or frustrated in its (socially encouraged) attempts to achieve it. Nationalism diminished the significance of invidious distinc- tions and, at the same time, ensured everyone a modicum of dignity.5 Structurally, the situation was similar to the one faced by the new English aristocracy. It was anomic: the relevant group was dissatisfied with its traditional identity as a result of a profound inconsistency between the definition of social order expressed in it and the experience of the involved actors.

In France, the architects of the national identity came from the ranks of the traditional aristocracy as it became increas- ingly discontented with its position and the manner in which its place in society was defined, and, in the process of redefinition, admitted into its ranks the most prominent of the non-noble intellectuals (Chaussinand-Nogaret, 1985; Ford, 1953; Reinhard, 1956). French nationalism developed in the eighteenth century (Aulard, 1921; Hyslop, 1934; Kohn, 1967; Palmer, 1940), the grounds for it prepared by more than a century of perpetual status-inconsistency-and anomie- among the nobility. In distinction to England, the old nobility of France, however warlike, was not destroyed by wars. But the descendants of the feudal lords in the seventeenth and eighteenth century led an unhappy life, marred constantly by a most "cruel anguish of mind," to use the phrase of the informative Duke de Saint-Simon (Saint-Simon, 1901, v.1, p. 255). Beginning with the efforts of Franois I and Henri II in the sixteenth century, the nobles were consistently deprived of a role in the government at the same time as greater numbers of them were spending their time and money at the royal court rather than on their estates. This depleted the wealth of the aristocracy, and as a result the noble status was separated both from wealth and from power. The aristocracy was becoming increasingly dependent on the power, and whims, of the king.

This dependence was the essence of absolutism, which the nobility, especially its highest echelons, staunchly opposed.

Nationalism was one of the forms the noble opposition to absolutism took. The French Revolution which destroyed the nobility was among its consequences, and yet it was, in fact, a product of a feudal reaction.6 The idea of the "nation" was imported from England. Not the least among the qualities that recommended it was the fact that the nation, rather than the king, was considered the supreme object of loyalty and the bearer of sovereignty. In England, the authority of the Crown was strictly limited by Parliament, and the aristocracy seemed to have retained its ancient political pow- ers. Originally, the French "nation" was synonymous with the nobility. But even as the notion expanded, the aristocracy, which it was destined to undo, remained among its chief adherents. Nationalism postulated an object of supreme loyalty which could replace the king. Service to the nation made privileges of the elite legitimate. And status was tied to the position of France vis-a-vis other nations.

The story of the birth of Russian nationalism is very similar. The first Russian nationalists came from the service nobility in the capitals-the noble elite. The turn to national identity was precipitated by a protracted situation of status inconsistency and insecurity among the aristocracy, the increasing psycho- logical untenability and disintegration of its identity as an estate. In distinction to nobilities in other countries, the Russian nobility did not descend from the feudal elite but was a service estate (Beloff, 1953; Blum, 1977; Meehan-Waters, 1982). In fact, Russia scarcely experienced feudalism at all; among the European societies, it was the site of a remarkably precocious absolutism. Both the status and material well-being of a nobleman (especially one nearer the Court) depended entirely on the extent to which the sovereign was satisfied with his service. Such dependence made the position of a nobleman highly unpredictable and resulted in the permanent sense of insecurity and anxiety among the nobility.

The status of the nobility was precarious even before the accession of Peter the Great, the tsar that decided to "modernize" Russia and turn it into a Western society. But his reforms aggravated its situation. Under Peter, on the one hand, personal status was tied to rank achieved in service, even noblemen of most exalted birth having to begin at the bottom of service hierarchy, and, on the other, ennoblement became automatic. Nobility as such became a liability rather than an advantage: while noble birth necessarily bred high expecta- tions and set young aristocrats apart from the rest, it was powerless to fulfill these expectations.

Unhappy with their traditional identity, the Russian nobility was ready to adopt a new one that would be commensurate with their sense of dignity. The framework for such an identity was provided by Peter himself in the Western concepts of "nation," "state," and "general good"-that he imported. In his edicts he reinterpreted his own authority as the authority of the Russian state, insisted that service was due not to himself personally but to the fatherland, presented Russia as a proud nation rather than his patrimony, and talked of the interests of the Russian people. It took several generations for these concepts (which required the creation of an entirely new vocabulary) to enter the general educated (and thus aristo- cratic) discourse. But during the reign of Catherine the Great (1762-1796), the nobility completed the transition it had begun under Peter and exchanged its estate identity for nationality.

German nationalism, unlike English, French, and Russian ones, owed its creation to middle class intellectuals rather than the aristocracy. The aristocracy, for reasons which are discussed elsewhere (Goodwin, 1953, pp. 88-93), was generally satisfied with its situation in the many German states, and only the middle class intellectuals experienced anomie that led them to clamor for a redefinition of their social situation and a new identity (Bruford, 1935).

The middle class intellectuals, Bildungsbrger, were a creation of German universities. Many of them were recruited from lower classes, but as a whole the group was supposed to enjoy a status higher than that of the (uneducated) bourgeoisie. Education was a legitimate avenue of social advancement in a static society which generally did not recognize social mobility. This rendered Bildungsbrger marginal: they did not belong to any of the accepted social categories. The situation worsened in the late eighteenth century. Enlightenment, which was the dominant philosophy in many prominent German states (most notably Prussia), placed intellect at the top of the value hierarchy, boosted the self-esteem of the intellectuals, and encouraged their social aspirations. This led to the overpro- duction of intellectuals and the consequent decline of job opportunities for them (Brunschwig, 1974). Caught in the state of trained unemployability and faced by the undimin- ished contempt of the upper classes, often very poor and always unhappy, intellectuals sought refuge in their imagina- tion.

For a long time, their fantasies had little to do with nationalism. In fact, cosmopolitanism ruled the day. Though it would have been in their interest to redefine the German states (or any one of them) as a nation for this would make them equal to the most exalted aristocracy and secure the dignity they were denied in the society of orders-Bildungsbrger did not demand such a redefinition. This would be futile: nationalism was utterly out of tune with the mood of the ruling elite and such influential groups as the nobility and the bureaucracies, and so intellectuals too, were not nationalist. It was the French invasion and, specifically, the defeat of Prussia that changed their attitude (Gooch, 1966). The French invasion offered intellectuals an extraordinary opportunity to identify with the ruling elite (and thus at least symbolically to elevate their status) at the same time as it made the elite sympathetic to such efforts of fraternization. It was the ruling elite that the French attacked. Bildungsbrger presented the cause of the ruling elite as the "German" cause and virtually overnight turned into German nationalists. The rulers, especially in Prussia, welcomed the efforts of native intellectu- als, whom they previously did not deign to notice, and used nationalism as a tool to ward off the French menace. In a remarkably short time German society was redefined as a nation, becoming the object of political loyalty. As a result, the character of social solidarity was transformed.

Obviously, as the idea of the "nation" was transferred from one society to another, the nature of nationalism changed. Contrary to widely held opinion, nationalism is not a uniform phenomenon. The original meaning of the "nation"-the definition of the people as sovereign and fundamentally homogeneous-v retained in every nationalism. Everywhere nationalism contributed toward the destruction of the society of orders. At the same time, the imported idea was modified everywhere in accordance with the local circumstances and reinterpreted in terms of indigenous traditions where they existed. The new society which emerged on the ruins of the old one, therefore, was everywhere different from others. Of course, the initial conditions-the specific forms of the society of orders-differed too, yet the differences between types of modern societies appear to be greater than those between principalities which constituted Western Christendom.

The fundamental unit in the society of orders was the order,not the individual. Orders were units of unequal worth. They differed as species of life may differ. The higher orders showed as little consideration for the lower as we do for chickens whom we eat. This was entirely logical. The lower classes existed to support the upper. Their own existence had no intrinsic value. Modern societies did away with such profound distinctions of value within their populations. An order is no longer the fundamental unit of mankind. It was replaced, however, by two entities rather than one: the individual and the nation.Society of orders everywhere was collectivistic (and for this reason authoritarian); the individual is a creation of moder- nity. Originally, a nation was a society of individuals, and that is why nationalism signified the advent of an entirely new form of social existence. In some modern societies, however, the innovation was never accepted. In them the nation was defined in unitary terms, with the result that the individual was repossessed by the collectivity, and the collectivity reinstated as the higher, the only significant being. However different societies of orders may have been, they all belonged to the same type of society. But there are two types of modern societies: different nationalisms engender different modernities. The distinction between them is fundamental; it is at least as important as the distinction between the society of orders and modern society based on the principle of nationality.

The initial definition of the nation in every particular case (whether it is defined in individualistic or in unitary terms) depends on the nature of the groups actively involved in the articulation of the new ideology, and the situations they face. The individualistic type of nationalism is likely to develop if during its formative period nationalism appeals to and serves the interests of wide sectors of the population (such as, English squires and newly literate urban masses; American colonists; French bourgeoisie) and new, open, upwardly mobile influen- tial groups. (Examples in this case are the sixteenth-century English aristocracy and squirearchy. German Bildungsbrgertum as a group was new, fairly open, and upwardly mobile, but before the intellectuals were incorporated into the traditional elite, they had no influence.) The collectivistic type is to be expected if originally the social basis of nationalism is limited and it is adopted by and serves the interests of a narrow traditional elite intent on preserving its status (such as the French or the Russian nobility) or a new group trying to attain status within the traditional social framework (German Bildungsbrgertum), which then transmits it to the masses by indoctrination. A significant change in the situation of the relevant participants may result in the change of the definition Different types of nationalism translate into different cultural and institutional patterns and correspond to different types of political structure and social organization. But there is one political institution, directly related to the principle of popular sovereignty, which all nations share. National government, the nature of which varies with the character of specific nationalisms, necessarily takes the form of the state. The state,it should be recognized, is a form, or type, of government, and it is this which makes possible its definition regardless of "the particular content of social action" (Weber, 1978, p. 901) with which it is associated in any particular case. In modern society,the state is ubiquitous and, for this reason, often identified with government or political community as such (Anderson,1974; Evans et al., 1985; Gellner, 1983; Mann, 1988; Tilly,1990). We tend to project our experiences onto the past and see all governments and political communities as states in the same way as we tend to ascribe to the people of the past national identities. Social reality is hardly conceivable for us without states and nations. Even Weber, who recognized the recency of the concept of "state" and therefore defined it in accordance with the characteristics of modern governments, as a legal-rational institution, often used the term in reference to pre-modern structures of authority. But institutions for which we lack concepts do not exist for the simple reason that conceptualization is the first necessary step in institutionalization. Weber's usage of the term contradicts his sophisticated discussion of the "rational institution of the state," which he defines as "an abstract bearer of sovereign prerogatives and the creator of legal norms." The specificity of this institution,he insists, lies in that it does not possess the "personalistic character" traditional ethics attributed to power relations in the economic and political spheres, in that it was separated "from all personal authority of individuals" (Weber, 1978, pp. 600, 998). Given this definition, a "patrimonial state," for instance, is obviously a contradiction in terms, which one should attribute to a concession to the conventional language.

The abstract, impersonal character is indeed what distin- guishes the modern form of government-the state-from the various pre-modern forms. This impersonality is a quality of the ideal type; in reality it is a variable. In some cases (for example, those of Hitler, Stalin), the state is personalized in a certain individual statesman, but conceptually it remains primary even then, and in principle, it is only represented by individuals. "These conceptual distinctions [between the state and the personal authority of individuals]," Weber justly argues, "are necessarily remote from the nature of pre- bureaucratic, especially from patrimonial and feudal, struc- tures of authority" (Weber, 1978, p. 998).

In the society of orders sovereignty was concentrated in particular individuals and lineages. Princes ruled as represen- tatives of religious and, in later periods, divine authority and as owners of property. A polity (seigneurie) could be defined as the territory belonging to a prince (une terre seigneuriale) and his authority which animated it (Loyseau, 1608). Most territories were obviously populated, and the population was treated as a part of the princely patrimony (the estate of the prince). This was consistent with the premises of the society of orders, which subdivided humanity into separate species. The blood of some was blue, the blood of others red; the blood of the French kings was believed to be translucent, and their authority was directly related to that (Beaune, 1985). The French royal lineage, indeed, constituted a special order-"tat du roi"; it was this from which the French concept of "state" derived. "Orders" were also termed "estates" in other languages; "estate" was the early form of "state" in English and German as well as in French.

The modern state-an abstract bearer of sovereignty and the creator of legal norms-emerged after and because of the development of the idea of the "nation" which redefined populations as uniform and diffused sovereignty within them. In England, the modern idea of the "state" (and, therefore, the state itself) appeared earlier than in other countries. "State" was one of a series of new concepts, which reflected the evolution of the national consciousness and also included "country," "commonwealth," "empire," and "nation" (Elton, 1955; Zagorin, 1971). From early on in the sixteenth century, these four words became synonyms, acquiring the sense which, with slight alterations, they retained later but which differed from their separate meanings before. They came to mean "the sovereign people of England." The meaning of the word "people," of course, was changed accordingly. The evidence of such changes in vocabulary can be found in the literature of the period, dictionaries, and parliamentary documents. It is abundant already in the 1530s and 1540s. The concept of "state," however, develops later. In all the early dictionaries, for example (Cooper, [1565] 1969; Elyot, [1538] 1970; Ryder, 1589), it has none of the political connotations with which it has been associated in the modern period and means either "status" ("the condition or state of ones life or other thing" [Cooper, [1565] 1969]) or "estate," that is, property. The term does change its meaning toward the end of the century when it becomes another near synonym for "nation," but it does not have the same evocative power and is not employed with the same frequency as the other new concepts.

The term "state" enters the Parliamentary discourse during the Elizabethan period. In most cases it is still but a form of "estate." The 1559 Act of Supremacy, for example, speaks of "re- storing to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ec- clesiastical and Spiritual." In the 1571 Treasons Act, the phrase "comfort of the whole state and subjects of the realm" appears, while in the 1585 Act for the Surety of the Queen's Person, the same cliche has the word "estate:" "the good felicity and comfort of the whole estate of this realm." In the Lay Subsidy Act of 1601, how- ever, the meaning of the term is different. It occurs here in a preamble: ". we your majesty's humble, faithful, and loving subjects... assembled... to consult... and provide for all such means as are or may be necessary to preserve both you and us from those apparent dangers wherein this State may fall..." (Statutes..., [1810-1821] 1963, Vol. IV; 1 Eliz., cap. I, p. 350; 13 Eliz., cap I, p. 526; 27 Eliz., cap. I, p. 704; 43 Eliz., cap. XVIII, p. 991). Here the term is used to make a stand and is intention- ally substituted for "kingdom" or "realm," which represent the polity as the personal property of the monarch. "State" here is a synonym of the "commonwealth"; it denotes a depersonalized polity in which her "majesty's humble, faithful, and loving sub- jects" have as much share as she and, therefore, the same right of political decision. The Act in general was a reflection of the Parliament's growing power and self-confidence; the use of the term "State" in its context was to show that Englishmen realized what their rights were and were going to stand by them.

During the reign of King James, the Parliament was asserting its right to an equal share in the government of the country with remarkable constancy, and this assertion ex- pressed itself in its insistence on the representative character of its position and in the changed perception of the referent of its service. Even the king's speeches in Parliament reflected these changes. In the 1621 Letter to the House of Commons, where James expressed his discontent with the House, he wrote, certainly believing that ruling England was the exclusive prerogative of kings: "none therein [House of Commons] shall presume henceforth to meddle with anything concerning our government or deep matters of the State" (Rushworth, 1659, p. 660). In using this new and depersonalized concept of the polity, James could not have wanted to emphasize that this was indeed a shared enterprise in which many parties had stakes, but the view that a country was simply the Crown's property was already inconceivable.The documents of the Interregnum period in a way sealed the transformation of the past century and a half. The important Act Establishing the Commonwealth declared that "the people of England, and of all dominions and territories thereunto belonging, are and shall be, and are hereby constituted, made, established, and confirmed, to be a Commonwealth and Free State, and shall from henceforth be governed as a Commonwealth and Free State by the supreme authority of this nation, the representatives of the people in Parliament" (Gardiner, 1906). While "commonwealth" here subtly changed its meaning and denoted "a republican government," it- and the "state"-were still equated with "the people of England." A people was certainly not a form of government, and the terms could be equated only because they all implied a new form of polity-the nation. The emergence of the "state" thus was a reflection of the growing nationalism. In its original modern meaning in English, the word was a synonym of the "nation," of the "people as an elite," of the "sovereign people." To be governed as a state meant to be self-governed, or, as an approximation to this condition, to be governed by representatives of people's sovereignty. A state form of government, by definition, was impersonal, based on popular mandate rather than on the authority of individuals.Concepts of "state" in other countries developed differently and for this reason are not necessarily equivalent to the English concept of "state," although, since in all cases they acquired their significance only in the framework of national- ism, they are invariably defined as an impersonal political organization based on popular mandate. In France, for example, the word "tat" originally acquired its political meaning from association with the person of the king. It referred to the king's personal authority and as such was conceptually inseparable from his person. According to the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings, within the framework of which this original political concept of the "state" developed, the king was sovereign in the strict sense of the word: his authority knew no bounds within his realm, besides God and the fundamental law, which in practice meant no bounds at all. It was the source of all law and had its own reasons, or needs, conceptualized in the seventeenth century as "reasons of state" (Church, 1941, 1972; Figgis, [1896] 1965). It was also obviously unitary and indivisible-an expression of one will. The loyalty to the king implied acceptance of his authority or loyalty to his state. Cardinal Richelieu, the minister of Louis XIII and the chief architect of royal absolutism in France, who wished to increase the loyalty to the king, cultivated loyalty to the state. His efforts led to the articulation of the concept of "state" and its abstraction from the person of the king and reification (Church, 1972). As a result, paradoxically, the "state" emerged as an alternative object of loyalty.

The meaning of the concept was further modified due to another development. The powers delegated to and exercised by king's officials during Richelieu's ministry grew very extensive (Ranum, 1963). Richelieu insisted that the officials represented the king's authority, the "state," and was staunchly supported in this by the king himself. Among other things, the term now referred to the government bureaucracy. This "state" was impersonal, yet it retained all the characteristics of the personal royal authority: it was unified, possessed of a single will, and had the power to make and unmake laws. When the French elite converted to nationalism in the eighteenth century, the loyalty to the impersonal bureaucracy as the embodiment of the authority of the nation was perpetuated, as a result of which central government in France was able to retain many of the features and keep many of the powers it had during the ancient regime.

The Russian term for "state"-gosudarstvo-is etymologically unrelated to the Latin "status" (the origin of the English and French "state" among others, but which, as I mentioned earlier, semantically has nothing in common with the modern concept). Rather, it is the gerund from the noun "lord"- gosudar'. This "lording" was originally entirely personal and, as we know, in a large measure remained such until our day. The new concept of government in this case was a result of conscious imitation, and the transformation in its nature, in distinction to England and to a lesser but significant extent to France, was mainly symbolic. The concept of "state" in its modern spelling and meaning was introduced by Peter the Great, the country's great modernizer and, one may say, first nationalist. Peter was and wanted to be an autocrat, and he cultivated in his subjects loyalty to a larger, impersonal entity beyond himself to secure commitment to his own ends.

The manner in which the concept of the "state" developed and the way it was defined as a result of this development affected the nature of the state-that is, governmental institutions-in every specific case. But whatever etymological and semantic resources it utilized, the inspiration for it, in the final analysis, came from nationalism, which is incommensura- ble with a personal government. The nationality principle, and the idea of a sovereign people, necessitates the concept of "state." For this reason all governments of nations, or, in other words, all modern governments, share the presuppositions of impersonality and representative character of the rulers' authority, even though they differ widely in the implementa- tion of these presuppositions.

Nationalism and Science In distinction to the relationship between nationalism and the state, the one between nationalism and science is usually seen as only indirect. They are related, it is believed, via the more general process of secularization of culture. On the one hand, secularization requires nationalism as a substitute for religion (Anderson, 1983); on the other, it makes science possible.

Such indirect relationship between nationalism and science could not exist for the simple reason that secularization was neither a condition nor a cause for either science or nationalism. Both, in fact, emerged during the period of great religious fervor, the source of which was the Protestant Reformation. Nevertheless, science and nationalism are re- lated, and they are related directly, nationalism being one of the central factors, perhaps the most important one, in the institutionalization of science.8 Not coincidentally, science was first institutionalized in England. It performed an important function for English national identity and for this reason was given a place of honor in it. As a national value it was assured the massive social support it needed to become an established and self-sustaining activity. The reasons for the association between science and English nationalism were the following. The idea of the "nation" in England reflected the value of the faculty of reason, the possession of which made men fundamentally equal and entitled each and every one to liberty. This value was at the source of the core properties of English nationality-a critical mind, a preference for empirical knowledge, a distrust of dogmatism and enthusiasm. Science epitomized these qualities, and Englishmen of the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries stressed the affinity between it and the Genius of the English nation.9 Since Bacon, science had been considered the sign of the superiority of the moderns over the ancients and a reflection of a nation's greatness (Bacon, [1620] 1831). In the battle between the ancients and the moderns, the English identified themselves with the moderns (Jones, 1982) because they could not compete with the chief cultural rivals of England-France and Italy-in classical learning, while in science, a yet undeveloped arena, they could do so quite effectively. As early as 1600, scientific achievements were put forward as the most glorious expressions of English nationality (Gilbert, [1600] 1958). Science was constantly evoked to demonstrate English cultural superiority (Hall and Hall, 1966-1973; Turnbull, 1955-77).

For the English, pursuit of science was a matter of national prestige. Later in the seventeenth century, at least in part because of the increasingly clear ascendancy of England, it was recognized as such by others as well. Foreigners were quick to pay attention to the superiority of English science and to connect it to the greatness of the nation. The spokesmen of the Royal Society in England constantly reminded the public of the contribution science made to England's prestige and used this to secure continuous support for scientific activity and its central organization.

Through its association with the national sentiment, science itself dramatically rose in prestige, attracting ambitious and able men who in different circumstances would spend their energies elsewhere. This state of social approbation was the essential condition for its institutionalization. Because it was associated with English nationalism, the very foundation of modern society and since the eighteenth century the focus of the new nations' imitation and resentment, science also became an object of powerful emotions in other countries. It was endowed with almost magical, creative, as well as destructive powers and accepted as one of the central elements of modernity across the world. It is important to recognize that this happened long before science could in any measure justify such views. The ideologies of scientism and anti-scientism, which attribute to science the ability to mould our lives, predate this ability by many decades, and may be among the factors that caused its development.

Certain nationalisms, constructed on the basis of the transvaluation of the values of original, English nationalism, are inherently anti-scientistic: concepts of national character in them are as closely associated with anti-scientism as English nationality is with science. Anti-scientism, for example, lies at the core of Romanticism, which has informed such national- isms as German (at least until 1945) and Russian. Nations with profoundly anti-scientistic ideologies, however, were often able to develop very successful scientific institutions and achieve great prominence in the practice of science. Initial institution- alization of science requires a very specific social context, favorable to the scientific ethos. But institutionalized science is a relatively self-contained activity, existing within a larger society as if in an enclosed capsule. A society can import scientific practice without simultaneously importing values which made its development possible in the first place. The attitude to science in societies uncongenial to its values is always ambivalent, and scientific communities are never immune from attack (Forman, 1971; Joravsky, 1961; Merton, 1973, pp. 254-66). The attacks on science as a rule coincide with crises of national identity and are a means of its reaffirmation. They may be widely separated in time, and during the periods between them, science, appreciated for the material benefits it carries in its train and as a basis for national prestige, enjoys both the relative freedom and the support necessary for its existence.

Nationalism and Capitalism Economic activity is similar to science in the degree of its independence from the wider social context. Similar economic systems exist in widely differing political and cultural environments. Like science, they may need certain social conditions to emerge but then acquire their own momentum and develop successfully in other circumstances. Marx to the contrary, there is no one to one correspondence between systems of production and ownership, and systems of social and political relations.

Still, nationalism, while it did not determine the nature of the modern economic system, has undoubtedly contributed to the development of its chief component: industrialization. Its influence was indirect. In England, the birthplace of industri- alization as well as nationalism, nationalism changed the criteria of human dignity and thus combined with Protestantism in making economic activity respectable. It became attractive to able individuals who would otherwise use their abilities elsewhere. Economic exploits were also interpreted as service to the nation. The growth of the English economy in the century and a half preceding the onset of the industrial revolution would be impossible without the respect enjoyed by the merchant classes, which, with a few exceptions such as Holland, was unknown at the time to merchants anywhere else. In England, as elsewhere, nationalism redefined social stratification and justified occupational mobility, which was another indispensable condition for rapid economic growth. Through its encouragement of science it was also partly responsible for adding to the process an essential technological dimension.

The impact of nationalism in the economic sphere is felt most where economic issues are interwoven with political and ideological ones. Attitudes to capitalism, for example, are directly related to the development of nationalism. Today, "capitalism" is a loose term referring to a politico-economic system which allows certain (never absolute) freedom to the play of the market forces in the economy. It coexists with the most disparate social systems but is, nevertheless, believed to be inherently associated with liberal democracy. It is this alleged association that lies at the root of the economic ideological politics characteristic of this century, which expressed itself in the struggle against "capitalism" around the globe and always implied rejection of the Western liberal democratic societies.

The myth of Capitalism as a moral force, which found its most influential expression in the writings of Karl Marx, was the invention of the French aristocratic and intellectual elite during the formative period of the French national identity. Its source was the aristocratic contempt for the men of money fanned into a rage by the onslaught of commoners who bought their way into nobility, diluting its ranks and undermining its status. In the aristocratic circles of pre-Revolutionary France, gens de finance were pariahs, seen as the incarnation of everything that was evil and impure. Money became the focus of the irritation of the nobility, the symbol of the ignoble. It was on money, paradoxically, that the rich elite concentrated its wounded pride and vented its fears and frustrations.

The aristocratic contempt for vulgar riches capitalized on the long-standing hostility toward tax-collectors among the people, which elite intellectuals articulated and fueled. In popular literature, financiers were called "blood-suckers fattening themselves off the substance of the people" and represented as ruthless, unscrupulous, greedy, and above all plebeian characters. By the time of the Revolution, tax-farmers were commonly known as "these public blood-suckers" and considered enemies of the people, from whom they were "stealing" (Schama, 1989).

By the end of the eighteenth century, such revolting characters were called "capitalists." It is possible that the term "capitalist" originated in the Netherlands (Hart, 1993, pp. 122-23). It was first used in French around 1770 in the neutral sense of a person with a capital to invest (Raynal, [1770] 1776), but entered the discourse somewhat later, through the work of Louis-Sebastien Mercier. In his Tableau de Paris, the term appeared several times and acquired a highly charged, derogatory meaning. In 1804, a dictionary, L'Impro- visateur franais, credited Mercier with inventing the word and relied on his text for a definition. "Capitaliste," it stated, is a "word known only in Paris, and it describes a monster of wealth who has none but monetary affections" (L'Improvisateur franais, 1804, pp. 45-6).

Most vehement detractors of capitalism came from among the intellectuals, both those who became members of the aristocracy and those who felt entitled to be considered its members. Rousseau wrote in the Social Contract: "The word finance is a slavish word. I hold enforced labor to be less opposed to liberty" (Rousseau, 1952, p. 77). In the Government of Poland he explicitly identified money with social degeneracy and implored: "Poles, do this for me: let the others have all the money in the world Systems of finance produce venal hearts" (Rousseau, 1972, p. 68). (It would appear that-for a while, at least-they took his advice.) Money and money-making, the preoccupations of the traditionally despised in France bourgeoisie, were defined as un-French. This became particularly clear when the complex of traits denoted by the word "capitalist" was identified with England. Resentment, or, to be precise, ressentiment (Nietzsche, [1887] 1927; Scheler, [1912] 1961; Greenfeld, 1992), against England characterized the final phase in the formation of French nationalism. This psychological condition accompanied the development of nationalism in many cases. Every country importing the foreign idea of the nation necessarily focused on the source of importation and reacted to it. The model was by definition superior to the imitator in the latter's own perception. The reaction assumed the form of ressentiment if the contact itself served to emphasize the latter's inferiority. Ressentiment inspired a transvaluation of the imported values, which in most cases resulted in the selection out of the indigenous tradition and deliberate cultivation of elements hostile to them. French nationalism was the first one in the formation of which ressentiment played an important (though not definitive) role; it was, in effect, the first anti-Western nationalism.

In the course of the eighteenth century, England had replaced France as the greatest power in Europe. In an effort to assuage the sense of inferiority this development aroused in the already nationalist French elite, its representatives tried to explain England's success away, as one not worth having, and represent England as an anti-model for France. In a wave of Anglophobia that swept educated France in the last third of the eighteenth century (Acomb, 1950; Schama, 1989), England was defined as an impostor, as a society which only posed to be a free nation but bartered its freedom away for economic power. It was dominated by commercial interests, greed was the consuming emotion of its people: "moved by the desire to augment their riches and extend their empire, [the English consulted] nothing but their avarice" (Mably, 1794-1795, p. 238). France, in contrast, desired liberty and glory rather than riches. The aristocratic contempt for nouveaux riches fused with resentment towards England, and the latter was rejected as a capitalist nation.

As often happens in the process of identity formation, in England the derogatory characterization "capitalist" was eventually appropriated and reinterpreted as a positive identification. Its mythical capitalism, which in the eyes of the French set it apart from the rest of humanity, became for Englishmen a matter of pride. (In terms of their economic practices, it should be noted, the difference between the two nations at that and other times was mainly quantitative.) Capitalism and anti-capitalism, like scientism and anti- scientism, thus became national characteristics. The emotions this pair (even more than the other one) arouses have to do more with the symbolic than the economic significance of the terms. Professed devotion to "capitalism" does not necessarily eliminate the possibility of the imposition of restraints on the forces of the market, and anti-capitalist attitudes more often affect the representation rather than the nature of business activity and thus may very well coexist with most successful "capitalist" economies.

The character of every modern society is defined to a very significant extent by the specific character of its nationalism. At the same time, the very fact of adopting national identity and defining the polity as a nation determines certain fundamental qualities and thereby ensures profound similarity between societies thus defined: nationalism makes a society modern. To claim that one nation-say, an economically successful, liberal democratic one-is more modern than another (economically unsuccessful and a dictatorship) is as little justified as to insist that a university professor, for instance, is more human than an illiterate farmer or a new-born infant. Modernity-like humanity is a qualitative, not a quantitative concept; it denotes a species of social being, heterogeneous as most species are and radically different from others. Since sociology is a modern discipline, our vision of social reality as such is shaped by our modern experience, and we are impaired in our ability to appreciate the uniqueness of modernity. To understand it, however, we must put it in comparative perspective. And if this is not possible within the confines of our profession, we may need to step outside it.

Notes There are exceptions to this view, however. E.A. Tiryakian sees nationalism as an essential element of modernity which "may be taken as much as an active as well as a reactive element that is at the core of succeeding phases of modernization" (Tiryakian, 1985, . 59).

2 See the summary of the argument in Greenfeld, 1991, pp. 333-370.

3 The ideas below were originally formulated in Greenfeld, 1992 (specifically, in the "Introduction" and the "Afterword"), which should be consulted for the theoretical framework and empirical basis of the following argument, as well as for the detailed analyses of the specific cases used as examples. I have also discussed these cases and certain, relevant in the present context, aspects of the phenomenon of nationalism in Greenfeld, 1990, pp. 549-591; Greenfeld, 1993, pp. 47-62; Greenfeld and Chirot, 1994, pp. 79-130; and Greenfeld, 1991.

* Only select sources are cited in this paper. For a complete list of sources in regard to the cases discussed, see Greenfeld, 1992.

5 In this regard see Peter Berger's sensitive discussion of honor versus dignity in Berger, 1973.

6 For a similar recent view of the French Revolution, see Schama, 1989.

7 A minority of students of modernization, notably Black, 1966, consider the "scientific revolution," or the revolution in knowledge, as the foundation of modernity.

* A detailed treatment of this argument is contained in Greenfeld, 1987, where I attempted to supplement the famous Merton thesis (1938) which emphasized the role of Protestantism in the rise of science.

The most articulate expression of this attitude is Sprat, 1667. 10 Weber's thesis (1958) has been widely debated, and it appears probable that nationalism played a greater role in the institutionali- zation of capitalism than did Protestantism, that it was nationalism indeed that played the role which Weber attributed to Protestantism. Some ideas regarding the connection between nationalism and economics are articulated in Greenfeld, 1995. "According to Hart (1993, pp. 122-23), in Dutch, "capitalist" at first denoted a taxpayer category: "those owning more than 2,000 guilders were called 'capitalists' (from 1621), and those owning 1,000 to 2,000 guilders were the so-called 'half-capitalists' (from 1625).. The word 'capitalist, here used in its earliest meaning, clearly designated someone owning property."