Raise Your Vibes!

Athena Bahri First published in the UK and USA in 2021 by Watkins, an imprint of Watkins Media Limited Unit 11, Shepperton House 8993 Shepperton Road London N1 3DF enquiries@watkinspublishing.com Design and typography copyright  Watkins Media Limited 2021 Text copyright  Athena Bahri 2021 The right of Athena Bahri to be identified as the Author of this text has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act of 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a review who may quote brief passages in a review.

COMMISSIONING EDITOR: Fiona Robertson EDITOR: Sue Lascelles PROOFREADER: Victoria Godden HEAD OF DESIGN: Glen Wilkins DESIGNER: Luise Roberts ILLUSTRATIONS: Glen Wilkins PRODUCTION: Uzma Taj A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library.

ISBN: 978-178678-482-7 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Set in Filson Pro, Clavo and Chennai.

Printed in Hong Kong www.watkinspublishing.com Publishers note: The information in this book is not intended as a substitute for professional medical advice and treatment. If you are pregnant or are suffering from any medical conditions or health problems, it is recommended that you consult a medical professional before following any of the advice or practice suggested in this book. Watkins Media Limited, or any other persons who have been involved in working on this publication, cannot accept responsibility for any injuries or damage incurred as a result of following the information, exercises or therapeutic techniques contained in this book.

Contents About the Author Hello and Welcome!

Introduction What is Energy Healing?

The Healing Power of an Open Mind How to Use This Book PART 1. STEP INTO YOUR SELF-HEALING POWER What is Reiki?

Introducing the Chakras Self-Attunement with Reiki How to Perform Reiki Self-Healing Creating a Sacred Space PART 2. VIBRATION-RAISING RITUALS Meditation Crystals Intention Candles The Violet Flame Sound Healing Aromatherapy Smudging Affirmations and Mantras Manifestation Angels and Signs Moon Rituals Practicing Gratitude PART 3. RAISE YOUR VIBES!

Clean Your Energy Find Focus Improve Your Self-Confidence Create Protection Work on Self-Love Nurture Your Relationships Make a Happy Home and Workplace Overcome Fear and Guilt Beat Anxiety and Stress Heal from Depression Heal from Emotional Pain Let Go of Grief Soothe Physical Pain Release from Old Traumas Manifest Positive Changes Helping Loved Ones Continuing Your Spiritual Journey Notes Further Reading and Resources Acknowledgements Dedication To my darling earth angels, Persius, Caspian and Willamina: you are the light of my life, may you always shine with love To my husband and eternal angel of love, I will always choose you ... in every life To my parents, for blessing me with the best of you To Grandma, my forever muse About the Author Athena Bahri is the founder and creator of Crystal Reiki Healer, one of the fastest growing online presences for crystal and chakra education and crystal Reiki healing. Hailing from a Hollywood dynasty  the niece of Rita Hayworth and cousin of Ginger Rogers and Donna Reed  Athena had a career as a successful actress (as Athena Cansino) before leaving her life of glamour and paparazzi to create a life of peace and energy healing. Today, she is a certified Reiki master, crystal Reiki master and chakra healer, leading retreats, clinics and workshops.

To discover more about her, visit @crystalreikhealer, www.crystalreikihealer.com Hello and Welcome!

Welcome to the world of energy self-healing, a safe place where you are loved and empowered to heal yourself, your loved ones, and, in turn, the world we live in.

I am Athena Bahri, your crystal Reiki healer, Reiki master and mentor for energy self-healing, here to guide you on your journey and give you the tools you need to raise your vibes. Energy is not bound by the same laws of space and time as we are; it is all-encompassing, and I want to offer you the gift of Reiki energy so that you too may feel and know its incredible healing power.

I believe passionately that we are all connected, deserving of love and support on this journey in life, and that together we can raise our vibration for a more positive world. The Universe has granted us incredible self-healing tools, and it is my hope that by reading this book, you will be equipped to use them to live a healthier and happier life. Your world is part of my world; lets raise the vibe together!

Introduction We are all connected in a beautiful and magical way through energy and its vibrations. Energy plays a part in every aspect of our being  from the atoms that make up our physical bodies to our emotional, mental and spiritual states. How we feel and think directly affects not only ourselves, but everyone around us. With more people recognizing the importance of our emotions and how they affect the world, we have the opportunity to create connection and unity  starting within ourselves. By healing and raising the frequency of our own vibration, we have the chance to create a healthier and more loving environment, a world where we can thrive and vibe together.

Vibration is the transfer and movement of energy. We can see it when a pebble is tossed into a body of water, which ripples out from the stones point of entry. We can feel it when we stand near a speaker playing loud music. Energy is neither created nor destroyed; it is simply moved from one space to another.

Our own physical, emotional and spiritual bodies likewise have their own unique vibrations. When our vibes are low, our mood is negative; our emotional state is anxious, angry or sad, our physical bodies suffer from illness, and we feel disconnected and alone. But we dont have to stay in this state of apathy. As you will see, we each have the power to raise our vibration to one of love and vibrancy, where we feel empowered, healthy, happy and safe within ourselves and our environment.

Today, we have witnessed how people in every corner of the Earth can be affected by the low vibe of an event such as the pandemic of 2020, which created isolation and fear. In our homes and workplaces, we are also becoming increasingly affected by the vibrations of modern technologies such as WiFi and 5G. Yet, at the same time, these things have helped to open our eyes and consciousness to how connected we really are. The truth is that we all play an important part in our world. In the same way that atoms and cells form to create the human body, we too are connected to form our world. We are living, breathing parts of one unit  one consciousness  and when we vibrate individually and collectively at a higher frequency, we create a profound effect on the health and happiness of the world we live in.

We are all connected at a vibrational level, so when we work on healing ourselves, we are also healing each other. Just as you can feel the vibe of people in a room, you can also change that vibe by raising your own, infusing those around you with good vibes. So lets choose to infuse our whole world with the energy of love and gratitude, to be the individual cells that regenerate our collective health, and spark a light for those who cannot see. Together we will create a vibration so high in frequency that generations to come will benefit from our work!

What is Energy Healing?

The importance of high-vibing energy for our wellbeing has been recognized since ancient times. Although it is often given other names in Eastern traditions, such as chi, qi or prana, this energy represents our life force, which flows freely, without blockages or imbalances, when we are in good health. Today, the benefits of practices such as Reiki, acupuncture and working with the chakra system  all of which are forms of energy healing  are becoming widely accepted in the West.

Energy healing holds that every physical or emotional pain we experience is the result of an energy imbalance or blockage. Spiritual ailments and blockages likewise often manifest in the physical form. Lets look at stress as an example. When things become too hard to bear, our emotional response alters our physical, mental and spiritual states. Our whirring thoughts manifest physically in our bodys increased production of the hormone cortisol, a root cause of many physical ailments. Reiki helps to regulate and release these stressors so we find balance within the physical body.

When our energy bodies are strong and balanced, this manifests as physical and emotional wellbeing. When we are energetically balanced, our immune systems are stronger, our nervous systems are healthier, we heal physically faster, and our mental and emotional state is more stable. If we can raise our vibration, we can experience whole body, mind and spirit connection.

The human body is an incredibly intricate system. It is so complex that, even with all the wonders of research, scientists are still learning how it all works. My purpose in this book is not to tell you about the latest medical findings, only that my experience has shown me that energy healing is just as important a part of self-care as conventional medicine. By raising your vibration, energy healing fills in the gaps of modern medicine. It is very gentle, but the shift is profound  it will alter both your mindset and the internal workings of your body, enabling you to enjoy a much happier and healthier quality of life. In the same way that we can learn to control our reactions to certain triggers, so too are we able to learn how to heal our inner life force and improve our emotional, physical and spiritual wellbeing. However, an understanding of spiritual health is typically not taught to us in the modern age. Instead, we are often raised to depend on others for our health. Our society as a whole has lost sight of our incredible, innate ability to heal ourselves. But it wasnt always like this.

Not too long ago, when there were no physicians to call upon, we relied heavily on diet, worship and sacred tools to cure ourselves. If we go back to the days of the ancient peoples of the world, many spiritual practices were used, including herbs, crystals, different forms of smudging, prayer and offerings to a higher power to cure ailments. Many of these tools remain available to us today and you will find them outlined in this book.

It is my hope that by highlighting these tools and creating easy-to-follow rituals, you will feel empowered to try them and take back your power on your own healing journey. Try one or try them all, but trust yourself and listen to your mind-body connection and your intuition for guidance on what works best for you. I welcome you to open your eyes to a new perspective in healing with energy. I welcome you to use energy healing as part of your routine for self-care to raise your vibration and heal yourself.

The Healing Power of an Open Mind As you might have guessed, I believe we need a full spectrum of healing practices for our wellbeing. The foundational tool in this book is Reiki. It is an amazing energy-healing tool  but it is not the only one. When Reiki is used together with other tools, you create incredible healing potential. Of course, its important to note that modern medicine also has immense value.

Over the years, I have found that combining a wide range of healing methods for the body, mind and soul can be profoundly helpful. For years, I suffered from chronic back pain, and I couldnt understand why I didnt gain relief from conventional treatments. Only after doing a lot of research and exploring alternative healing methods in my search for wellness did I grasp that there is so much more to healing than just treating physical symptoms  that true healing takes place on all the levels of body, mind and spirit. With proper guidance, conventional and alternative medicines can work together in beautiful and powerful ways, as I am still discovering.

My oldest and dearest friend was diagnosed with stage 4 cancer in 2019. One of the things that most cancer survivors have in common is an awareness of how important it is to keep a positive mindset. These same words were passed on to my friend by her own physician. Knowing that energy healing can be an amazing way to stay positive and vibing high, I travelled to see my friend while she was going through chemo, taking with me suitcases of crystals, essential oils and my spiritual bag of energy tools. She was determined to beat this thing and to stay alive for her young daughter, so she was open to a wide variety of healing modalities. We spent many weekends doing healing work together  and I have continued to do distance crystal Reiki healing for her while writing this book. She is a survivor, and, with the support of conventional and alternative treatments, she is finding the power to beat her cancer into remission. I am certainly not claiming to be able to heal cancer, but I am saying that a combination of healing methods is leading my friend back toward a healthy body, mind and soul.

Releasing what we harbor in our minds through practices such as Full Moon rituals, smudging away bad vibes, aligning our chakras, working with crystals and using the gifts of our dear Mother Earth support our whole health. Just try it. Whoever you are and wherever you live, you can experience the benefits of energy self-healing for yourself.

How to Use This Book This book was created with your wellbeing in mind. Although there are no hard-and-fast rules in spirituality on creating a happier life and shifting your own energy and vibration toward the positive, there are guidelines for how to do this  and you will find them in these pages.

To start your healing journey, I recommend beginning by reading Part 1: Step into Your Self-Healing. It explains what Reiki and the chakras are, for example, and sets out the foundations on which to build the rest of your healing practice.

In Part 2, Vibration-Raising Rituals, you will find a thorough explanation of how to use the different techniques, what they are meant to assist you with, and their history of helping us raise our vibes. Part 3, Raise Your Vibes!, offers a wonderful system for approaching the many struggles we all face as humans and creating a shift into the positive. Youll find which vibration-raising methods work best for different challenges as well as easy-to-follow rituals. In this part of the book, feel free to jump around from section to section to suit your personal needs, as they too change from day to day.

As you learn about the different methods and rituals, you will discover which ones work best for you. Remember that healing is a process and can take time, just as it would if you were to receive treatment from a physical therapist, a doctor or another health practitioner, and that its by creating a regular practice that you will receive the most benefit. Feel free to make any adjustments you need as you become accustomed to the core healing processes. You are a remarkable being of energy, individual and unique in your own right. You have both the power and ability to create your happiness no matter what challenges you face in life.

May this book give you the confidence to trust in that ability for your highest good and wellbeing! Wishing you love, healing, and many blessings!

What is Reiki?

Reiki energy exists all around us at all times and lies at the heart of the healing principles set out in this book, which are designed to help you raise your vibes so that you can live your best life. Reiki, pronounced ray-kee, is an energy healing modality originating from Japan that translates into English as Universal Life-Force Energy. Reiki energy is truly the life force energy of our world, embodying love at its highest frequency.

The founding father of Reiki as a healing practice was a Buddhist monk named Sensei Mikao Usui (18651926). Born to a wealthy family, he studied theology, medicine and psychology, and his belief in the importance of healing the whole body led to the creation of Reiki. He realized that for true healing and change to occur, the body, mind and spirit needed to be addressed as a whole.

The Reiki symbols that you will find in the chapter Self-Attunement with Reiki (page 28) were said to have come to Mikao Usui on the last day of a 21-day meditation on Mount Karuma, and it is believed that they were in turn influenced by his studies of ancient Sanskrit symbols, Japanese kanji (the ideograms used in Japanese writing) and Tibetan Buddhism. Today, the symbols help Reiki practitioners to focus and channel energy for specific outcomes. After another period of meditation, Sensei Usui received the Five Principles of Reiki.

These can be translated as follows: Just for today I will not worry.

Just for today I will not be angry.

Just for today I will do my work honestly.

Just for today I will give thanks for my many blessings.

Just for today I will be kind to my neighbour and every living thing.

Once the Five Principles came to him, his healing method was complete and Mikao Usui went on to spend the remainder of his life healing and teaching. He divided his new Reiki system into three levels of development and attunement: First Degree: Reiki One (Shoden) offers a gentle introduction to the life-changing power of Reiki, with an attunement that allows the individual to become an open channel to Reiki energy for the healing of the self and loved ones. This level involves becoming attuned to the first three Reiki symbols, but not being taught how to use them.

Second Degree: In Reiki Two (Okuden), the student receives an attunement by a Reiki master to the Reiki symbols, allowing that individual to work on others at a deeper level through the use of these symbols. The student learns how to channel or send Reiki to other people, situations and animals, as well as how to channel Reiki energy remotely without limitations of space and time in a practice known as distance Reiki. This is regarded as the practitioner level by most Reiki masters in the West.

Third Degree: Reiki Three (Shinpiden) is the level of the Reiki master teacher and includes the final attunement to Reiki and the Master symbol. Some teachers use an additional fifth Reiki symbol or more. This level goes well beyond simply teaching and attuning others to Reiki energy; it sets the course for a lifelong journey of continued learning and enlightenment through fully embracing the Reiki Principles.

To this day, there stands a memorial erected by Sensei Usuis students in honour of his memory, in a graveyard at Saihoji Temple in Tokyo. During his life as a healer, Sensei Mikao Usui would teach an estimated 2,000 students and initiate 20 teachers, including Dr Chujiro Hayashi (18801940), a physician and retired marine commander for the Japanese navy who would unknowingly play an important role in bringing reiki to the West.

Asked by Sensei Usui to continue developing his own style of Reiki, Dr Hayashi opened a clinic. Drawing on his military discipline, he developed a practice of Reiki that included an attunement system which was easier to teach, with more detailed record-keeping, including notes on which hand positions were best for treating particular ailments; and he also changed the position of the receiver from sitting up to lying down. However, when World War II broke out, Dr Hayashi was required by the Japanese Navy to report on the locations of any US military he might have seen on his travels to Hawaii. His refusal to cooperate resulted in the disgrace of being called a traitor, and he performed ritual suicide known as seppuku.

Before his passing, he invited his long-term student Mrs Hawayo Takata (19001980) to study to be a Reiki master. Hawayo Takata, known later as Madame Takata or Sensei Takata, returned to Hawaii and opened her own clinic, then travelled throughout the US teaching and healing with Reiki. She is credited for sharing Reiki with the West. However, she also made many changes to how it was performed and taught, most notably prohibiting students from using any written material or notes. Among other things, she increased the number of hand positions from seven to twelve and directed her students to keep many parts of Reiki secret. After her passing, some of her master students came together to formulate a written version of her teachings. Today, Reiki is used in private practice and in public hospitals alike to assist in the healing of all ailments  physical, mental, emotional and spiritual. I have personally experienced the incredible healing of Reiki  and feel so blessed to be able to share it with you.

Although her methods and teachings varied and were surrounded in secrecy and contradictions, Madame Takata ultimately enabled the gift of Reiki to spread throughout the world when it may have otherwise been lost in the pillages of World War II. This is why there are so many stories and variations today as to how Reiki should be correctly taught, but I suggest that you consider allowing all of these to guide your Reiki journey rather than follow strict rules that will prevent you from receiving the many blessings of Reiki energy.

Regardless of any myths and legends that have come to surround it, at its core, Reiki energy is a gift of healing, connecting and balancing the mind, body and spirit, enabling them to work in harmony  just as Sensei Usui originally intended. The Reiki symbols are a form of initiation and, when learned at each different level, a powerful tool for channeling this sacred healing energy. The Five Principles of Reiki are a beautiful way to live your life and a foundation for the practice, as well as a pillar to mark the beginning of your spiritual journey. I encourage you to keep these Principles close to your heart so you too may live a life of higher vibration and whole-body health.

Within the different branches of Reiki, some lineages focus on the Indian-based chakra centres  vortexes of energy inside the body  while others focus on the Japanese energy centers known as the Three Diamonds. These are: Earth Ki: Situated below the naval and known as hara, this is the core energy center that holds the essence we are born with in this lifetime, connecting us to the physical world and our Mother Earth.

Heart Ki: Situated in the middle of the chest, this is the energy center of emotions, learned experiences in life, and the perfect balance of love between the physical and spiritual planes.

Heaven Ki: Situated in the head, this is our energy source center, connecting our spirit with the divine, through which we may enable psychic ability and connection to Source, the Universe, God (depending on faith/belief).

By focusing and meditating on each of these centers one at a time, beginning with your Earth Ki, followed by your Heaven Ki, and finishing with your Heart Ki, you are aligning and balancing the energy within. To do this, you may choose to use Reiki energy, which will always be with you and literally at your fingertips, or the practices and rituals described in Part 2 of this book, including affirmations, crystals, visualizations, essential oils, the violet flame exercise, sound healing, or any combination that resonates with you in the moment.

This book will focus more on the seven chakras than the Three Diamonds, as this is how I was taught; however, I love, appreciate and have studied both systems. Allow your intuition to guide you to whichever resonates best for you, knowing that both these systems describe valuable and important energy centers within the body. Maintaining balance and a high vibration within these centers, in combination with daily healing and following the Five Principles of Reiki, can enrich your life in the most amazing ways, manifesting positive energy in all you do, feel and experience in life. Since our focus in the chapter Self-Attunement with Reiki will be on working with the seven chakras to open your spirit to the blessing of Reiki, lets turn to them next.

Introducing the Chakras Our chakra centers are the energy sources within our spiritual bodies, first described in ancient Sanskrit texts. The state of health and balance of these areas affect our energetic vibration as a whole, so keeping them open and balanced can have beautiful resonance in our daily life, affecting all we do, feel and experience on our journey in the most magical ways.

While there are many different chakras, the seven main chakras are the root, sacral, solar plexus, heart, throat, third eye and crown. Each chakra has its own unique effect on your vibration and wellbeing. Working with these can be especially helpful when you feel a certain area of your life is in need of balance and healing. You have the capacity and the tools to heal yourself without the assistance or dependence on energy healers, though they can also be a wonderful support as well. The more you practice, the more confident you will feel as you begin to recognize the shift in energy and the abundance flowing into your life.

Here is a brief description of the seven main chakras for your reference. This may be helpful as a guide in determining for yourself where you need to focus some healing energy, particularly when your struggle is not easily identifiable physically or emotionally.

The Seven Chakras Use the descriptions overleaf as a guide to locate imbalances within your energy system by noting each chakras correlating physical, emotional and spiritual aspects as a guide to where you might need specific healing.

As you step into your self-healing power and begin to work with the chakras, remember that  as with anything we learn in life  practice builds confidence. The beautiful thing about energy healing is that there is no wrong: you will be successful each and every time you do the work to raise your vibes. You may notice the benefits immediately, or sometimes it may take some time to see the changes, which is also wonderful in its own way.

A simple place to start is by using mantras. Youll find more information in the chapter Affirmations and Mantras in Part 2 (pages 11318), but for now, why not make a note of the mantra for each chakra and see how it feels to repeat the sound while you focus on the relevant area of your body?

Chakra energy healing is gentle and non-intrusive but extremely beneficial. Not too long after you start a daily practice of balancing your chakras, you will be able to look back in amazement at the progress you have made and the beautiful effects on your life.

The human experience often includes a sense of impatience and wanting an instant fix, which can lead to frustration and abusing your system in a negative way, which in turn greatly affects the health of your mind, body and spirit. I believe this impatience plays a part in Western medicine, with the use of prescription medication. The good news is that we can empower ourselves through self-attunement with Reiki.

Using Mantras for Your Chakras The list below shows the sounds or chants known as Bija mantras in Sanskrit, which have been used for thousands of years in Vedic meditation for healing and balancing our chakra centers.

Root chakra: LAM Sacral chakra: VAM Solar plexus chakra: RAM Heart chakra: YAM Throat chakra: HAM Third eye chakra: AUM Crown chakra: OM Carry the sound from your chest until you feel the vibration on the inside of your closed lips. Repeat as many times as you feel called to, or until you notice your shift in vibration.

Self-Attunement with Reiki When we think of energy, we often think of those things we can see and touch, such as an electric light switch or turning on the ignition of a car  a tool that can be flicked on to make something start. So how do you know you can feel energy without that symbolic start button? Well, lets think back to when you were a child and bumped your head. The first instinct was to hold the hurt area with your hands, covering and soothing the wound. The second was to run to your mother or another parental figure for comfort. She too would touch the area and maybe even kiss it all better. You and your mother (or father, or other comforting person) were actually engaging in a Reiki energy exchange. That kiss, that touch, really did soothe and help make the bump feel better. Physically, it soothed the wound. Emotionally, it calmed you down. Spiritually, it released the attachment to the pain. Sometimes this pain stopped immediately, sometimes it lingered for a few days, but the attachment to it was gone and you went back to playing happily.

Reiki energy is often associated with feelings of heat and love. There have been many times during healing sessions when my clients have noted how hot my hands feel during the treatment. You may also find during your self-treatments that your hands do in fact feel warmer on the area of the body you are focusing on. Just the other day, I was showering my six-year-old daughter. When she came out and I wrapped her in the towel, I told her to wait so I could put lotion on her skin. She commented that the lotion always makes her feel cold. So, without telling her what I was doing, I decided to try something. First, I prepared my hands with Reiki before placing them on her. While I added lotion to one hand, on the other I drew the Reiki Master symbol, and as soon as I placed my hands on her to rub the lotion on, she said to me, Wow, Mommy, it feels like love going on me! I was so stunned  though I shouldnt have been  that she really could feel the difference. Instead of feeling cold, she felt love. It was a wonderful moment of validation.

Energy mudra Keep in mind, you will not always feel the difference with your touch. That does not mean Reiki is not working. It could simply be that your mind-body connection is focused elsewhere. The Reiki energy will still be most effective and pass on its beautiful healing energy. Learning to use Reiki is a bit like learning to drive  without the fear of collision of course. Learning to sense the ebb and flow of traffic takes practice and time. The more you practice Reiki, the more you will begin to notice its subtle frequency, the stronger your sensitivity to the feeling of Reiki will grow. Be patient with yourself as you learn and trust that you are creating wonderful healing change in your physical, emotional and spiritual world.

Opening to the Flow of Reiki Energy As I mentioned earlier, I firmly believe there are no rules in spirituality, only guidelines. We all have our own unique path to enlightenment. How you get there doesnt matter; its the journey and continuing on your path that counts. I have created a path for you here for self-attunement with Reiki without the need to attend classes, pay large fees or study beyond your own desire for information. Reiki Level One is open to all, a gift from the Universe, a channel to light and love for spiritual and, in turn, physical and emotional wellbeing. Opening yourself as a channel for Reiki initiates magnificent life-changing effects.

Reiki attunement is really an act of blessing. Usually, a Reiki master performs the act of blessing the individual or group so that they may be more open to the flow of Reiki energy, allowing them to channel that energy to themselves and loved ones. However, there is no copyright on Reiki energy, no governing or religious body regulating its use, and thus no rules as to how it may be attained or employed. The original discovery of Reiki by Sensei Usui was founded in deep meditation and openness, not dogma, and is open to all, whatever spiritual or religious path you may follow.

As you will see, you can incorporate many different modalities to work together in Reiki healing, which will in turn strengthen your methods. Using Reiki together with crystals while focusing on balancing your chakras is a perfect example of how different modalities complement each other. I have personally found that working with many healing modalities makes for a stronger, more well-rounded healing session. Words are powerful tools as well; in fact, the root word of spelling is spell, a ritual that creates magic or, for our purposes, energy shifts. I have blessed these pages, these words  and this chapter in particular  with the beautiful energy of attunement to Reiki Level One, so that all who read it and do the work may then become a channel to the flow of Reiki healing.

Using Clear Quartz as an Amplifier Crystals play a significant role in my own Reiki practice, as combining Reiki with crystals helps to focus and strengthen healing energies. To assist your self-attunement, I recommend using a piece of clear quartz crystal. Clear quartz is considered the master healing crystal and its ability to help amplify energy is unmatched. Simply holding the crystal or placing it near you will intensify your bodys openness and allow your bio-electric energy field to harmonize with the Reiki energy that you are intending to connect with during the following exercises. Reiki energy flows from above, through the crown chakra, whereas crystals bring in the grounding energy from the Earth, so together they form a natural and seamless circuit.

Clear quartz should always be cleansed when you first begin to use it. You want to make sure it is amplifying your intention and energy, not that of others it has inadvertently come in contact with. This is a simple process and can be done using many different methods, so choose the one that you feel is best for you (see page 69). Once you have completed the exercises in this chapter, you may choose to use Reiki energy itself to cleanse your crystals in the future.

Of course, learning to utilize this tool for yourself and others does require practice on your part, coupled with a genuine intention to initiate healing. Should you wish to continue further, other Reiki masters may prefer to lead you through Reiki training from the beginning, despite your reading this book, which is totally fine; just know that your self-attunement is still valid and gives you the freedom to practice this beautiful modality on yourself and loved ones for healing purposes without the need for further study. My only requirement is that you are open and willing to accept your blessing. My only wish is that you feel empowered to implement these tools to create a happier and healthier life.

Beginning to Self-Attune to Reiki Energy In order to help your body-mind accept this Reiki attunement and blessing, Id like to lead you through some simple exercises to help connect your spiritual energy with your physical and emotional body of energy.

PREPARING FOR THE ATTUNEMENT CEREMONY Let us begin with a brief moment of breathing and meditation.

You will need: clear quartz crystal Step 1: Find a place where you will be undisturbed and sit upright in a chair with your feet flat on the floor, with your quartz crystal nearby. Allow about 30 minutes to complete this attunement ceremony. (Of course, if youre a parent, like I am, these moments are often interrupted, so rest assured you can continue where you left off or begin again  whichever feels right to you.) Step 2: Once you are sitting still and have set the intention to do your energy work, take a few deep and steady breaths to center yourself and calm your mind; essentially grounding yourself so you are focused and ready.

Step 3: Raise your hands together in prayer position in front of your heart with gratitude (a gesture known in Reiki as gassho), then rest your hands in a relaxed state on your knees or wherever is most comfortable.

Step 4: Place your clear quartz crystal in your non-dominant hand, on your lap, or by your feet  whichever feels more comfortable. Release any and all expectations of something happening, so you are open to receiving the blessing.

Step 5: It is time now to practice the Seven Intentional Breaths, a series of breathing exercises that allow the body-mind to connect with the spiritual mind. You can also use this meditation any time to ground and center yourself, during times of stress, or simply for the purpose of meditation itself.

If you need to pause to read the next part of the exercise, that is okay; remember that these are intentional breaths and you may breathe normally between them as you learn to create energy flow and connect to Reiki energy. You can also record the steps and listen to them as you do the Seven Intentional Breaths. The more you practice this meditation, the easier it will become to continue with each consecutive breath.

With each breath you inhale, know you are breathing in air around you that has its own energy and contains compounds essential to life as we know it, as well as pure love.

Breath One: Inhale cool, energized air slowly and deeply through your nose, visualizing your first intentional breath reaching down to your root chakra at the base of your spine. Hold this breath for a count of five. Visualize your breath opening a red spinning circle at the base of your spine. Visualize it glowing red with warmth.

As you breathe out through your mouth, visualize your breath releasing the warm, red energy from your body.

Breath Two: Inhale cool, energized air slowly and deeply through your nose, visualizing your second intentional breath reaching down to your root 9 chakra and back up to your sacral chakra. Hold this breath for a count of five. Visualize your breath opening an orange spinning circle just below your navel. Visualize this glowing orange with warmth.

As you breathe out through your mouth, visualize your breath releasing the warm, orange energy from your body.

Breath Three: Inhale cool, energized air slowly and deeply through your nose, visualizing your third intentional breath reaching down to your root chakra and back up to your solar plexus chakra. Hold this breath for a count of five. Visualize your breath opening a yellow spinning circle just above your navel. Visualize this glowing yellow with warmth.

As you breathe out through your mouth, visualize your breath releasing the warm, yellow energy from your body.

Breath Four: Inhale cool, energized air slowly and deeply through your nose, visualizing your fourth intentional breath reaching down to your root chakra and back up to your heart chakra. Hold this breath for a count of five. Visualize your breath opening a green spinning circle in the middle of your chest. Visualize this glowing green with warmth.

As you breathe out through your mouth, visualize your breath releasing the warm, green energy from your body.

Breath Five: Inhale cool, energized air slowly and deeply through your nose, visualizing your fifth intentional breath reaching down to your root chakra and back up to your throat chakra. Hold this breath for a count of five. Visualize your breath opening a blue spinning circle within your neck and throat. Visualize this glowing blue with warmth.

As you breathe out through your mouth, visualize your breath releasing the warm, blue energy from your body.

Breath Six: Inhale the cool, energized air slowly and deeply through your nose, visualizing your sixth intentional breath reaching down to your root chakra and back up to your third eye chakra. Hold this breath for a count of five. Visualize your breath opening a purple spinning circle in the middle of your forehead. Visualize this glowing purple with warmth.

As you breathe out through your mouth, visualize your breath releasing the warm, purple energy from your body.

Breath Seven: Inhale the cool, energized air slowly and deeply through your nose, visualizing a beautiful white light being pulled in from above, stretching as high as the eye can see; this light and your breath becoming one. Allow this white light to reach down to your root chakra and back up through each chakra to your crown chakra. Hold this breath for a count of five. Visualize this beam of light connected from your crown chakra through the ceiling, through the roof, through the clouds and atmosphere, up and out to the Universe beyond. Feel your divine connection to the Universe around you. Visualize your breath opening a white spinning circle at the top of your head. Visualize this glowing white with warmth. Allow this white energy to flow to every part of your body.

As you breathe out through your mouth, visualize your breath releasing the warm, white energy from your body on up through our atmosphere.

Your entire essence is now an open channel and ready for the blessing of attunement. Continue on to the next section to complete your attunement ceremony. You may return to this exercise any time you feel called to and I encourage you to make it a daily practice. Meditation is a wonderful gift in and of itself, as you will discover in Part 2.

REIKI BLESSING ATTUNEMENT CEREMONY Now that your entire being is an open vessel, lets usher in the / beautiful energy of Reiki. Allow your mind to detach from all thought and feeling beyond the warmth of energy flow. Relax and let go of any expectations. When you are ready to begin, if you have been holding the clear quartz crystal, you may now place it on top of the Reiki symbols shown opposite. With your hands in gassho (prayer position) in front of your heart, please take a moment to say out loud or with your inner voice: I, [your name], call upon Reiki, the universal life force. I am ready and open to receive the Reiki attunement.

Place your cupped hands over the clear quartz and pictured Reiki symbols. These have been specially infused with Reiki energy for this purpose.

Step 1: Open your crown chakra to Reiki. With your nondominant hand resting on the Reiki symbols and clear quartz, place your dominant hand on the top of your head, above your crown chakra. Be sure your fingers remain together in a closed, slightly cupped position. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling your head, as you did with your seven intentional breaths. Allow the warm beam of light to completely fill your head space and open your crown chakra.

The Reiki Symbols Cho Ku Rei Se He Ki Hon Sha Ze Sho Nen Cho Ku Rei: Reiki power symbol, Placing all the powers of the Universe here.

Se He Ki: emotional and metal healing, God and humanity become one Hon Sha Ze Sho Nen: distance healing symbol, Having no present, past or future.

Step 2: Open your third eye chakra to Reiki. While holding your non-dominant hand over the clear quartz and Reiki symbols, move your dominant hand down to your third eye chakra, keeping your fingers closed and slightly cupped. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling your third eye space, as you did with the seven intentional breaths. Allow the warm beam of light to fill your third eye center and open your third eye chakra.

Step 3: Open your throat chakra to Reiki. With your nondominant hand over the clear quartz and Reiki symbols, move your dominant hand down to your throat chakra, with your fingers closed and slightly cupped. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling up your throat space, as you did with the seven intentional breaths. Allow the warm beam of light to fill your throat center and open your throat chakra.

Step 4: Open your heart chakra to Reiki. With your nondominant hand over the clear quartz and Reiki symbols, move your dominant hand down to your heart chakra, keeping your fingers closed and slightly cupped. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling up your heart space, as you did with the seven intentional breaths. Allow the warm beam of light to fill your heart center and open your heart chakra.

Step 5: Open your solar plexus chakra center to Reiki. With your non-dominant hand over the clear quartz and Reiki symbols, move your dominant hand down to your solar plexus chakra, keeping your fingers closed and slightly cupped. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling your solar plexus space, as you did with the seven intentional breaths. Allow the warm beam of light to fill your solar plexus center and open your solar plexus chakra.

Step 6: Open your sacral chakra center to Reiki. With your non-dominant hand still held over the clear quartz and Reiki symbols, move your dominant hand down to your sacral chakra, keeping your fingers closed and slightly cupped. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling your sacral space, as you did with the seven intentional breaths. Allow the warm beam of light to fill your sacral center and open your sacral chakra.

Step 7: Open your root chakra to Reiki. Keeping your nondominant hand over the clear quartz and Reiki symbols, move your dominant hand down to your root chakra, with your fingers still closed and slightly cupped. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling your root chakra space, as you did with the seven intentional breaths. Allow the warm beam of light to fill your root center and open your root chakra.

Step 8: Open your entire body to Reiki. With your non-dominant hand still above the clear quartz and Reiki symbols, move your dominant hand back up to your crown chakra, keeping your fingers closed and slightly cupped. Take three deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a beam of white light from up above and beyond our world filling your entire being with light. Allow the warm beam of light to shine through your arms, chest, abdomen, thighs, legs and feet. Visualize every muscle, organ, tissue and cell of your body filled with the white healing light of Reiki energy.

Step 9: Attune to the symbols and the violet breath. Now place both hands over the clear quartz crystal and Reiki symbols with your fingers and hands together, slightly cupped, but not overlapping. Take five deep intentional breaths, visualizing each breath as a soft violet glow that enters and completely envelops your mind, body and spirit. Allow your entire being to be wrapped in the warm embrace of this violet glow, flowing and circulating in and around you  down to your hands and back up through your arms and into your heart center. Visualize your final exhale as a warm violet purple energy and blow directly at and around your hands in a clockwise circle.

Step 10: Close the ceremony. Bring both hands up and behind your head. Keeping them a couple inches from your body, bring your hands up and over your head and down the length of your body, all the way to your feet, and touch the floor. Repeat this motion three times. Bring your hands back together in the gassho prayer position in front of your heart and enjoy a moment of gratitude. When you are ready, you may come back to full awareness, concluding the attunement. Please have a glass of cold water and rinse your hands in cool water as well.

A New World of Energy Welcome to a new experience of energy and congratulations on taking your health into your own hands! There are a couple of things to think about now that youve been blessed to channel Reiki. We are all unique beings and carry our own genetic imprint, so our reaction to energy healing can vary greatly from one person to the next. Know that your response to the attunement is normal, whether you felt emotional, tired, giddy, saw visions or colors, or nothing at all. Over the next month, try to remember to be gentle with yourself as your body-mind adjusts to this energetic shift. You may find old emotions come to the surface that are now ready to be looked upon and healed.

In the next chapter, you will learn to perform a self-healing treatment with the use of your hands. This is also an ideal time to incorporate crystals for a more powerful healing (see the chapter Crystals in Part 2; page 66). It would be very beneficial to do these treatments on yourself daily during the first three to four weeks after the attunement. Not only will it help you adjust energetically, but it will also help you to recognize Reiki as an energy source. The more you practice, the more confident you will become at performing self-treatments.

How to Perform Reiki Self-Healing Congratulations on your new journey in self-healing! I hope you will continue to explore this beautiful new gift as you watch your life change in so many wonderful ways. Remember that the more you practice, the more you will recognize Reiki energy flowing through you. Trust Reiki and trust yourself as you raise your vibes one healing session at a time. You may choose to include Reiki energy in every healing ritual you perform, whether for yourself or when channeling its energy into your loved ones, your tools, crystals and sacred space. Your Reiki blessing, or attunement, will always be with you, even if you havent practiced for a time, so you can always pick it back up and use the steps below to channel healing Reiki energy.

After the self-attunement that you experienced in the previous chapter, I advise that you practice Reiki self-healing consistently for 21 days and then as often as you feel its needed. Sometimes I feel like I need it every day while at other times a week will pass before I practice self-healing. Keep in mind that the more you do, the better you will feel spiritually, emotionally and physically. Performing the following ritual each day to start your journey in Reiki healing will help you recognize this energy as well as create wonderful positive changes. It has changed my own life in the most amazing ways and I know it will for you too.

When I had my first Reiki attunement, I experienced the most wonderful sensation of warmth and visions of purple light. I found the first week of self-treatment to be exciting and sort of chasing that feeling again. Some days I struggled to concentrate, while on others I was on cloud nine. By the end of my 21-day initiation, I had the most amazing feeling of purpose and placement in the world.

Everyone will have their own unique experience, as everyones energy and journey are different, so dont worry if your experience is not the same as mine. Some people feel like they are floating, seeing lights or getting emotional, while others may question whether anything happened at all. Trust that Reiki is working for you in its own special way.

SELF-HEALING WITH REIKI Give yourself the gift of approximately 30 to 45 minutes of time to spend healing yourself, with three to five minutes for channeling Reiki in each hand position pictured. Remember there is no right or wrong, so try not to stress over getting each hand position perfect. Reiki energy will always flow to where it is needed most and for your highest good.

Step 1: Bring your hands to prayer position (gassho) over your heart chakra, inviting Reiki energy to flow through you.

Step 2: Visualize its beautiful light entering your crown chakra and flowing through every cell of your physical body and into your hands.

Step 3: Begin by placing your hands on your crown chakra and working down one chakra at a time as Reiki energy flows into each chakra center. Follow the pictured self-treatment Reiki hand positions as a guide, adapting these as you work your way down your body.

Position 1: Crown and third eye chakras Position 2: Throat chakra Position 3: Heart chakra Position 4: Solar plexus chakra Position 5: Sacral chakra Position 6: Root chakra Step 4: If you feel that one or more chakras need extra focused healing, spend an additional three to five minutes on that area.

Step 5: If there is a particular part of your body that needs more healing, place your cupped hands there and hold for three to five minutes.

Step 6: Bring your hands to the gassho position, giving thanks for the time youve been given for self-healing and to Reiki energy for its blessing.

Step 7: Drink a glass of cool water to assist grounding. You may also choose to rinse your hands and wrists under cool, flowing water. This is an important step, bringing you back to the physical plane and grounding yourself in our physical world.

INFUSING YOUR TOOLS WITH REIKI ENERGY Just as you can channel Reiki into your body and energy centers, you can also channel Reiki into your healing tools. This may be done for crystals, journals, tarot and oracle cards, a pendulum, or any other tool you are choosing to work with.

Step 1: Bring your hands to prayer position (gassho) over your heart chakra, inviting Reiki energy to flow through you.

Step 2: Visualize its beautiful light entering your crown chakra and flowing through every cell of your physical body and into your hands.

Step 3: Hold your cupped hands over your spiritual tools or in your cupped hands if the tool is small enough to handle. Allow Reiki to flow into your tools for three to five minutes.

Step 4: Bring your hands to the gassho position, giving thanks for the time youve been given for self-healing and to Reiki energy for its blessing.

Step 5: Drink a glass of cool water to assist grounding. You may also choose to rinse your hands and wrists under cool, flowing water.

At the end of rituals and ceremonies, I personally love to show gratitude for the masters, the senseis, who came before me, for sharing their beautiful gift and for Reiki itself for its beautiful healing. You may do what feels right to you, so long as you finish each practice with gratitude. You may be pleasantly surprised at how much you look forward to this me time when you practice healing and how much more powerful your tools become.

Creating a Sacred Space Creating a sacred space in which to practice healing is about much more than just preparing for spiritual work. This is the space in which you change the whole vibe of your energy and that of your environment; this important space should act like a bubble of safety and peace surrounding you.

A sacred space doesnt need to take up a whole room or your entire home; it could be in a little nook, on your patio or balcony, next to a small table where you keep your spiritual tools, or even in your car if you choose. The location doesnt matter; your sacred space is your personal space  its wherever you are when you decide to perform spiritual work. When you begin from a place of love and high vibration, you are giving your practice a solid foundation where your healing work can thrive and bring in the blessings you are intending to set in motion. I have found that when starting any energy work with a positive vibration in the surrounding space  whether manifesting, healing or performing rituals  the work itself is much more effective and the results too are even more positive.

You can create your sacred space simply by setting the intention to do so. However, when we are starting on our spiritual journey, sometimes we may need a little extra something to get those vibes flowing and to boost our confidence in our ability to change the world in positive ways. For those who need a little extra encouragement or who are ready to take their practice to a new level, here are some wonderful ways in which you can take a more active part in creating your sacred space.

Try to remember these are guidelines, so use whatever methods feel right; there are no rules. Try one tool or all of them and see what resonates with you most. (You will find more information about each method in Part 2.) This is your space of peace, manifestation, healing and creation, so enjoy your moment and make it magical. Just the act of creating a sacred space will feel wonderful because you are taking an active role in raising your vibration.

Working with Fire It goes without saying that fire can be very unpredictable.

If you are carrying out a practice that uses fire in any form  such as with intention candles, smudging or in any of the rituals - always work away from drafts and hanging fabrics such as curtains, prayer flags or wall tapestries.

If you are outdoors, perform your rituals away from overhanging plants, shrubs, flowers and trees.

Never leave flames to burn unattended and take extra care if using highly flammable ingredients such as the optional rubbing alcohol in the Journaling Through Guilt and Fear Ritual (pages 21820).

Always store the sealed alcohol bottle safely away from where you are working.

One spark can be all it takes to start a blaze, so if possible keep a fire extinguisher close by!

SACRED SPACE SMUDGING Using a smudge stick (a dried, wrapped bundle of herbs) or burning resin will give your sacred space an air of formality and purpose. Once youve made your choice of which plants and/or resins to use (see pages 107110), follow these easy steps to create your sacred space.

You will need: smudge stick or resin lighter or matches dish or abalone shell for use with smudge stick, or heat-proof pot and charcoal for use with resins (see Methods of Burning in the chapter Smudging, pages 11112) large feather (a hand fan or folded paper will do at a pinch) A pen or pencil Optional: small bowl of sand to douse the smudge stick when you are finished. (I love to use sand at the end of my smudging rituals. This brings in the water element, as well as safely puts out a very smoky smudge stick.) Step 1: Decide on your choice of smudge. You can use more than one, though it is recommended that beginners start with one at a time, before deciding which combinations work best for them.

Step 2: Light the smudge stick and place it in the dish or shell. Or, if you are using resin, light the charcoal disk and use tongs to drop it into your heatproof pot (be aware that the charcoal will get extremely hot, so handle with great care), and sprinkle the resin over it. Then fan the smoke, using your feather, away from your body toward your altar or around the area that you wish to make your sacred space.

Step 3: Finish by sweeping the smudge stick or pot along your body, starting a few inches from the top of your head, down the length of your front, and back up the back of your body, finishing with a final sweep of the stick or pot under each foot.

Step 4: Put out your smudge stick, or allow the resin to burn to ash, and place the dish, shell or pot within your space of intention.

Your choice of smudge will eliminate and shield you and your space of intention of any negativity, while also blessing your space with its beautiful healing and protective powers, clearing your mind for the spiritual work you are ready to perform.

I also love to do this practice before every Full Moon, as part of New Moon rituals and especially before spiritual baths. Enjoy!

SACRED SPACE INTENTION CANDLE Candles bring a wonderful sense of light and warmth to any setting, and using them to make intentions brings the same light and warmth to your healing sessions. (See Part 2, Intention Candles, pages 7682.) You will need: 1 candle (see Intention Candles, pages 7980 for color options, or use white) lighter or matches Step 1: Hold in your minds eye the intention you wish to set. In this instance, you are going to create a special sacred space in which to practice your healing work.

Step 2: Hold that thought, declare your purpose, and light your candle. The energy of your intention will remain for as long as the candle is lit.

Step 3: Take a moment of gratitude for the time youve been given to create this ritual. If you wish, you may blow out the candle when you close the session. Alternatively, you are welcome to allow the candle to burn through to the end (just keep it in a safe place).

Its really that easy!

SACRED SPACE AFFIRMATION You dont need to feel dependent on tools to create your sacred space. There will likely be plenty of instances when you dont have any tools with you but you still want to create a space for healing, manifestation, intention and rituals, etc. Opening a sacred space using affirmations of intention is equally powerful (see Part 2, Affirmations and Mantras, pages 11318).

Step 1: Take a moment to acknowledge the energy healing youre ready to channel. Now focus on the fact that this is the moment and the space you are holding to do so.

Step 2: Bring your hands to prayer position (gassho) and speak your affirmation while holding love in your heart. Here are some affirmations that I have used in the past, which you are free to adapt for your purposes: This is my space of love and positive vibration, held with protection of the angels to create powerful and positive change I hold this space, safe from all negative energy, to begin my ritual for healing This is my sacred space, where only love and high vibrations are allowed, and I am shifting the energy around me to the positive Step 3: Now you can perform your ritual or energy work knowing you are creating from a safe place of charged higher vibrations.

Step 4: Close your ritual with a moment of gratitude for your sacred space of intention.

Create Your Sacred Space as Part of Every Ritual I recommend that you create your sacred space as part of your preparations for working with all forms of energy healing and vibration-raising rituals. This may be done by simply setting your intention to dedicate your space to the work, or with the method that resonates best for you. It may even involve setting up a ceremonial altar. It is as much about preparing yourself mentally as it is about creating the right physical setting.

All journeys begin with one step, and creating your sacred space first is a wonderful way to put your best foot forward.

Now its time to take a closer look at some of the vibrationraising tools and rituals that you can enjoy using as part of your healing work with Reiki.

Meditation There are few things in life that are as rewarding and soul-soothing as meditation. This healing tool is a game changer, one that is available to everyone, costs nothing and is absolutely invaluable to your wellbeing. Meditation is like a spiritual shield that keeps you vibrating at your highest.

Each chapter in Part 3 of this book has its own unique way of using meditation for healing. In this one, we will focus on learning the basics of how to meditate. If you already know how to meditate, wonderful! You will find many different ways to use meditation for healing throughout this book, some you may or may not have tried previously.

When I first heard of meditation, I thought of gurus sitting atop mountains  as if meditation were only for highly spiritual individuals. However, when life events had me searching for a way to calm my mind, I started attending classes in a form of meditation called mindfulness. I learned that meditation wasnt just for spiritual people; it was a scientifically backed healing modality that anyone could use to address ailments ranging from chronic pain, anxiety, depression, anger management, addiction, and to most everything controlled by the brain. Meditation literally changes the physical form of our brain by opening new neural pathways  communication highways within the brain.

Learning to meditate can at first seem intimidating, but once you follow these simple steps and make the commitment to honor yourself, you too can find that gorgeous inner peace and soothe your soul so that you can handle anything life throws at you.

Meditation and the Mind Its important, first, to understand how the mind works. If you pause for a moment, youll notice how your mind literally never stops whirring. The voice of your thoughts carries on in an endless cycle, constantly reminding you about what has happened or worrying over what might happen. Learning to pause that voice and quiet the mind brings incredible benefits that will touch every aspect of your life, bringing a sense of peace that is worth more than any material thing you could ever own.

Tucked away deep within our brains are two, small, almondshaped clusters of nuclei called the amygdalae. As well as storing memories, each amygdala is responsible for how we respond to emotional triggers and stress. They are also responsible for the fight, flight or freeze responses. Back in the days of our cavemen ancestors, the amygdalae were vital to our survival as a species, helping us react to danger and protect ourselves. We learned what was dangerous and remembered our responses to those moments to keep ourselves safe in the future. These days, we dont typically have wild animals chasing us, and, with the exception of war, nor are we hunted by humans. Most of our basic needs are already met, including food and shelter. However, what we do deal with on a daily basis is stress  and our brains have adapted accordingly. For many of us, learning to handle stress is a major part of our growth. Our amygdalae never stop working to protect us by responding to perceived threats; however, in todays world, our brain can at times defeat our own objectives and stand in the way of our happiness. The thing about the amygdalae is that theyre very negative by nature, creating a cycle of negative self-talk that can be so defeating in the face of stress. We can use meditation as a way to press pause on those primitive triggers, release those fears and relax our minds.

It will take practice; the brain is not the easiest thing to train when we have habits and cycles of behavior in play from years of conditioning. However, with dedication and determination, we can absolutely make meditation a new and healthy habit. Once youve created a daily practice, youll find your moments of peace extending longer into your days, more patience to handle stressful situations, better sleep, and that peaceful space within you as a place of refuge from the struggles of life.

Getting Started with Meditation Here are a few suggestions to help you begin your journey with meditation: Set aside time each day: You may find its harder to practice at some times of day than others and that even some days are harder than others, and thats okay too. Do whatever works best for you; just consider setting a reminder to keep doing your meditation practice daily.

Mudras Mudras are a form of ritual gesture used in meditation and yoga to help channel energy. The word mudra means seal, mark or gesture. While some mudras involve the entire body, many are performed with just the hands and fingers. They can be a very useful focal point, preparing the mind for meditation and helping the flow of energy in healing.

To work with a mudra, first rub your hands against each other ten times and hold them above your solar plexus chakra at your navel to help the energy flow into your hands. Then place your hands in your chosen mudra position.

To create the patience mudra, touch the top of the middle finger and thumb together. This mudra will help you to develop patience and understanding, and to stay in the moment.

If you are new to meditation, start with five minutes a day and gradually increase this by five minutes each week until you reach at least 20 minutes.

Make yourself comfortable, but not too comfortable: One of the biggest obstacles to meditation is that people fall asleep during it. Meditation calms the mind so much, our brains are often confused with this being the time to sleep  it is not. So unless you are choosing to use meditation as a tool to fall asleep, try to practice it in an upright, seated position.

Focus on your breath: Your breath is life itself, giving you the vital air you need to live. It is also a beautiful focus point that is always available.

Accept that thoughts will come and go: You may, or may not, be surprised at how many different thoughts come to mind as you meditate. My teacher called this the endless loop of crap. Try seeing your thoughts as just that  a thought, a distraction  and send them away. You can think of them as clouds that you can mentally send away, if thats helpful. Even the most seasoned meditators will experience this, so dont be too hard on yourself if you find it hard to focus  youll get there with practice. One thing that helps me is to acknowledge the thought and tell my mind: I hear you, but I am choosing to focus on my breath right now.

Focus on sound: Although I believe that focusing on your breath is the best way to train your mind, you may choose to use sound as well:  Singing bowls: Follow the sound as it grows quieter  how long can you hear it?

Music: Listen to your favorite relaxing tunes or a guided meditation, many of which you can easily find on YouTube.

Mantras: Repeating mantras (with or without the use of mala beads) is also a wonderful way to find focus during meditation and what I use for spiritual baths. (See also the chapter Affirmations and Mantras, pages 11318.) SIMPLE MINDFULNESS PRACTICE The following exercise is deceptively simple. Although it might not seem as if you are doing much, you will soon find your mind looking for a way out  with an itch, a sneeze, a place of discomfort, a thought, a sound in the distance. Ignore that itch or distraction and return your focus to your breathing. You will notice how the itch or other distraction is suddenly gone. This sort of distraction can and probably will continue for most of your meditation, so simply keep returning to your focus until the timer goes off. Dont allow that distraction to replace your point of focus.

Here we go...

Step 1: Set a timer for your chosen number of minutes and get comfortable! Pick a location where you will be undisturbed and take a seat. If you have back problems, you may find a chair is more comfortable. Adjust yourself until you feel totally at ease, yet not so comfy that you fall asleep. If you wish, play soothing music or repeat a mantra to help focus your mind.

Step 2: Do a full body scan from your head to your toes, consciously releasing tension or tightness in each area of the body.

Step 3: Take deep belly breaths, so that each breath raises and extends the belly, rather than the chest.

Step 4: Allow your breathing to slow to its natural rhythm.

Step 5: Notice how your breath is cooler on the inhale and warmer on the exhale.

Step 6: Continue to return your focus to your breath (or chosen point of focus) whenever distractions arise, until your timer goes off.

Not only will this practice help to strengthen your mind, it can create beautiful changes in your daily life, raising your vibration so you feel empowered to take on whatever challenges life presents you with.

Meditation for Kids I have found meditation to be a wonderful tool for my adolescent boys as well, helping them focus better in school, restore mental peace before a big exam and have an easier time falling asleep at bedtime. It also helps calm the tension between them, so I have a more peaceful home too! My six-year-old daughter comes and sits with me silently when she sees me meditating, giving herself a wonderful break as well.

If you have children, I highly recommend having them join you in learning to meditate. You may even go so far as to hold daily meditation circles together, much like some families pray together, bringing you closer in mind, body and spirit. Children are our future, so why not teach them to find peace before the world takes it from them?

Crystals There are few things as magical and mystical as crystals. As a healer, patient, friend, mother and partner, I have seen for myself the positive impact they can have on our wellbeing and the ability to share this knowledge with you is such a gift. At the time of writing, we are all emerging from the depths of a pandemic, which has certainly taken its toll on humanity and our spirit as a whole. With global quarantine, perhaps the silver lining has been that we have had a moment to pause, to reflect, and put into perspective what is truly important in order for our souls to thrive. This new awareness for healing can be supported with the powerful yet gentle energy of crystals. They are themselves a gift from our dear Mother Earth.

Crystals have been a part of our natural world for longer than the human species and all of the animal kingdom combined. The oldest known crystal discovered by scientists is a zircon that is over 4.4 billion years old, preceding the first known microfossil by 900 million years. Let that sink in for a moment.

Crystals are not just a New Age fad; they mark the beginning of a new age of human tools. Humans have been creating tools from the Earths elements ever since the Stone Age. But take a moment to look around at the tools you use today: cell phones, computers, televisions, watches, digital clocks. They all use quartz crystal to function. We are really at the beginning of the Crystal Age.

Prior to modern medicine, there was no separation between magic and medicine, and people used many different healing modalities to cure their ills  including herbs, ritual dances, and even healing stones. In recent times, we are beginning to return to the healing materials that Mother Nature has supplied us with in natural form. Crystals are a major part of this  and for good reason: they work! It has even been discovered by scientists that birds, fish, butterflies and turtles use the magnetite crystals found in their brain cells or beaks as a natural compass to navigate the electromagnetic field of the Earth. As it turns out, we humans also have this crystal within our own brain cells.

Crystals have their own unique vibration, and just being near one can raise your vibration to match. After I first began practicing Reiki, I did some research and found that crystals formed the perfect union with Reiki energy, so I studied the art of crystal Reiki in more depth. Then, when I was recovering from back surgery, I found a beautiful apatite crystal, a crystal that is known for assisting our bones and teeth by supporting calcium absorption in the body. I sleep with it on my bedside table even now to keep my back strong and healthy.

Crystals have wonderful benefits for our emotional as well our physical health. Blue lace agate, for example, is great for calming nerves and soothing anxiety. Meditation with crystals is another incredible union of spiritual, emotional and physical energies. Crystals can also help us balance our chakras.

Helpful Crystals for a Happy Life We can pick up on so many vibes during the course of our day, its important to keep ourselves supported. Crystal energy keeps our own energy at a high vibration not only as a way of protecting ourselves, but it allows us to be sources of positive energy for those we meet on our path. When you start to work with crystals, you will notice people gravitate toward your radiant light  so share that light and be the positive change you wish to see in the world. There are many people out there who are wrestling with their own insecurities and hardships, and you can create a positive vibration that infuses those in need. We are all connected and the more love and positive vibration we send out, the more we will receive.

Not only are they beautiful, but crystals can help to improve the vibes around your living space and work areas. For more ideas on ways to use the healing powers of crystals for specific aspects of your life, home and work space, see the section in Part 3, Crystals for Home and Work (pages 20511).

Cleansing and Charging Crystals Like any other energy tools, crystals need to be cleansed periodically of dissonant energy. Use the table opposite to choose the method that resonates for you.

Method Description Freezer Place the crystal in the freezer for at least five hours or overnight.

Full Moon Place the crystal in the moonlight to cleanse and charge it.

Lunar water (see pages 1434) Water-safe, non-dissolvable crystals will enjoy the same cleanse from lunar water as the light of the Full Moon inbetween moon cycles.

Reiki Drawing in Reiki energy to your crystals is a beautiful way to cleanse and charge them so they are vibrating at their highest healing potential.

Salt Salt has wonderful cleansing properties both physically and spiritually. Place your crystal in a bowl of salt overnight to cleanse it. In the morning you can rinse off the crystal and discard the used salt.

Selenite Selenite is unique in that it is both self-cleansing and clears the energy attachments of other crystals. Simply place the two stones together in a bowl overnight to cleanse the other crystal.

Smudging (see pages 10512) Use smudging with sage or palo santo to clear away unwanted energy attachments by holding the crystal in the rising smoke.

Water Rinse the crystal under running water with the intention that all energy attachments wash away.

Solar energy Set your crystals in the sun long enough to warm them through. Be cautious with sun charging, as they can quickly get really hot to the touch.

Crystals and the Seven Chakras Throughout this book, youll find references to using crystals to balance and heal the chakras. Here is a handy reference guide to some of my favourite crystals for this type of work.

Chakra Crystals Root apache tears, black onyx, chrysocolla, desert rose, hematite, obsidian, smoky quartz, tigers eye, tourmaline Sacral apache tears, carnelian, citrine, moonstone, sunstone, tigers eye Solar plexus ametrine, black onyx, carnelian, citrine, pyrite, sunstone, tigers eye Heart amazonite, apache tears, chrysocolla, desert rose, green aventurine, jade, lepidolite, malachite, pink opal, rhodochrosite, rhodonite, rose quartz Throat amazonite, angelite, apatite, blue kyanite, blue lace agate, chrysocolla, lapis lazuli, turquoise Third eye amethyst, apatite, black onyx, blue kyanite, labradorite, lapis lazuli, lepidolite, moonstone, selenite Crown amethyst, ametrine, desert rose, moonstone, selenite All chakras clear quartz, jasper, lepidolite, shungite How to Create a Crystal Grid A crystal grid consists of an arrangement of crystals that are arranged in a geometric pattern with a specific intention in mind. Depending on the properties of the stones, they can be used for any manner of outcomes, such as health and happiness, wealth and security, love and relationships.

There are entire books written on making crystal grids with beautiful and expensive crystals set up in gorgeous, ornate settings. I had read many of them, yet was still at a loss as to how to create my own grid or how to copy those gorgeous set-ups. I went into my local American Indian store, prepared to spend a fortune on stones, and was given invaluable advice instead. After all that effort, I discovered that my intention was really the most important thing.

Simply put, you dont need to spend a fortune or use exactly the same stones as shown in the books: just let your intuition guide you, as your intention is the key to manifesting with crystal grids. You are welcome to make yours as beautiful or as simple as you feel called to. If you dont have a large crystal collection (yet!), you can also incorporate natural elements such as sea shells, flowers or herbs to your grid in what is called a mandala  in an intricate and symbolic geometric pattern. You can also choose to include a photograph of a loved one or lunar water (see pages 1434) as the focus of intention.

Once you have arranged crystals, there is no time limit as to how long your grid should be left in place. I have one I leave out each year for my personal natal chart, but for healing sessions I create them each hour. Ive also created them on the dining table before a special family occasion to bring in that extra touch of love and connection. (If you do the same, just remove the grid before your guests arrive or when you set the table for the meal.) Every grid serves their purpose for the time needed, so dont stress over time limitations. When it comes to energy, remember that it is not bound by the same laws of space and time as we are.

MAKE YOUR OWN CRYSTAL GRID Before you begin, decide what your intention is in making a crystal grid and the outcome that you are aiming for.

You will need: a selection of crystals with properties that harmonize with your intention location with a flat surface (e.g. table, nightstand, patio, dining table) Optional: flowers and herbs to act as amplifiers, and/or an attractive cloth or tray on which to arrange your crystals Step 1: Decide where you will create your grid and make this area your sacred space.

Step 2: Choose the crystal you want to use to symbolize your intention and, holding your intention in mind, place the crystal at the center of your chosen location. For example: Amethyst - for divine connection, enlightenment, sleep and crown chakra healing Citrine - for inner strength, confidence and solar plexus chakra healing Green aventurine - for physical health and heart chakra healing Rose quartz - for love, self-love and heart chakra healing Tourmaline - for protection and root chakra healing Step 3: Add more crystals. Place each additional crystal around your center stone in a mostly symmetrical geometric shape, with the intention that each crystal will support your focus of intention. Crystals are rarely exactly the same size, so dont worry if the symmetry isnt perfect. Circles, squares, triangles and ovals are the easiest shapes to create at first, and you can always add more stones as you go along. I love to use the Seed of Life geometric grid for my home, but you can choose the one that resonates for you. See overleaf for some examples to choose from.

Fibonacci Spiral Borromean Rings Seed of Life Metatrons Cube Interlocking Circles Triquetra Star of David Flower of Life Step 4 (optional): Add your amplifiers. Place smaller crystals and/or herbs and flowers inbetween each crystal, being mindful of your grids shape and the properties of the stones, herbs and flowers. To infuse your gird with love energy, for example, you could add rose quartz pebbles; for added clarity and protection, some rosemary sprigs.

Step 5: Admire your creation. Take a moment to sit back, admire what youve made and make any adjustments to areas that dont yet feel right.

Step 6: Bring your hands to prayer position in gratitude for the blessings you are receiving from your crystal grids focus of intention. Leave it undisturbed for as long as you feel called to.

Congratulations! You have just manifested beautiful positive change into your life!

Creating grids is an amazing way to infuse your life with the magical energy of crystals. Remember that everything happens with divine timing and trust that the energy youve just created is being sent out to the Universe to transmute and return positive energy to your world. Keep practicing with different crystals to find what works best for your life as it too changes. If creating crystal grids becomes part of your spiritual practice, enjoy the shift in consciousness and energy with gratitude.

Intention Candles Think of all the birthdays when youve made a wish and blown out the candles on your cake. You were not just hoping but declaring that your wishes come true. It is very much the same with an intention candle: you are asking and allowing your candle to hold space for your wishes. Manifesting intentions with candles has been practiced since ancient times, as the combination of fire and intention is a powerful tool. When you add a candle to your wishes, you are inviting the warmth and light of the flame to raise the vibration of your chosen intention.

Today, candles continue to be used for a wide range of purposes, besides providing light. They are lit to pay respect to the departed and as part of religious services, as well as for celebrations, receptions, romantic dinners, intimate settings and in rituals ranging from the ceremonial to their use as tools in magic rites or spells.

In the Persian culture that I married into, we light candles at the Persian New Year (Norooz) every spring equinox on our Haft Seen table (kind of like a New Year altar that has special meanings for each item placed on it) to represent enlightenment and happiness for the year ahead. Likewise, I use them on my Beltane altar honoring my Scottish family heritage. Candles bring ambiance and meaning to any special occasion.

Candles can also pull in the energy of their surroundings, so its a great idea to place a crystal nearby, or even create a crystal grid around your candle to infuse it with the energy of your stones. Likewise, essential oils can be a fabulous addition to a candle ritual. To use them, simply place a drop or two onto the candle and rub it in. Not only does this smell amazing and delight the senses, it also infuses the candle with the energy of the oil. Different oils have different magical properties, so choose one that applies to your purpose (see the list of essential oils on pages 1014).

Remember to respect the energy of fire by always keeping the lit candle in a safe place to burn all the way down. (Bath tubs, showers  away from curtains  or glass holders are great for long-burning ones.) Once it has finished burning, you can either bury the finished wax to allow Mother Earth to take it for transmutation or dispose of it in the garbage outside your home. You definitely want to dispose of it outside: the same as with any smoke rising, you want that energy outside in the Universe, not trapped inside your living space.

Our mood and vibration can easily be influenced by our surroundings, and intention candles are an easy fix for shifting your vibe to one of a higher vibration. Creating an intention candle is easier that you might think. Next time youre at the market, shopping for your home  or perhaps you have an unused candle at home  hold the candle between your hands and use your intuition to sense what it can bring you. Once you are ready to use it, write on the label what its for so you dont forget later. And be sure to use a new candle for each new intention you set.

Intention Candle Uses and Burn Times Create your own candle to suit your needs. While some start working as soon as you light them, others may need longer to shift the energy, so follow your intuition.

Friendship: If theres tension in the air, my friend will light her friendship candle for approximately 30 minutes to two hours to restore harmony to our group.

Grounding: Get your head out of the clouds and refocus on the physical plane. Best to keep this to a 15-minute burn time or you may end up spinning over worries.

Sex and passion: This is wonderful for re-sparking a relationship and getting your mojo back. Use your candle to light up your intimate moments together.

Like a boss: A motivation candle for handling all the responsibilities youve been putting off, or if you have a lot on your plate that needs to get done.

Love: We all need some extra love in our life sometimes! This candle is for when youve been feeling a little low. You can light it while you pamper yourself, or to improve the mood of the household during a family get-together.

My best friend has a thing for magical candles. She has noticed that some are magical and really work to support her intentions, while others did nothing. Shes found her most magical ones at discount stores, so dont feel pressured to rush out and buy the most expensive; money has no claim or influence on this sort of energy. You will probably also need to try them out to see which ones bring in the beautiful intentions youre sending out into the Universe and which are just regular candles that are great for dcor, setting the mood for some lovely ambiance at home, or on your altar. These regular ones are also useful for moon rituals, to light your paper of intentions/releases.

Using Intention Candles in Rituals If in doubt over which color to use, you can always light a white candle  a symbol of truth and purity. White is used in religious ceremonies as well as in pagan rituals and everything inbetween. White is the color associated with the protection of the angels and the Source (God, the Universe, the All-Knowing). I love white for its angelic connection, but if youre wanting to add a little more focused magic to your intentions, choose a color that resonates best with that wish.

Red: Root chakra, courage, sexual love and lust Orange: Sacral chakra, encouragement and joy Yellow: Solar plexus chakra, protection, strength Green: Heart chakra, abundance, prosperity, physical health and money Pink: Heart chakra, soul love and friendship Blue: Throat chakra, communication, creativity and mental health Purple: Third eye chakra, psychic connection and ambition.

White: Crown chakra, angelic/divine connection, truth and purity.

Brown: Earth and animal connection.

Black: Protection against negativity and banishment.

Gold: Financial increase and connection to the Suns energy.

Silver: Intuition and connection to the moons energy.

I love using candles in many different situations, but there seems to be something very special about using their warmth and light for the purpose of manifestation. Much like blowing out the candles on a cake, they allow your wishes to rise up to the Universe to transmute, heal and return for your highest good.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Light a blue candle to open your throat chakra with communication or creativity as focus.

CHAKRA HEALING RITUAL WITH INTENTION CANDLES This ritual is based on the steps in the previous exercise. However, when using candles for chakra healing, choose the corresponding color for the chakra you intend to heal (see The Seven Chakras, pages 235). Its best to focus on one chakra at a time if using colored candles. If working with more than one chakra, you can include crystals for the chakras you wish to heal in a circle around a single white candle. (See the chapter Crystals for specific chakra crystal choices.) You will need: 1 candle in the appropriate color matches or lighter fireproof candle dish or holder tool for inscribing on candle Optional: pen and paper, crystals to represent the chakras you wish to heal Step 1: In your sacred space, inscribe on the candle or write down on a piece of paper the struggles or what youd like to improve upon in relation to your chosen chakra. For example, these might be Speak my truth or I release creative blocks for your throat chakra or Divine guidance and I can find my true path for your crown chakra.

Step 2: Follow the steps in the previous exercise, burning the note and leaving the candle to burn down if you so wish.

Step 3: Let go of your attachment to these struggles, in the knowledge that you are taking an active role in healing them.

Step 4: Close your session by blowing out the candle if necessary and giving thanks to the Universe and yourself for releasing your struggles and balancing your chakra(s).

The Violet Flame The violet flame is a powerful healing and protective tool that has been used throughout the ages. The beauty of the violet flame incorporates the power of light, color and divine connection together with one of the four elements - the element of fire. Although there is no literal flame involved, the sense of warmth generated from the energy can be as comforting as a warm bath or mothers womb, restoring the feeling of safety and security that many of us have lost on our journey in life. It is a powerful tool that anyone can invoke with some practice and visualization.

This beautiful healing light will help cleanse and seal your aura; remove uninvited entities and energy blocks; restore your sense of peace; protect you from jealous and hurtful energy vampires; give you confidence in social situations; heal old hurts from this life and those of the past; cut energetic cords of attachment; as well as raise your vibration to that of loving peace. Once you have mastered the method, you will even be able to send the protective violet flame to those you love who are in need of its beautiful, healing light.

In historical writings, the color violet has been associated with the Ascended Masters, those spiritual guides of the past who transcend religion, denomination, creed and conviction. The most well-known Ascended Masters include Jesus Christ, Gautama Buddha, Quan Yin and the Egyptian goddess Isis. The violet flame is especially associated with the Ascended Master Saint Germain, who was said not to age according to many accounts. Sometimes referred to as Master R, he was reputed to be an 18th-century alchemist and crystal collector, and confidant of the French King Louis XV.

In modern times, purple remains the color of royalty in England. It features in songs such as Purple Haze by Jimi Hendrix and Purple Rain by Prince, and in countless spiritual writings on cleansing the aura and healing the soul because of its divine connection with the third eye and crown chakras. Purple, or violet, is one of natures most healing colors, and is used in color therapy for soothing mental and emotional stress. It is often found in nurseries to create a calm and serene environment.

How to Heal with the Violet Flame Today, the divine healing properties of the violet flame can be used for your own healing, for healing others, and for high vibration of the spirit. Visualizing this majestic color can do more than put you at ease; it can help you heal on a soul level.

Here are some simple methods you can use to invoke the violet flame and raise your vibration to that of love and peace. The violet flame will feel like a warm soft energy blanket surrounding you, and if you raise it when practicing Reiki, you will notice your hands become significantly warmer as well. My own Reiki clients have commented on seeing purple lights flashing around them without my telling them I am invoking the violet flame.

These rituals are wonderful to practice before an event or where youll be around a lot of people, as well as afterward to recharge and cleanse yourself of any and all negative energy you may have picked up while being out. Likewise, if youre feeling low, invoking the violet flame is a great way to raise your vibration! Choose the method that resonates most with you, or try them all before deciding on your favorite.

KUNDALINI REIKI RITUAL This is the method I was taught by my own Reiki master, which Im delighted to share with you now. Kundalini is a form of divine female energy that resides at the base of the spine. However, you do not need to be familiar with kundalini energy to use this method, as the following ritual will still be a wonderful way to work with the violet flame.

Step 1: Begin in a seated position with your eyes closed or at rest, slightly open.

Step 2: With a large exhale through your mouth, envision a beautiful purple glow at the base of your spine, while you draw in your pelvic floor muscles. At the same time, place the tip of your tongue on the roof of your mouth at the highest point behind your teeth.

Step 3: As you draw in a large, slow, deep breath through your nose, keeping your tongue in place, feel that warm purple glow rising up through your body from the pelvic floor all the way to the crown of your head.

Step 4: As you exhale slowly through your mouth (like you would do when fogging up a pair of glasses to clean them), allow this purple light to blow out of your mouth in a swirl of light that will surround your exterior body like a cloud.

Step 5: Repeat until you feel the glow on the inside and outside of your being. It may take some practice to fully realize the sensation, but keep trying with each inhale and exhale. Once you feel the warm glow surrounding you, you will know you have activated the violet flame.

You can also use the violet flame to blow energy to specific parts of the body where you have pain or on to others to help heal them.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Close your eyes and envision wrapping yourself in a large, warm, fuzzy purple blanket as you hug yourself. Know you are safe within your purple blanket.

PURPLE CANDLE RITUAL Sometimes we need help visualizing the purple glow. A candle is a wonderful tool to help you do this.

You will need: 1 purple candle lighter or matches Step 1: Light the candle and stare into the flame until you see the halo that surrounds it. You will notice after a short time that the color is, in fact, a light to medium purple. If it helps you, allow your gaze to relax and shift until the flame is slightly out of focus.

Step 2: With each inhale, visualize that purple halo getting larger until you are completely encased by its healing glow. Hold this step as long as you feel called to.

Step 3: Close the ritual with a moment of gratitude.

Some people might experience astral projection when using this method  so if you feel like you are outside yourself, its okay! You are safe and having a beautiful moment  enjoy it.

AMETHYST CRYSTAL RITUAL As with the purple candle ritual, the amethyst crystal ritual will help you to visualize the violet flame, and it also holds the incredible healing energy of the crystal itself. Be sure to create your sacred space before you begin.

You will need: 1 amethyst crystal (or more if you wish) Step 1: Sit comfortably yet upright, holding the amethyst in your cupped hands or on your lap. Inhale slowly through your nose and exhale through your mouth as you focus your gaze on the amethyst.

Step 2: As you breathe and focus, allow the energy and light of the crystal to rise, visualizing the purple glow around the amethyst growing larger and larger, until you are completely surrounded and at one with the energy of the crystal and its purple light energy.

Step 3: Hold this moment of being encased in purple light for as long as you feel called to.

Step 4: Close the ritual with a moment of gratitude.

With practice, you will feel the warm glow of the amethysts light and the violet flame surrounding you, wrapping you in an embrace of love, and relieving you of physical, mental, emotional and spiritual pain or trauma. This may be repeated daily for best results and anytime during moments of stress or anxiety.

VIOLET FLAME MEDITATION RITUAL During meditation, there is no right or wrong time to begin focusing on the violet flame. You can direct its healing energy to wherever you feel the need, although I find it most helpful to visualize your entire person being encompassed by its light. As you relax and focus, you will simply begin to see purple behind your closed lids.

Step 1: As you breathe, focus on the purple light behind your lids and allow it to spread all around your body, paying attention to those places in particular that need healing.

Step 2: Notice your breath is cooler on the inhale and warmer on the exhale as you activate the violet flame.

Step 3: With each exhale, visualize that purple glow completely surrounding you in a warm, soft embrace. Your energy field or aura is being cleansed and sealed within the light glow.

Step 4: All negative energy is leaving your being with each exhale. You will begin to notice feeling warm and safe within the purple light.

Step 5: Close the ritual with a moment of gratitude. There is often a feeling of euphoria or light-headedness after a violet flame meditation. Your physical body is just adjusting to the shift in energy. Allow yourself a few moments to get centered and grounded before you continue your day.

SENDING THE VIOLET FLAME RITUAL Once youve become familiar with the energy of the violet flame, why not send some of this healing light to your loved ones? One of my own best friends suffers from anxiety. She is an empath as well, so social situations can be very stressful for her. Times like those are perfect for sending the violet flame to loved ones like her.

Step 1: Take a moment to find your place of peace and visualize your loved one close to you. You can also focus on the persons picture if that helps you form a connection.

Step 2: Visualize the violet flame rising up through you from your root chakra to your crown chakra. Then look at your loved one with your minds eye and visualize wrapping them in a large, warm, purple blanket of light; allow that light to swirl around them in a gentle and calming flow of energy. All of their body, from head to toes, above and below them should be encased in this beautiful, warm, purple glow.

Step 3: Hold this visualization of flowing light for as long as you feel called to, or until you see your loved one completely engulfed in the violet flame energy.

Step 4: Next, youll want to watch them step away from you, severing the connection between you, and continuing on their path bathed in the violet flame.

Step 5: Finish with a moment of gratitude for the healing energy you have just shared.

VIOLET FLAME AFFIRMATION RITUAL Your words carry the powerful vibration of sound, and by aligning your energy with sounds healing frequencies you can achieve deep healing. Repeat this affirmation seven times to invoke the violet flame: Violet flame, do surround me, Invite my soul to purity; Oh, violet flame that heals my soul, Let me be free of all negativity; Encase my being in your protective glow, That your healing flame does cleanse me.

You may hold this space of warmth and healing energy for as long as you feel is needed. It is during this time of being within its warm glow or flame that you are healing, cleansing and replenishing your inner self, as well as your physical, emotional and spiritual being, past and present.

It is important to note that while invoking the violet flame, everyones experience is different, because we are all different. So, if you find yourself having an out-of-body experience, falling asleep, having visions of what could be past lives, tingling throughout the body, or any other experience or sensation, know that you are safe and it is simply a part of your unique healing journey. Continue to practice any or all of these methods daily and watch as your life improves and your feelings of wellbeing continue to become even stronger.

Sound Healing Few things in life can shift the energy and emotions of people faster than the power of sound. Music has been used by humans for as long as we know. Early peoples created instruments from nature and used their bodies and voices during rituals, ceremonies and gatherings, much like we do today. It is believed that healing with sound dates back to the ancient Greeks, who used it to cure mental disorders, as reflected in the Hippocratic philosophy. Today, you can experience healing in the form of a sound bath, a meditative ritual composed of sounds made with crystal bowls and other musical instruments. Ever since my first sound bath, Ive always believed you havent lived until youve experienced one, so great was my physical, emotional and spiritual response. I literally felt myself floating and had visions of being out in the Universe. I could feel the vibration of the sounds in every cell of my body.

Sound has such a powerful effect on our energy, our emotions and our memory. Sound will even affect the shape and structure of water molecules. The vibration of our words and thoughts have the ability to do this as well, as was discovered by Dr Masaru Emoto (19431914), a Japanese scientist. In his studies, he found that classical music and words of love created beautiful molecular structures in water, while words of fear, anger and heavy metal music disturbed the water into unorganized and unsightly shapes  or none at all.

Water holds memory, which may explain why when we hear certain songs, we are brought back to a point in time in our lives. After all, over 70 per cent of the human body is made up of water, and sound penetrates every cell of our physical body, so using it as a tool is a natural and simple way to change and raise our vibration. When we listen to music we love, we will often find ourselves moving our bodies to its rhythm, even subconsciously, and feeling happier and more in harmony with ourselves and our environment. We all have that special song that tugs on our heart strings, bringing up memories of a loved one or a time in our lives from the past.

Studies have shown that sound healing can directly affect our emotions and vibration; improve our immune function; lower stress levels; improve the health of premature infants; soothe insomnia and anxiety; help us work more productively, improve morale of soldiers; reduce pain; help patients with dementia; support cancer treatment; ward off negative entities; and improve our overall state of wellbeing.1 Sound penetrates the meridian system of energy in the body in a similar way to acupuncture, but without the needles.

While I was recovering from back surgery in the hospital, a dear friend came to the hospital with her collection of crystal singing bowls tuned to 528 Hz and performed a sound bath for me. She carefully wheeled in as many as seven crystal bowls on a stroller and set them out on a blanket next to my hospital bed. When she started to play them, I could feel the vibrations of the sound throughout my body, creating a shift in my own vibration and easing my pain. She transformed my room into an energy healing center, and the nurses, my husband and the doctors were amazed (and relieved!) by the immediate reduction in my pain levels. During the session, she also laid crystals on my chakras, and I performed a self-treatment of Reiki. It was a powerful combination of sound, crystal energy and Reiki energy that had immediate and profound effects on my surgery-ravaged body and my declining mental state. It was the beginning of a long journey of healing that would take months to achieve, but it was also the beginning of my absolute faith in energy healing.

One of my most treasured gifts from my husband is a gorgeous wind chime tuned to the note of D that he gave me while I was recovering at home from surgery, and which I keep just outside my healing room office today. The amazing sounds of the chimes vibrate and send out healing sound waves with the slightest touch of wind. I can feel their magical vibration any time I am in my space and they always fill me with the incredible sense of love, both from my husbands intention and their frequency. His love and their vibration were an important part of my own healing while I recovered from my back surgery. It is no coincidence that the note of D resonates with the heart chakra and the sacral chakra, the location of my spinal injury.

No matter what struggles you are facing in your own life, be it physical, emotional, mental or spiritual, sound healing is a powerful tool you can easily incorporate into your own healing journey. You dont need to invest in crystal sound bowls or wind chimes to create a shift in your vibration. There are many inexpensive tools, like tuning forks, Tibetan bells or small singing bowls, available in most countries, and of course sound baths are available on YouTube most anywhere with WiFi.

Healing Frequencies There are different frequencies for specific types of healing according to the Solfeggio system (see page 98), as well as notes specific to the chakras which differ slightly in the Tibetan and Vedic chakra systems (see the table below). Choose whichever system resonates best for you and your circumstances, and you will literally feel the shift and be thankful for the beautiful healing power of sound.

Chakra sounds The table below shows the notes in the chromatic scale which are used in the Tibetan and Vedic systems for healing each of the chakras, to balance, remove blockages and raise their vibration.

Your voice is just as powerful a healing tool as any musical instrument. In the chapter on chakras, you will find a list of the Bija mantras (page 27), used for thousands of years in Vedic meditation for healing and balancing the chakra centers.

Solfeggio frequencies The beautiful and healing Solfeggio frequencies are based on Pythagorean sacred geometry. They have a fascinating mystical and religious history, which begins with the work of an 11th-century monk called Guido dArezzo, who devised a way to teach his students how to sight-read music. His system forms the basis of modern music notation. A version of the vocal note scale that he developed is likewise still used today and is known as solfege. As the German-American musicologist Professor William Apel discovered, dArezzos original scale  ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la  can be found in the monks Hymn to St John the Baptist and occurs in other sacred music, including a number of Gregorian chants.

In the 1970s, an American neuropathic physician called Dr Joseph Puleo built upon this finding and, using the ancient Pythagorean method of reducing numbers to the single digits, found a series of repeating codes based on the sacred numbers three, six and nine in the Bibles Book of Numbers, Chapter 7, verses 1283, which in turn correspond with the vocal note scale ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la. He is responsible for deciphering these sound frequencies and revealing how they relate to energies for balancing the mind, body and spirit. The numbers three, six and nine lie at the heart of the Solfeggio frequencies.

The Solfeggio frequencies continue to offer a way to align our own frequency to those that are known to be naturally healing. But how can we do this? If you have the opportunity to visit a sound healing center, I would highly recommend it; however, for many that is not an option. If this applies to you, you can find recordings of the Solfeggio frequencies online, or you could even purchase an instrument that is tuned to the specific frequency you desire for healing. The Solfeggio frequencies are as follows: Syllable Frequency Healing UT 396 Hz Liberating guilt and fear.

RE 417 Hz Undoing situations and facilitating change.

MI 528 Hz Transformation and miracles. Mi derives from the phrase MI-ra gestorum in dArrezos Hymn to St John the Baptist, which means miracle in Latin. This is claimed to be the exact frequency used by genetic biochemists to repair broken DNA  the genetic blueprint upon which life is based.

FA 639 Hz Connecting and relationships.

SOL 741 Hz Awakening intuition.

LA 852 Hz Returning to spiritual order.

Using the same Pythagorean method, three additional vibrational tones were discovered by Dr Leonard Horowitz toward the end of the twentieth century. These are: Frequency Healing 174 Hz Alleviates pain.

285 Hz Heals tissues.

936 Hz Highest plane of consciousness.

Interestingly, the frequency 432 Hz, called Verdis A, has been found to be closest mathematically to our Universes natural vibration. Its been pointed out that that frequency was used by the composers Verdi and Mozart, as well as the ancient Egyptians and Greeks, in their compositions.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Hum the sound LAM for three to five minutes to ground yourself in times of stress.

Healing with Sound Creating a daily practice using sound is a wonderful addition to your healing journey. You will find that life flows in a more positive state when you invite this powerful healing tool into your life. Sound vibration can shift the energy to the positive within yourself, your loved ones and your environment.

You can, for example, use sound to take your meditations to the next level. While many struggle to calm their thoughts during meditation, using sound as a focus can help soothe the mind and body without any extra effort on your part. Many people report visions, have out-of-body experiences, receive messages and clarity on issues and experience deep relaxation when using sound as part of their meditations. Simply playing your favorite relaxing meditation music can be effective. Or search online for sounds with those frequencies that resonate most for you in the moment.

Aromatherapy For centuries, our senses have been delighted by the healing power of essential oils. They have so many health benefits, from soothing sore throats to calming headaches and settling an upset stomach, but did you realize what an important tool they are for raising your vibes? Theres a reason for the old saying stop and smell the roses, and its worth more than a passing thought. Through the power of our nose, and a few beautiful scents that are also readily available in most markets, we can switch our mood from tears of sadness to tears of joy.

Essential oils are concentrated plant extracts. To benefit from them, you can simply inhale them straight from the bottle or by using a diffuser or humidifier. You can also dilute a couple of drops of essential oil in a carrier oil such as almond oil and apply this directly to your skin, or add a few drops to your bath, shampoo or body wash. Always check labels, as some oils that are safe to use on your arms and legs might not be suited to other parts of the body, especially intimate areas, and dont use edible oils such as cumin oil on your skin. Take care if you are pregnant, on medication, or if you suspect you might have an allergic reaction. With these guidelines in mind, essential oils can become a beautiful part of your self-healing journey.

Raise Your Vibes Scents Sometimes, we find ourselves stuck in a funk, and it feels like no matter how much meditating or how many grounding exercises we do, we just cant move past that low vibrational feeling. And thats okay! We all have our moments, but we dont have to remain in that place of darkness  we can use essential oils to lift our spirits and raise our vibes. The beautiful part of using essential oils is that you can use them as an additional tool with any of your other ritual practices.

For example, we might feel like were just not ourselves because our chakras are out of alignment, leading to a sense of being unbalanced. With the essential oils listed below, you can easily and effortlessly give your chakras the boost they need. (If youre not sure which of your energy centers is unbalanced, have a look at the chapter on chakras, specifically pages 245.) Give some of these beautiful scents a try and watch your vibe shift back into the positive. Essential oils are a powerful tool for lifting our spirits and energy vibration and one small bottle lasts a long time when you use it sparingly.

Bergamot oil: Brings a sense of ease to an overburdened mind, balance, prosperity, happiness; use for protection, financial abundance, connection to the divine, and solar plexus and heart chakras.

Chamomile oil: Brings a sense of peace, soothing the body, mind and spirit from worries; use to relax before sleep, to attract love, for psychic protection, to ease the worries associated with spiritual growth, release expectations, and heart chakra healing.

Cedar wood oil: Brings in a sense of divine connection, grounding, positivity, and dispels negative vibes; use to connect with your inner truth, divine guidance, and root chakra healing.

Cinnamon oil: Brings a sense of passion and love, financial abundance, protection and inner strength; use to bring in abundance, fulfill your intention, and for root and solar plexus chakra healing.

Eucalyptus oil: Brings a sense of peace, freedom and restorative vibrancy, opens airways and purifies the energetic body; use to clean your energy of negativity, open your ability to speak from a place of love, and for heart and throat chakra healing.

Frankincense oil: Brings a sense of enlightenment, focus, protection, purification, overcoming stress and despair, boosts the immune system; use in rituals for divine connection, for cleansing your space of negativity after an illness, and for crown chakra healing.

Geranium oil: Brings a sense of peace, love and gentleness; use to ease the mind of worries, restore love to your environment, self-worth, and solar plexus and heart chakra healing.

Jasmine oil: Brings in a feeling of love, sensuality, purity, and beauty; use to release tension, remind you of whats important in life, and heart and third eye chakra healing.

Lavender oil: Brings in a sense of calm, quiet and sacredness; use to soothe nerves, treat sleeplessness and burns, and third eye and crown chakra healing.

Lemon oil: Brings in a boost of energy, detoxing the body and mind; use to cleanse your space of negativity, after illness, for empowerment, and solar plexus healing.

Myrrh oil: Brings a sense of spiritual and earthly connection and release from grief; use for protection, allowing negative spirits to move on, and root and crown chakra healing.

Orange oil: Brings in a sense of stress relief, cheerfulness, and lightening the mood of your space; use to relax in a stressful environment and for sacral chakra healing.

Oregano oil: Brings fidelity and joy to relationships, assists in releasing unhealthy attachments; use for psychic protection during rituals, cleansing the air after illness, and for sacral chakra healing.

Peppermint oil: Brings in a sense of relaxation and focus; use to soothe feelings of irritability, relax muscles and tension, open nasal passages, and for throat chakra healing.

Rose oil: Brings in a sense of beauty and love to your environment, use for self-love and heart chakra healing.

Rosemary oil: Brings in a sense of protection, concentration and clarity; use to connect with your awareness and dispel negative vibes, and for crown chakra healing.

Sandalwood oil: Brings clarity, inner peace, protection and connection to the divine; use to cleanse your space of negative energy and after illness, create divine connection, and for third eye and crown chakra healing.

Tangerine oil: Brings in a sense of joy, stress relief, a boost in physical energy; use to break the chain of negative thought patterns and sacral chakra healing.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Add a few drops of geranium essential oil to a diffuser to permeate your aura and uplift your mood.

Smudging Ever notice how after youve been around certain people or places, you just dont feel yourself? Maybe you had a gathering at your home and, after guests have left, you notice the energy doesnt feel right. This is very normal, because everyone has their own energetic footprint and even your most loved friends and family can be carrying the weight of negative energy theyve picked up during the day. We never truly know what a person is going through, or how they respond to things like jealousy, heartache, loss and fatigue. Those feelings all carry with them negative energy that, in turn, affects our own energetic body and mood.

We have already touched upon smudging in earlier chapters and how it can enhance rituals. Burning resins, herbs and certain types of wood has been carried out for various purposes throughout human history. The indigenous people of the Americas have used smudging for thousands of years as part of their ceremonies, religious rites, to drive off negativity, and for raising the vibration of the community. Today, the way we practice burning a dried herb or resin is borrowed heavily from them, while the use of a feather to wave the smoke, through burning charcoal, stems more from ancient Eastern cultures such as ancient Persia. In India and China, burning incense and moxa (also known as mugwort) are used for a similar range of purposes. Ancient Egypt is among the first recorded cultures to use burning scented woods for the purpose of dispelling negativity and raising the vibration, and in more recent times, organized religions have adopted a form of this practice, using incense in their houses of worship, for weddings, funerals and during prayer as a sign of their prayers (or souls of the dead) rising up to heaven. Regardless of origin, the purpose of the practice is the same and its no small wonder people today have adopted the use of smudging for their own vibration-raising rituals and ceremonies.

The different herbs, resins and woods are used either in sacred holders, atop burning charcoal, or in sacred fires as a way of cleansing people and places of sacred space. I use smudging myself daily as a method of keeping my vibes high and my spiritual tools free of negative energy. Certain smudges such as California sage are also wonderful as natural air purifiers, as the smoke kills off bacteria, microbes and fungus. Very often throughout history, people believed that sickness was caused by evil spirits, and burned sage and other materials as a way of cleansing themselves of those evil entities. There is an element of truth to that which makes sense even in todays scientific world: if we cleanse the air in our homes, we are also keeping ourselves healthy and free of the germs that make us sick. I always burn sage to cleanse the air in my own home when someone has had an illness, both to shorten the length of the cold and to keep it from spreading to other members in the household.

Practicing smudging is an easy way to wash away those bad vibes, cleanse the air and allow space for positivity. You can do this for your car, home, your crystals, spiritual tools, pets and yourself anytime you notice the energy shift into a negative vibe, or simply have the desire to raise your vibes. Using a smudge will also allow you to create your own sacred space. Its important to respect the energy of fire anytime youre working with smudging, as an accidental fire is the last thing you want.

A Quick Guide to Smudges and Incense There are many different types of smudges and incense used, but these are the most common: Bay leaves: Dried shrub leaves used to amplify healing abilities, protection, psychic enhancement, success, and for writing wishes and manifesting. Anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial, eases digestion, anti-fungal, and a stress reliever. Origin: Mediterranean region.

Cedar: Dried tree leaves used for purifying, divine connection, inviting positive energy and eliminating negative energy. Origin: Mediterranean region and Western Himalayans.

Cinnamon: A tree bark used to promote financial abundance, protection, love, luck, strength and lust. Origin: Sri Lanka, Malabar Coast of India and Myanmar.

Copal: A resin used to clear negativity and for spiritual cleansing and divine connection. Origin: East Africa and South America.

Esfand: The dried seeds of rue used since ancient Persia to ward off the evil eye and clear negative energy. Origin: Middle East.

Frankincense: A resin used for spiritual enlightenment, focus, protection, purification, overcoming stress and despair; also boosts immune system, diminishes signs of ageing, cleanses the air of bacteria. Origin: Middle East Hibiscus: Dried flowers used to restore life force and for rejuvenation and divination. Origin: Asia.

Holy basil: An herb used for protection, healing, balancing the chakras, embalming, as an antioxidant; anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and anti-inflammatory. Origin: Indian subcontinent.

Juniper: Dried leaves of shrubs used for detoxifying the physical body, defining boundaries, clearing negativity, inviting abundance, success and blessing a new home or venture. Origin: Northern hemisphere.

Lavender: Dried plant used for healing, calming, purifying, and restful sleep. Origin: Mediterranean region.

Mugwort: An herb used as protection from psychic attack, and for astral projection protection, purification, connection with the divine feminine within, and psychic enhancement. Used as moxa in Traditional Chinese Medicine to turn breech babies by warming points on the toes. Origin: Europe and East Asia.

Myrrh: A resin used for healing, allowing negative spirits to move on. Used by ancient Egyptians in rituals of healing and embalming. Origin: Middle East.

Nag champa: This combination of sandalwood and frangipani in an incense or essential oil is a wonderful tool used for divine connection, clearing negativity, bringing in positive energy and calming the environment. Origin: Indian subcontinent.

Palo santo: Wood from fallen trees that clears away negative energy, leaving only positive energy; also good for psychic protection, deep healing of the physical body, clarity and creativity. Origin: South America.

Rose: Dried petals from roses used to bring in love, for self-love and beauty. Origin: Northern hemisphere.

Rosemary: A herb that banishes negativity, clears the mind, promotes psychic protection and enhances focus; also spiritual and physical purification. Origin: Mediterranean region.

Sandalwood: A dried wood used for clarity, to strengthen spiritual connection to the divine, calming the emotional and spiritual bodies, promoting inner peace and as an anti-bacterial, antiseptic and expectorant. Origin: South Eastern Asia and Pacific Islands.

Sweetgrass: Dried and braided long grass used for attracting positive energy. Considered a sacred smudge by American Indians. Origin: North America and Eurasia.

White Sage: A dried plant that cleanses the air of microbes, bacteria and mold spores, and clears all energy  the bad and good  creating a clean slate. Enhances intuition, protects your space. Origin: Southern and Baja California.

Yarrow: Dried plant used for healing, psychic protection and for invoking the goddess energy of Venus, inviting love. One of the oldest known smudges dating back to Neanderthal age. Origin: Northern hemisphere.

Yerba santa: Dried leaves used for protection, purification, healing, spiritual strength, love, empowerment, setting boundaries, psychic ability and releasing emotional pain. Origin: California and Oregon, USA.

If making your own bundles of herbs and flowers, use 100 per cent cotton or hemp twine, so that they will burn cleanly.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Breathe in the scent of a fresh sprig of lavender to calm the nerves. If smudging with lavender, hold at arms length to avoid inhaling the smoke.

Methods of Burning There are three ways you can burn your smudge stick, depending on the type you have chosen. Some are available only as a resin and most can be found as incense sticks or cones if the actual plants are not accessible to you.

Resin method When using resins, you will need a small fireproof pot with a secure handle. (Butter melting pots or Turkish coffee pots are great sizes.) Hold your charcoal piece over an open flame of your stove or lighter using tongs and once it is smoldering red, drop it gently into the pot. Sprinkle your choice of resin on top of the burning coal. A little goes a long way. Using a feather, hand fan or folded piece of paper, fan the smoke away from you.

Burning Resins and Incense When using resins and incense for smudging, its best to heat them in a small saucepan with a long handle or a Turkish coffee pot that you can use safely. Incense burners will get far too hot to touch.

Smudge stick method When using a smudge stick, hold it to a flame (a lighter, matches or candle will do fine) and gently wave the stick or use your fan until the flame goes out. Hold your fireproof dish or abalone shell where it will catch the ashes as you walk around your space. Using a feather, hand fan or folded piece of paper, fan the smoke away from you.

Incense stick and cone method When using incense sticks or cones, youll need a safe way to catch the ashes  and always keep fire safety in mind, as with the other methods. For the cone, you can also use a small pot as you would with the resin method. For an incense stick, use a special tray with a small hole or a small bowl of sand to hold it steady and catch the ashes. Using a feather, hand fan or folded piece of paper, fan the smoke away from you.

Once youve decided on your choice of smudge, you can easily add this tool to your rituals when creating your sacred space, as well as for cleansing your aura, home and spiritual tools. If you are sensitive to smoke, you can use essential oils instead. Many of these smudges are also available as an essential oil.

Affirmations and Mantras Our words carry more power than we often give them credit for. Learning to use them in a way that raises our vibration is a gift we can bestow on ourselves with affirmations and mantras. As recently as the 1970s, Western therapists and scientists discovered the connection between positive thinking and positive life changes. However, the origin of affirmations is very close to mantras  man meaning to think in Sanskrit; tra, to liberate  and has been used for thousands of years in Buddhism and ancient Sanskrit teachings. While Sanskrit mantras are sacred refrains, passed down the generations, affirmations tend to be motivational phrases tailored for individual use. Today, many of the most successful people in the world use positive affirmations, including Oprah Winfrey, Will Smith, Tony Robbins and Arnold Schwarzenegger, to name a few.

Back in my own acting days, I was taught to use affirmations to both open my throat and voice and instill confidence before going on stage or walking into an audition. I realized later that using affirmations was also a wonderful tool for my throat and solar plexus chakras, which helped explain how I was more successful than some of my peers in booking acting jobs. I later used affirmations to assist with childbirth after reading about how they help mothers endure the pains of labor and delivery. Now, on days I find myself struggling with my own vibration, I stand in front of the mirror and repeat positive affirmations to myself to shift my mood from low to high vibrational  its kind of like giving myself a pep talk. Youll find the use of affirmations today in sports too, with coaches firing up their players with phrases such as, Whos going to win?, to which they shout in response: WE ARE GONNA WIN! Many life coaches and therapists use also positive affirmations in their practice to help their clients.

The key to using affirmations for raising your vibes is to look at what your struggle is and then using an affirmation that is the opposite of it. So, for example, two weeks after having an operation, I was feeling exhausted, defeated and in pain. I took a dry-erase marker and wrote in bold letters on my guestroom closet doors, I AM . . . PAIN-FREE, LOVED, STRONG. I keep those words there even today, in what is now my office/healing room, as a reminder of how far Ive come. I wasnt feeling any of those things at the time, but I made the choice to shift my consciousness  and you can too.

The more you use affirmations, the more your mind begins to believe and accept them. Of course, you can and should use affirmations that resonate for you, as mine may not be what you need  and thats okay; we all have our own journey. Those who struggle with self-confidence or self-love benefit greatly from using affirmations that support insecurity or self-deprecating behaviors and thoughts. (For more on healing from these, see the chapter Work on Your Self-Love, pages 18290.) Its important to remember that, as with all energy healing tools, or any other therapy for that matter, healing is done in layers, so be patient with yourself as you create changes. I have personally spent a lot of time in physical therapy and I can say with all sincerity that I did not always look forward to going to my sessions, especially in the beginning. During my first session post-op, I remember crying  not from pain, but from the fear of pain. With time and self-healing Reiki sessions to help me overcome the fear, I was able to see how my body was growing stronger and gaining more flexibility, and I began to look forward to my sessions. It is very similar with energy healing. Facing our demons takes work and dedication, so we may shift our consciousness toward a consistently positive vibration. There can be setbacks, frustrations, and thoughts of giving up, but stick with it, do the work and you will see how incredible you feel and be able to look back at how far youve grown since the days of your early struggles.

How to Use Affirmations Affirmations are a wonderful and simple way to get you started on your self-healing journey. Let them be your pillar of support, as they were for me. Allow yourself to be open to their power to raise your vibes; trust that they can and they absolutely will!

Look within yourself for what you want to create and start making it happen, one day at a time, with the support of your own affirmations. Keep these statements short, positive and in the present tense, and repeat three to five times. You can repeat them anytime or several times in the course of 24 hours, though starting your morning with them is great for creating a better day.

Here are some examples you can use to get you on your way. Please feel free to adapt them to suit your individual needs: I AM healthy.

I AM strong.

I AM a beautiful soul deserving of love.

I AM capable of changing my life for the better.

I AM a wonderful mother, daughter, friend and partner.

I AM going to walk into that room and nail my interview.

I AM going to make the choice to be a better person.

I AM successful at everything I put my mind to.

How to Use Mantras The words and sounds of ancient Sanskrit mantras are rooted in the beliefs of Hinduism and carry with them the power of manifestation, helping you to create change for the better. I love to use Sanskrit mantras for my spiritual baths, and can recommend listening to the singer Deva Premals meditative music, which will help you learn to say the mantras while her incredible voice brings sound healing to your vibration.

While they are different in many respects, mantras and affirmations go hand and hand, so choose the style that works best for you. If you like the idea of using the ancient Sanskrit mantras for meditation or raising your consciousness, here are some of the more well-known ones: Om Gum Ganapatayei Namaha Pronounced: Om Guhm Guh-nuh-puh-tuh-yea. Nah-mah-hah Meaning: Remover of obstacles, new beginnings.

Om Shanti Om Pronounced: Om Sha-anti Om Meaning: Peace.

Om Shree Dhanvantre Namaha Pronounced: Om Shree Daan-vaan-tray. Nah-mah-hah Meaning: Health and healing for ourselves and others.

Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya Pronounced: Om Nah-moh Bah-gah-vah-tae Vah-soo-deh-vie-yah Meaning: Liberation.

Om Shreem Mahalakshmiyei Namaha Pronounced: Om Shreeem Mah-hah-labiksh-mee-eye-yea Nah-mah-hah Meaning: Prosperity in all things worldly and spiritually.

Om Mani Padme Hum Pronounced: Om Mah-knee Pahd-meh Hohm Meaning: Compassion for yourself and others.

Om Radha Krishnaya Namaha Pronounced: Om Rahd-ha Kreesh-nah-yah Nah-mah-hah Meaning: Joy and bliss for your inner and outer world.

Using affirmations and mantras creates a beautiful shift in your energy, while empowering you to bring your vibration to a higher state of health and happiness. They allow your aura to radiate. When we are having those darker moments in life, when hope feels out of reach, using affirmations and mantras will lift you back up on your feet with a sense of purpose, direction and hope once more. The more you use them, the better you will feel.

Manifestation The power of our mind to create our reality is not only possible  it is magical. There are many different ways people approach the practice of manifestation, and they are all valid ways of bringing what you desire most to your world. Once you begin to see how your mindset affects your life, you will see the impact manifestation can have on creating the shift in your vibration to attract those things you desire. It all starts with you and your energy. For example, when you are vibrating love, you will also attract love. It may not always be in the form of romantic love: trust that the Universe will bring you what you need with divine timing.

An important difference between simply making wishes and manifesting is the ability to release attachment to the outcome. When you take a moment to send out your desires to the Universe to transmute and return to you in a form that is for your highest good, you must also release your need to have them. Trust that the Universe (or Source, or God, depending on your personal belief system) will send them to you in the best form and timing for your life.

Also be very careful with the words you use. For example, when you wish for money, be aware of saying I need . . . Stating that you need something is putting out to the Universe a perpetual state of needing rather than receiving. Using words such as I am ready for would be much more effective. You are announcing to the Universe what you are ready to receive, rather than what you need to receive. I often hear people saying, I need money to pay my bills. These people then face the same need every month. By changing just one word, you create a different reality. Dont stop to question the how  the Universe creates magical opportunities for us that are well out of our scope of understanding; you simply have to have a sense of trust and faith.

Yet be careful what you wish for! This age-old saying is directly related to manifesting. Think of all the times in your life you wished for something that didnt turn to be what you hoped it would mean for you. Sometimes the things we are wishing for are not in the interests of our highest good or part of our divine path in this lifetime. When manifesting, its really important to consider if what youre asking for will help you grow spiritually. So many people have, for example, gained incredible financial blessings that they were not ready to receive  only to lose it all in a short time. When manifesting, its wise to rephrase a desire for money to financial independence or financial comfort, so that no matter how much or how little comes to you, you will have the perfect amount for your highest good.

Another thing to consider when manifesting is releasing your idea of what things will look like when you receive what you asked for. Very often what you thought would happen comes to you in a different form to your expectations. So we may wish for love to come to our life and receive it in the form of a soulmate who is a friend rather than a lover. Likewise, when manifesting the perfect job, college or home, you may find that you end up getting into a school on the other side of the world, or are offered a job that takes you away from home, or in a location that you didnt expect. Its not what you had in mind, but years later you can see how it was the best thing that couldve happened to you. Maybe you met your partner there or your children met theirs? Perhaps the new neighborhood is your perfect fit, making your life easier and happier? The Universe works in amazing ways, so have faith and use your affirmations to keep your thoughts positive while manifesting.

Methods of Manifesting Choose the manifesting method that works best for you, make combinations of all of them, or create your way with these suggestions as a guide. Whatever approach you use, the main focus here is: trust its yours and release attachment.

Written manifestations Writing down your wishes is a beautiful way to bring your wishes into the physical plane. Often, getting those thoughts out of your mind and onto paper will give you a fresh perspective on what you truly want to manifest. It is also said that when you physically write things down, they become a part of your Akashic records, the Universes archive of your life  past, present and future. So, make sure you are creating and manifesting things that are close to your heart. Here is a list of the sort of manifestations you could write:  I have the love of my soulmate.

I am financially stable.

I am getting a raise at work.

I am writing a book that will help many people.

I am pain-free, loved, strong.

I am valued.

I am healthy.

I am ready for miracles.

I am successful in all I do.

These sorts of manifestations are wonderful to do during a New Moon cycle, when the energy signifies endless possibilities. Once written, keep the note under your pillow and re-read it every day to reaffirm that your desires are what you want to be manifesting in your life.

Candle manifestations Intention candles are a wonderful way to usher in your wishes for manifesting (see Intention Candles, pages 7682). Take a moment to think of what you are manifesting and light your candle, allowing the warmth and light of the candle to infuse your wishes.

Verbal affirmation manifestations Go ahead and tell the Universe what you want! Decide what you truly wish to bring into your life and say your affirmation with conviction  as though what you desire is already yours. Release attachment to the need with the knowledge that it will come to you in divine timing. Keeping your mind focused on the good entering your life, put any thoughts or doubts about the how out of your mind. As with every ritual, thank the Universe for its blessing on your life. Repeat daily to reaffirm.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Declare what you want with a sense of urgency and firm will. Believe it is done and yours with gratitude.

Vision board manifestations A vision board is a handmade collage of images and words that relate to your goals and wishes. It works with the Law of Attraction and ideally will also act as a source of motivation, inspiring you to take action toward your goals. This is my personal favorite method for manifesting long-term goals, but daily use is wonderful too.

CREATE A DAILY VISION BOARD Here is how to create a simplified version of a vision board that you can refresh on a daily basis or as required.

You will need: 1 dry-erase marker pen 1 mirror or white board Step 1: Create simple, positive and carefully considered affirmations that relate to what you want to manifest in your life.

Step 2: Using the marker pen, write the affirmations on your bathroom or bedroom mirror, or on a white board, where you will see it first thing in the morning.

Step 3: Read the affirmations back to yourself every day, feeling in your gut that these things are yours and on their way to you. Release any doubts or thoughts of how they will come and simply trust that they will.

Step 4: Believe they are coming to your life with gratitude.

The biggest self-sabotage to manifestation is doubt. When you think about how your hopes cant happen, or what obstacles are in place preventing them, you only continue the cycle of need. Let those worries go. Just because it didnt happen today doesnt mean its not on the way. Keep the faith. You are worthy of your wishes, so let them come to you with gratitude and love.

Angels and Signs Many of us grew up with tales of fairy godmothers and three wishes, but what if there is more to these stories? What if we really do have angels guiding us and leaving clues to help us live a better life? When I was first introduced to the idea of angel guidance, I was a bit wary, but open to listening. Well, here I am, all these years later, receiving divine guidance that is clear and very real. I realized that angels arent just here for fun; they are divine beings that exist out of sight on the energetic plane  a dimension that lies outside our physical world  and yet they are with us all the same. We are not alone and our angels are here, ready and willing to assist us in ways that allow our souls to thrive.

A lightworker in the form of a pharmacy delivery driver who worked with a friend was one of the messengers who changed forever the way I view the world around me. He said, You have angels around you, ready to help you. Theyre bored, they want to help you, so give them something to do and talk to them!

So, my friend and I started speaking to our angels and asking for signs. At first, we laughed at ourselves, then we questioned our sanity, and finally we arrived at an open acceptance of their divine guidance. When we received an angelic sign, we would look at each other and say, I swear Im not crazy . . . right?

No, not crazy, just in tune with a world we cant actually see, which as humans we naturally question. We are raised to believe only what we see, that magic is only a sleight of hand, or that faith belongs only to God. Whatever you believe about a higher power or being, know none of us are here alone. We all have many helpers, in the form of angels who are here with us, guiding and protecting us. I have been blessed by their help many times myself.

When I was 19 years old, I rolled over four times in a convertible on the highway. Every piece of glass in my car shattered  with the exception of my drivers side window, saving my face for the acting career I was pursuing at the time. It was a hit and run, and I never discovered who hit me  I only knew it was a white car. As I sat there, stunned, clearly in shock and literally upside-down, watching cars whiz by on what I thought was the sky, four girls pulled over to help me. (Four is the number of the angels, which only struck me now, as I write!) They came running to my car, asking if I was okay. I didnt really know.

One of the girls asked if I could open the door, but the glass was jammed into the ground, so how could I? I managed to open it just enough to unlatch it and between my kicking the door and the girls pulling on it, we got about 78 inches of clearance.

Id never felt super human strength before, but, wow, it was amazing: one of the women reached in and lifted me out by holding under my arms, like youd lift an infant. I felt like a ragdoll in a giants arms! It was an incredible feeling.

Although I didnt have so much as a scratch, that accident changed the course of my life. I spoke with the woman who lifted me out a few days later, thanking her for stopping to help. I told her she was my angel and that she had saved me  a complete stranger with super-human strength had come to my rescue. She and her friends stayed with me until paramedics arrived and were both able to get me safely away from the gas-leaking car and to confirm my story of the hit and run. I was and am to this day so grateful for their help. I later learned my lower back took the hit and I would need extensive physiotherapy, but then I married a chiropractor  who I wouldnt have met had I scarred my face and not been able to continue acting!

Three years after my accident, a fellow actress dragged me out to a party I had no interest in attending, but where I was introduced to my husband-to-be. The only place available to sit happened to be next to him. The events that unfolded after meeting him were absolutely a matter of divine intervention. I always called him my angel for rescuing me from the superficial and unstable life of Hollywood and showing me the true meaning of love. Our own story is one of magic, a sort of spiritual romance all on its own, filled with signs and events that could only be granted by a higher power, and a bond deeper than any Ive come to know throughout the years. The angels clearly had other plans for my life  and saving me from that car accident was only the beginning.

Most of us at one point or another have had a life-threatening experience, but have you ever wondered how you were able to walk away alive to see another day? Was it just luck or fate? I believe every experience is part of our growth and a series of events that lead us to the life we have in the present moment.

I also believe we are protected by divine intervention. There is no reason for my conviction other than that I am alive today to tell you my story.

But we dont all need to have a crazy experience to appreciate the divine touch. We can also learn to heed the warnings and guiding signs in our daily lives to make choices that are for our highest good, and which may mean we avoid lifes harder lessons. So how do we do this? How do we connect with our own guardian angels? How do we ask them to assist us in raising our vibes to those of a loving vibration?

Im going to give you some simple ways to open your mind and your world to that of the angels. By learning how to connect, how to ask, and how to recognize signs, you too will be able to raise your vibes and live a happier existence.

How to Connect with Your Angels Start talking to your angels and ask for a sign from them in the awareness that you are not alone. This may feel weird at first, but with time and practice, you will start to recognize the divine messages you are asking for. For example, you might say, Angels, please guide me and let me know youre there. Or: Angels, if youre with me, send me a feather. I often find angel feathers appear in the most random places as a sign to let me know the angels are with me. However, remember that their concept of time is different than ours, so be patient and allow about 24 hours for your answers. If you dont receive the answer youre searching for, try rephrasing the question.

Yes or No questions Start with yes or no questions. We may not be able to hear the angels as clearly as we can hear a physical person, so keep it simple. Ask for a sign in response to each question. Sometimes youll get the sign right away, sometimes it can take a whole day, and sometimes it hasnt been decided. When you dont see the sign, try asking the question in a different way. For example, you could ask: Angels, if I should accept the job, send me a green balloon; if not, send me a red balloon. You can choose whatever sign you want, but try to keep it related to your question. In this case, red would symbolize stop or no, and green a yes  go for it! Choose a fresh sign for each new question.

Recognize the signs when you see them A sign isnt just something random; it will stand out, like when you spot something that makes you do a double take. Sometimes, the angels will keep sending you the same sign repeatedly, almost if theyre saying, Do you get it now? Pay attention! You dont always need to go looking for a sign, but when you spot it, be thankful and acknowledge you saw it. A simple, Thank you, Angels, will do wonders.

Acting on your messages Have a little faith in the divine guidance you are receiving and follow it. Trust that they are sending you messages that are only for your highest good. They love you, they want the best for you, they will protect you, and its best if you listen. Its kind of like when you were a kid and your mom told you to look both ways before crossing the road. As adults, we dont realize we still have that safety net, that protection; we do  we simply need to tune into it.

As you practice and get better at recognizing the signs youve asked for, you can move on to more important questions that affect your own vibration and life choices. Try to remember to be specific: clear questions give clear answers. Over time, you may even start to hear the angels. One of my friends swears her angels talk to her. She gets very clear messages, as if someone were talking to her just out of sight. Within hours, shell get a phone call confirming the message. So youre not crazy, youre in tune. Listen to and then follow their messages. As you start seeing validation of them, youll feel more comfortable asking and receiving their guidance, and youll notice how much lighter and higher vibrational you feel throughout the days, weeks and years on your unique journey in life.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Call on your angels to give you comfort and love. Show gratitude for them hearing and helping you.

Synchronicities as Signs Often in life, we dont know how to ask the right questions, or dont even realize we could use some guidance. This is when the angels will send you other types of signs, like overhearing the words of a total stranger delivering an important message. The angels especially love number signs and feathers. Math and color are like a common language too. Ever see 444 and wonder why it struck you? Or see a feather in a place it shouldnt be? The angels are letting you know they are there.

Gradually, youll start receiving different variations. Look up their meanings when you see them: what are they trying to tell you? And if you need validation, ask for confirmation with a simple yes or no sign for your answer.

Numbers Different numbers can mean different things. 1,23,4, for example, is the angels letting you know youre on the right path, but theres work to be done. The numbers in a row act like stairs: youre going up, but not there yet. Pay attention to the thoughts you had at the time you saw the numbers for help in decoding the message.

These are some of the more common seen numbers which are usually the ones that you will start noticing first: 111: Your thoughts are manifesting quickly, keep them positive!

222: Youre on the right path, have faith.

333: The Ascendant Masters are near, assisting, guiding and protecting you. Show some gratitude.

444: The Angels are near and you are safe. (This is a great time to ask for a sign about something in your life, or simply acknowledge them and say hello.) 555: Big changes are coming; growth is always a positive, so have faith that the changes are for your highest good.

666: Let go of your focus on material things and return to a more spiritual mindset. This is a great time to meditate.

777: Expect miracles, luck is on your side, keep doing what youre doing.

888: Money is coming! This is your financial abundance sign.

999: Endings. This is a sign that some part of your life is ready to come to a close or a shift. Release the old to make space for the new.

000: New beginnings are near. You create your own destiny so make choices worthy of your hearts desires.

Feather meanings Feathers are a sign that your angels are near, but they have particular messages too. In particular, pay attention to the colors you find. Here are some of the more common examples of feather meanings: White: Angels are near, make a wish.

Black: You are protected.

Grey: Peace is coming.

Spotted: Release the past.

Black and white: Change is coming.

Brown: Pause, wait for clarity.

Yellow: You are on the right path.

Blue: Your psychic powers are strong, so tune in.

Red: Spiritual growth, gifts are appearing.

Pink: Love, romance, or pregnancy coming.

Green: A time for healing.

As you get more familiar with the signs, recognize them for what they are and open to them, youll find you start seeing them more and more  and not just in the form of numbers and feathers. Youll receive unique messages meant only for you. Your communication with the angels will get stronger; you may even question your sanity, as I have in the past. But with each moment of validation of your signs, trusting in their divine guidance will come easier. Its like a light turning on in a world that was dark before. Youll have ah ha! moments of clarity and newfound gratitude for your chosen path. Youll even start to recognize your angels personalities. They do have a wonderful sense of humor and will make you laugh out loud at times  so go ahead and laugh; enjoy your beautiful connection. Show gratitude for your connection and the validation you receive. Everyone loves manners, and your angels are no exception. This connection with the angels is a gift, helping you to raise your vibes and live your life with your best foot forward. You cant even imagine the wonderful plans they have in store for you: tune into them and watch the blessings roll in...

Moon Rituals The Moon has been an object of fascination for as long as its appeared in the night sky. Scientifically, we know the connection between the Sun and Moon is responsible for the tides in our oceans, and that there is a correlation between the Moon and fertility in sea animals. More recently, people have begun to study the Moons effects on the human body. It has long been believed that the Moons cycles are responsible for our mental health, hence the word lunacy from the Latin word for Moon, luna. Whether we really are crazier or simply more emotional during New and Full Moons is beside the point; the Moons cycles can simply help us become more aware of our physical, emotional and spiritual states.

Moon rituals marked one of the turning points on my own spiritual journey. I noticed subtle changes in my life at first, only to realize one day that I had created a completely different life, a life that is so much more fulfilling. In this chapter, you will find some of the rituals I use to raise my own vibration. You may make these practices as ceremonial or as informal as you choose. As for most rituals, its not so much about the time you put into creating them as it is the intention that matters most, though it is certainly fun to create a more elaborate practice.

New Moon The New Moon brings with it a time for openness and manifestation. During the New Moon, the energy of the Sun is not reflected upon the Moons surface to light up the night sky. This is also the Moon phase that emits the least amount of infrared light energy reflected to our Earth, making it a time for quiet creation. Much like a seed that is planted, it has no light in the beginning, but grows and flourishes in the Sun once its reached beyond the surface of the soil. Your dreams and wishes, too, are like seeds, so take this time to plant them.

New Moon manifesting This is a wonderful time to put your thoughts, dreams and wishes down on paper (see pages 1212 in Manifestation). There is something magical about the process of writing down your thoughts. For one, it helps you to see what you desire in a tangible, physical medium. You can hold your dreams before you, raising your vibration to match that of what you desire to manifest.

You may also choose to write a poem, a song or even a letter to yourself, a person, or the Universe, describing in more detail what you wish to bring into or release from your life. Its really a matter of personal preference. Choose whichever way feels right to you. If youre new to this and arent sure, try them all and see what works better for your life. Remember, there are no rules here, only suggestions. As you continue to practice raising your vibes, you will discover what works for you and what doesnt. The most important thing is your intention, so keep it positive!

Once youve put your thoughts in order, what do you do with the paper? Well, there are a few ways to work with your intentions. Below are some examples, so choose the method that resonates most with you, or mix and match depending on your mood. Begin your rituals by creating your sacred space (see Creating a Sacred Space, pages 4955), and always remember to take a moment to close any ritual with gratitude.

SELENITE FOR NEW MOON INTENTIONS The crystal selenite will help clear any negative energy that may be attached to or blocking your wishes from coming to fruition.

Single stone: Write down your manifestation and place a piece of selenite on top of the paper under the night sky when the Moon is new. In the morning, place the paper with the selenite under your pillow until the Full Moon. Sleeping with a note of your wishes and the crystal allows time for their energy to match and raise your own vibration to that of your wishes.

Grid: Create a crystal grid around the written manifestation, with a piece of selenite on top of your note in the center of the grid. Use clear quartz as amplifiers inbetween the other crystals or in a circle around your piece of selenite. If you wish, you can speak your wishes to the stone and keep your thoughts on it as you create the grid. Then leave the grid untouched until the Full Moon.

Clear quartz: This is another beautiful choice for this exercise as it holds a space for your wishes and acts as an amplifier while they manifest.

SET YOUR NEW MOON WISHES ON FIRE!

Fire has been used for thousands of years to express and release intentions in rituals. Please be sure you are practicing fire safety to avoid any accidents. To release your New Moon wishes into the Universe, burn the paper at the Full Moon and place a bit of the ashes in a glass of water, wine, or lunar water (see pages 1434), and drink it, ashes and all. This brings your wishes back into your essence. Alternatives: Bury in the soil or flush for an earth/water element.

NEW MOON MEDITATION FOR MANIFESTING This is a wonderful option either as an add-on or on its own to hold space for your desires and wishes.

Using both paper and crystal: Starting at the New Moon, hold the note with your written wishes in your dominant hand and a clear quartz in your nondominant hand as you meditate with your wishes in mind. Do this each day for any amount of time you feel is right, until the Full Moon. Then burn or bury the paper in the earth.

Using your written affirmation: Hold the note with your wishes pressed between both your hands in prayer position in front of your heart center. Meditate on the wishes you wrote down.

Speak to the Moon!

Either silently or out loud, let the New Moon know what it is you wish to manifest while holding your selenite or clear quartz (or both!). The Moon cannot know your wishes if you dont tell her! That night, place the crystal(s) under your pillow. Each night before you sleep, repeat your prayer to the stone(s) and place them back under your pillow until the Full Moon. This practice of sleeping with the crystals near you will raise your vibration to match that of the intentions and stones themselves.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Look at the Moon and take a moment to tell her (either out loud or silently) what you want and what you are thankful for.

Speak to your lunar water!

Lunar water is another excellent choice for manifesting New Moon wishes. (See Full Moon rituals, pages 1434, for how to make yours.) Your voice carries its own vibration and will infuse the water to match that of your wishes. Speak your wishes to the water at the New Moon and, with gratitude for the Moons energy, drink the water. This is even more powerful if you are using lunar water made during the previous Full Moon. You may repeat this ritual each night until the Full Moon.

Speak to your crystals!

Crystals hold powerful yet gentle energy that helps support different areas of our lives as well as our physical, emotional and spiritual bodies. Holding them during meditation can also be wonderful for New Moon rituals. Speak or pray silently toward your crystals before you begin your meditation. Hold those same thoughts as your point of focus for the duration of the meditation.

Speak to your candles!

You can also choose to use intention candles to begin and close your ceremony. Hold your intention in your mind as you light the candle to infuse the candle with it. This could be as simple as: With the lighting of this candle, I open the space for my ritual. If you choose to elaborate further, state what the candle represents first with a phrase like, With this candle of pure love, I begin my ritual to vibrate at a state of love and happiness so that my wishes too may bring me love and joy. Just remember what your intention for the candle was for future use! (For more on how to do this, see the chapter Intention Candles, pages 7682.) Tarot and oracle readings When there is a New Moon, there is an openness and potential for change and growth. This is a great time to do a reading for the current Moon cycle to get a view of what possibilities lie ahead. Keep your focus on the coming month and pull a single card or lay a spread for insight. Observe what comes through and reflect on the message throughout the month. You may find it helps to take a picture of the spread to keep it fresh in your mind.

How can you create the change the cards foretell? What can you do differently to make the cards come true? These are questions you can apply to your life as events unfold. Dont love the reading? Thats an incredible sign you can create change! Go ahead and change your path, make new choices that will alter that outcome. The future is not set in stone. Oracles offer suggestions for growth. Every choice you make affects the next phase in your life, so if you want change, you will need to make different choices day to day. If you love the reading, pay attention to what youre doing daily so you can continue allowing the positive vibes to enter your life.

If you wish, repeat at the Full Moon  a time of powerful yet very different lunar energies  to take stock of how things worked out, keep a track of your progress and tune into the potential of the weeks ahead.

Reiki Moon infusion As we saw in Part 1, Reiki is the universal life force, one of the purest and most powerful energy tools for blessing your life. You can incorporate Reiki energy in any of the above rituals, both at the New Moon and the Full Moon, and use it either on yourself or by infusing your crystals, candles, cards and your wishes with it, or all of the above.

You may find it helps to begin with a self-healing treatment before focusing on your spiritual tools so that you can start each Moon cycle with balanced chakras, a cleansed aura, and high vibes. Reiki energy will continue to work on you and your tools in the days following your healing session, giving added insurance that your wishes come to pass for your highest good.

Full Moon Humankind has always delighted in the magical light that shines down on us from the night sky. The Full Moon has inspired awe and faith for thousands of years. Many cultures and societies  from American Indians to the African people  have traditionally held sacred rituals during the Full Moon. Today, people from all over the world continue to observe it in wonder.

The Full Moon is the time when lunar energy reaches its peak, when the most energy from the Sun is charged against its surface. This is the best time of the Moons cycle to release what is no longer serving you. The infrared light and radiation of the Suns reflection are ready to scorch away those fears and insecurities, and release the old and unwanted. In the case of manifesting, this is the time to release your attachment to the wishes, sending them out to the Universe for her to release you from a state of wanting and bring you into a state of creating. This is a wonderful time to release worries, negative thought patterns, habits or behaviors for transmutation.

We all pick up negative energy during the day, week and month. The Full Moon is an excellent time to release that energy so we can begin the next Moon cycle vibrating at our highest. Here are some beautiful ideas for rituals you can practice to release negativity from your body, mind, spirit, home, crystals and anything else you can think of. You can choose whatever feels right to you. There will be some months you dont have the energy or will power to perform an elaborate ritual, and that is okay. You may find that doing a simple ritual is exactly the boost you needed anyway to switch your vibe back to the positive. Again, it is important to create your sacred space before you begin, and to open and close the ceremony with gratitude.

Cleansing and charging your crystals The Full Moon holds that fiery energy from the Sun. She is ripe for cleansing away the old to pave the way for the new. Crystals pick up the energy around them, both from you and from those who have either had ill wishes or negative mindsets. It is important to cleanse them regularly so they are vibrating at their highest frequency in order to best serve your needs.

Place your crystals outside or on a window sill where the light shines. The light energy of the Moon will cleanse the crystals of any negativity picked up recently and charge them so they are able to work again freely with their pure energy vibration. This is wonderful for crystals that have been made into jewelry too.

Cleansing your spiritual tools Spiritual tools such as card decks and runes can pick up negative energy too. During the past month of using them, the cards picked up your energy vibrations as well as the energy from anyone else who may have touched them. The Full Moon is a great time to cleanse and charge them so they can give you the clearest answers while doing future readings. Tarot cards, runes and oracle cards, etc. may be placed either outside under the moonlight or on a window sill where the moonlight will shine on them. This method will clear any negative energy attached to them.

MAGICAL LUNAR WATER Water has a long history of use in many cultures for spiritual and religious rituals and ceremonies. Lunar water is quite magical, especially when charged with the energy of the Full Moon. It is wonderful for cleansing water-safe crystals, self-cleansing in the shower or bath and for drinking. It will wash away any negativity inbetween Full Moons. It is best to use a real glass jar to make lunar water, as glass will allow the Moons energy to pass through without depositing unwanted particles, as plastic will.

You will need: 1 glass or mason jar water Optional: Clear quartz crystal to act as an amplifier, crystals to make grid Step 1: If using, place a piece of clear quartz in the bottom of the glass jar. If you prefer not to place the crystal directly in the water, you may place it next to the glass for indirect crystal energy.

Step 2: Fill the glass with clean drinking water.

Step 3: Set the glass either outside in the moonlight or next to a window where the light of the Full Moon will shine on the water. Leave untouched overnight.

Step 4: If you wish, you may also create a crystal grid around the glass jar to add additional intentions to the lunar water.

If you added a clear quartz, remove it before you use your lunar water. Water charged with the Full Moons energies can keep that beautiful, healing energy going for longer, raising your vibration all month long.

Light those candles!

If you created an intention candle at the New Moon, now is a wonderful time to finish the work you started, allowing it to burn to completion. You can also use a new candle for Full Moon rituals for a burst of fresh energy. Choose what sort of candle you want to work with and make some magic! (See Intention Candles, pages 7980, for color choices, or use white.) The Full Moon is the best time to release the old to allow space for the new. So, if youre starting to use a new candle, write on the candle those things you want to bring into your life. You can also pull seven rune stones and engrave the candle with them, along with your name. (Even if the meanings of the runes seem challenging, these can offer an opportunity to release selfsabotaging habits; for example, if you pull Nauthiz, this might represent the time to release unhealthy attachments or self-inflicted restraints  perfect for a Full Moon ritual!) If you wish, dress the candle in appropriate essential oils by rubbing on a drop or two. Use the candle to light your list of what you want to release before burning the paper in a fireproof container.

Delight in the Moon Each phase of the Moon cycle gives you fresh opportunities to shape and create your reality. Make a habit of performing your rituals each month to invite in the new and allow space for change. You are in control of your own life and I know you have the courage to create the change you want. Even if you perform your rituals on a cloudy or rainy evening, the energy will be the same. In fact, you can collect the rainwater as your lunar water for an added boost of energy! (Just be sure to purify it before drinking, and dont leave your selenite or other not-so-water-friendly crystals and paper-based tools outside in the rain!) Working next to the window or under a covered patio is great on rainy days. Water-safe crystals, on the other hand, love the rain, so let them have a nice cleansing shower in the rainwater.

Remember to practice a moment of gratitude for the beautiful healing energy of the moonlight when you collect your tools in the morning. You may choose also to allow some time for the Sun to heat up and infuse your tools before collecting them, giving them that warm glow of energy.

Practicing Gratitude Creating a daily gratitude practice is one of the best and easiest things you can do for yourself! When you begin your day, pause within it, or finish your evening in a state of gratitude, your world shifts into the positive. Showing gratitude for the blessings in your life each day both raises your vibration and helps you move forward from a place of love. We all tend to focus on our troubles, stressing ourselves out before anything bad even happens or, worse, find ourselves getting lost in the midst of them. Imagine how different your life will look when you focus on the positive things in your life.

My parents werent religious so they decided to raise my six siblings and me in an agnostic mindset, and encouraged us to be open and choose what we wanted to believe in. However, my mom also felt it was important we had some grounding for our views, so when I was a teenager (what an appropriate time!) she took us to the local church to learn about God. She viewed the Mormons as family-oriented, so off we went to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. We didnt attend for very long, but I did learn how to pray and that has served me well over the years and has since morphed into my gratitude practice.

As a child, my prayers began like this: Our Heavenly Father who art in heaven, I pray to you today to give thanks for . . . I was taught to always give thanks before making requests and that somehow showing gratitude would put me in the grace of God. I was likewise taught to finish my prayers with In the name of thy son, Jesus Christ, Amen. It wasnt until many years later that I saw the value in the format and started to notice how much better I felt after prayer. Its no coincidence that prayer is also a form of gratitude practice that eases your worries and raises your vibe. You dont need to believe in anything in particular to use this method of self-healing; it encompasses all and is open to people of all faiths, cultures and backgrounds.

Every day, before I do anything else, I take a moment to give thanks for all the wonderful things, people and events in my life. I get to wake up feeling amazing, open to the possibility and opportunities to make my world even better! I have three kids to get ready for school in the morning, so I totally understand the urgency to get moving, yet taking a moment to pause and give thanks is still my number one priority. After all, a happy mom/dad is what every child needs in their life.

So, forget all those stresses for a moment and put gratitude at the forefront of your mind. Start with the little things  its the little things that count, after all. Close each gratitude ritual with Thank you, as an acknowledgement and a conclusion. Whether you are saying thank you to yourself, God or the Universe doesnt matter so much as the intention.

Morning practice As soon as you open your eyes, you can begin! Before you do anything else (use the bathroom, look at your phone, or get out of bed), lay there and take a moment to name three to five different things you are grateful for. You can of course add in more, but this is a beautiful starting point, especially if youre short on time, which in the beginning youll feel like you are. Begin with the words, I am so grateful . . . for each thing you list and finish the ritual with a simple Thank you. You might say:  I am so grateful for my health.

I am so grateful for my friends.

I am so grateful I live in this city.

I am so grateful for waking up this morning.

I am so grateful for coffee!

Evening practice Likewise, finish your day with gratitude. This is a wonderful ritual for those days youve been especially stressed out, life has been difficult, or you simply want to say thank you for a good day. This will help you shift your mindset from one of stress to one of peace so you sleep better and can have a better tomorrow. Begin again with I am so grateful . . . for each thing you list and finish the ritual with Thank you. Here are some suggestions:  I am so grateful I have a cozy bed to sleep in.

I am so grateful tomorrow is a new day.

I am so grateful I handled all my responsibilities today.

I am so grateful I didnt give up.

I am so grateful for my home.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Pause, and think of three to five things you are grateful for in life. Smile with a sense of gratitude in your heart.

Pause your day and change your vibe Sometimes life can be truly hectic and cause anxiety. Taking a moment to pause in the day with your gratitude practice is a wonderful way to switch your vibe and get out of a stressful mindset. We all have days like this, so go ahead and break the cycle of stress to usher in some positivity! This will also work as a wonderful distraction to help ground yourself in the midst of chaos.

Close your eyes and take three deep belly breaths if you need to center yourself, in through your nose and out through your mouth. Feel the breath expand your belly, deep into your core. Begin with I am so grateful . . . for each thing you list. Finish the ritual with Thank you. You might try these thoughts:  I am so grateful for the time to breathe.

I am so grateful its almost lunchtime.

I am so grateful for the ability to work through problems.

I am so grateful I am good at what I do.

I am so grateful for my inner strength.

I am so grateful you have bought my book! I am so grateful you have taken the time to read this chapter. I am so grateful you have made the choice to raise your vibe! Thank you for being a part of my gratitude practice. Believe it or not, you are a part of what makes my life feel more complete and I am grateful for you. (And, Mom, I am so grateful for the foundation you laid for me. Thank you.) Clean Your Energy!

We all have our own unique energy, which radiates out from our core being in the form of our aura. There are even machines available now that can read aura colors. If you ever get the chance to use one, its really fun to see the results. Our aura is kind of like a cloud of energy surrounding us and it is sensitive to the energy of other people, places and things.

Ever notice how when youre around certain people or places you feel amazing, while others can leave you feeling low vibrational, unhappy or even angry? Perhaps after sitting at a computer, in front of a television or being on your phone for a long time, you feel drained? This is a sign your aura could use some cleansing. Technologies such as WiFi, 5G and Bluetooth devices, though wonderful for many things, also emit energy. Our energy field, or aura, is greatly affected by these, so keeping it clear of these influences, healthy and vibing high, makes a world of difference for our mood and in turn our physical health.

Tools and Rituals for Keeping Your Energy Clean There are many ways to clear our aura of outside energy influences, but the use of smudges, protection with crystals, the violet flame and Reiki have to be among my personal favorites. I invite you to try them all and see what combination works best for you. You will know by your new sense of peace and love, easing of stress, and/or a welcome feeling of joy after performing them.

SMUDGE CLEANSING RITUAL This is a wonderful ritual for when youre feeling low, after being in an uncomfortable situation, before a spiritual bath or shower, when youre about to perform any ritual and/or you want your energy to vibe high and release any negative energy attached to you. I find that smudge sticks work best, but if youre using resins rather than herbs, use the smallest amount as they burn for much longer.

You will need: smudge stick or resin of choice lighter or matches abalone shell or container for smudge stick or fireproof pot and charcoal for resins Optional: a small bowl of sand to douse the smudge stick at the end. (Palo santo and sweet grass will typically go out on their own and may even need relighting.) Step 1: Decide on your choice of smudge. You can use more than one, though I recommend using only one or two per aura cleanse. Of course, it is perfectly alright to use several, especially if its a mixed bundle or youre using rose or sweetgrass, for example, so you are inviting love in while also dispelling negativity.

Step 2: In your safe space, light your smudge stick or incense, and choose a healing affirmation, such as Love, light and happiness or I am cleansed of any and all negative energy and any negative attachments not serving my highest good in my past, present and future. So it is done.

Step 3: Repeat your affirmation as you draw the smudge stick around yourself. Starting a few inches from the top of your head, circle around your crown, then down the front of your body, back up around your legs and arms, behind your back, and finish by sweeping the stick under each foot. Alternatively, begin with your feet and work your way up to your crown. The important part here is being sure you draw the smoke completely around yourself so that your aura is cleansed and sealed. (If using incense, you may need to fan the smoke around yourself.) Step 4: Extinguish your smudge stick in your sand, on your plate or abalone shell and give thanks with hands in prayer position for the protection and healing of your aura.

Children love this ritual. Every time I burn sage or palo santo, my kids come running in, asking me to smudge them too. I do it for my pets as well, though theyre not big fans of it with their heightened sense of smell, so I usually do just a quick circle over the head. Its important to remember to cleanse yourself after youve cleansed anyone else, even your children and pets. You dont want to wash them off just so the negative energy can attach to you.

Crystal protection Crystals can create a shield for our energy with their vibrations. If youre in a position to get some, they are wonderful additions to your self-care and will keep your aura protected from outside sources of negativity.

Black obsidian: Sends negative energy back to its source, not in a way thats harmful, but just returning it to where it came from. I find black obsidian most useful for those times when I dont know whose bad vibes are coming my way. They can keep their negative vibes to themselves so I can continue vibing high!

Black tourmaline: Wonderful for absorbing negative energy. Keep one near your computer at home or in the office to protect your energy. It will need to be cleansed often to keep it working at its best. Like a sponge thats full of water, when its full of negative energy it needs to be wrung out and cleansed so that it can continue to soak up vibes. I often wear a black tourmaline necklace and bracelet during online meetings or healings to protect my energy from those who may not have my best interests at heart.

Shungite: A great protection tool for placing near your WiFi towers and computer monitors that acts as purifier and shield. I have a shungite plate under each WiFi tower in my own home. It also makes for a wonderful necklace to shield you from the effects of 5G and Bluetooth devices.

These are examples of protection stones that I use for my own energy; yours may be different. Choose the crystals you gravitate toward, as those are the ones that will work best for you and your aura protection.

INVOKE THE VIOLET FLAME RITUAL Invoking the violet flame is a wonderful choice when you feel weak or ill from being around negative energy, or know you will be walking into an environment that creates fear and anxiety in you. It works beautifully for sealing and protecting your aura.

Step 1: Close your eyes and take three deep breaths.

Step 2: Visualize a warm, purple cloud of energy coming out of your body with each exhale, which swirls around your whole body, encircling you.

Step 3: Take another deep breath of relief, knowing that you are safe and protected within this shield of warmth and that nothing can harm you.

Now you can walk into any environment or group of people knowing you have this divine radiating light surrounding you. All negative energy will bounce off and away from you. Visualizing the violet flame will invoke a beautiful shield of protection and love to keep you vibrating at a high level and your aura pure.

REIKI AURA HEALING RITUAL This is similar to the ritual used for self-healing with Reiki (see pages 457). However, instead of using hand positions, while you focus on each of your chakras, youll use your dominant hand in a slow, sweeping motion all around your body. The dominant hand is used for giving energy, while the non-dominant hand is used for receiving it.

You can perform this ritual in as little as a minute to cleanse your aura!

Step 1: Bring your hands to prayer position (gassho) as you invite Reiki energy to flow in through your crown and to your hands.

Step 2: Hold your non-dominant hand with your fingers and thumb held together (see diagram opposite). You will be pulling in Reiki energy through this hand.

Step 3: Using your dominant hand with fingers closed, sweep your slightly cupped hand a few inches from behind your neck, up over your head, down the length of your body, under each foot and back up the front of your body.

Step 4: Sweep over your non-dominant arm and hand; then switch hands to complete the sweep over your dominant arm.

Step 5: Finish with your hands in prayer position, giving thanks for the beautiful healing energy of Reiki for cleansing your aura.

Cleansing your aura is an important part of self-care and you may find that not only are you raising your vibes, but you now have a wonderful sense of calm, peace, clarity and lightness in your spirit. You can do this in such a short time and the benefits are so uplifting. This is an incredible quick fix to a bad mood or lousy day. Wash it all off so you can smile again!

Find Focus Bringing our mind, body and spirit into balance so we may focus on the immediate priorities in life can certainly be a challenge at times. If youre anything like me, you have a thousand things to do and only so much time to get them done. This is when focus becomes so important. Its about more than just prioritizing, as many believe; its settling our energy to align with our priorities. When our vibration is raised we can accomplish incredible things without the pressures or even thought of time.

Time is merely an illusion anyway, a method of organizing our lives to fit what our minds can process. Is time really linear? Or do we just perceive it that way? Calendars and measuring systems have changed throughout human history and continue to do so as scientists discover more. Our perceptions of time can change too. Think of all the times you had an incredibly busy day at work and you were so focused that time flew by. Or likewise, those days when you were perhaps struggling emotionally and the hours dragged on, with little being accomplished?

Tools and Rituals for Focus When we raise our vibration, our focus becomes sharp as a laser beam, allowing us to create and complete what seems impossible in a short time. Our minds have a way of flowing with our own energy wavelength, and when we feel off balance, even the smallest tasks can feel like a chore. Learning to center ourselves and balance our energy will allow us to set aside thoughts of worry or stress so we can be more productive and focus on the task at hand.

Food for thought Many people underestimate the importance of gut health in relation to focus and the functioning of the mind in general. Neuroscientists have only recently started to discover the significance of the incredible system of neural pathways from our gut to our brain  and the old saying You are what you eat is catching on in the scientific world too. Maintaining a healthy diet affects not only our body, but our minds. So, instead of reaching for coffee and sweets when youre trying to get focused, grab a handful of berries and pour yourself a nice cup of green tea. Sugar can be so defeating to our mental clarity, spiking our blood sugar, destroying healthy gut bacteria and leaving us even more drained than we were once weve peaked. There are many natural sweeteners available now to satisfy that sweet tooth; try a few and give yourself a well-deserved break from the crash and burn of the caffeine-sugar cycle.

Here are some other powerhouse foods that are amazing for keeping your mind strong and focused. They will improve your gut health, supporting a healthy mind-body connection, and they are also wonderful for balancing our chakra centers (especially the berries), which in turn helps improve focus and mental health.

Bananas: This superfood is awesome for gut health and strengthens your solar plexus chakra.

Berries: Blueberries, raspberries, blackberries and strawberries are wonderful for that mind-body connection and can help you resist the craving for unnatural sugars that make you sluggish and cause mental fog. It also supports throat, third eye and crown chakras.

Lemon: Hot water and lemon are not only amazing for your gut health, but also for giving your solar plexus chakra a boost for motivation and clarity.

Herbs are another beautiful gift from our Mother Earth that can help us maintain our focus, balance and spiritual health while raising our vibration. They can be used as essential oils, freshly snipped, as a tea (just add hot water), or in a smudge stick, depending on your preference and their availability.

Two readily available herbs are rosemary and lavender. Rosemarys scent is incredible for focusing the mind, improving concentration and balancing our crown chakra. I keep a fresh twig near me when Im writing, teaching or healing, and bring it right up to my nose to take some deep inhalations to calm and focus my mind. My son goes up on our hill to snip fresh pieces for me, even though he thinks its funny and calls me a hippie. Yet sometimes Ill find him cutting his own piece when hes overwhelmed with homework, which is amazing to see. Lavender is another very helpful herb, bringing in a sense of calm, quiet and sacredness. It can be used to soothe nerves, sleeplessness and burns, and is great for focus.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Clip a fresh snip of rosemary and hold this under your nose as you inhale deeply to bring your mind into focus.

Crystal vibrations As our minds swirl with worries of deadlines and projects on top of our own personal responsibilities, keeping focused on our goals in the workplace can be a challenge. The beautiful energy vibration of crystals offers so much support in clearing the mind of distractions and regaining focus. The following crystals work really well together. However, you dont need to have all of them, so work with what you have.

Amethyst: Brings clarity and divine guidance. Supports the third eye and crown chakras.

Ametrine: Balances yin and yang energies, fosters compatibility and acceptance of co-workers, authorities and customers/clients, while maintaining personal inner strength. Supports solar plexus and crown chakras.

Blue kyanite: Brings clarity, connection of creativity, communication and focus. Supports the throat and third eye chakras.

Blue lace agate: Stills the mind from worry and inspires communication and creative inspiration. Supports the throat chakra.

Citrine: Boosts will power and determination to complete your goals. Supports the sacral and solar plexus chakras.

Clear quartz: The master healer, transmutes negative emotions and offers divine connection to the Source. Supports all chakras.

Labradorite: This crystals shield of protection over your aura allows you to think and focus clearly on tasks. It also assists with divine connection and gives us the sight for clear perspective, as well as banishing insecurities. Supports the third eye chakra, and helps all chakras to work in harmony.

Lapis lazuli: Keeps distractions at bay so your mental focus stays sharp and tuned into your work, especially helpful with written communication. Supports the throat and third eye chakras.

Music for the soul Music carries beautiful vibrations that can soothe the mind of distracting thoughts so you can focus on the task at hand. Choose music with a frequency of 432 Hz, 528 Hz, or any that you find is particularly soothing. Also avoid music with lyrics, as the words can become a distraction. The exception is music with mantras and chanting.

MEDITATION FOR FOCUS Meditation is an incredible tool for mental focus. The act itself strengthens the mind, helps you quiet your myriad thoughts, bringing peace and balance to your spirit as you raise your vibration. You may choose to use this tool while focusing on your breath and/or a specific chakra, holding your crystals, repeating mantras, inhaling the scent of herbs, sipping herbal tea mindful eating, or any combination that feels best for you. Continue to keep refocusing your mind on the tools you are using for the duration of your meditation.

You will need: timer Optional: crystals, herbs, smudge stick, foods, mantra (e.g. Om Gum Ganapatayei Namaha), mudra and/or music Step 1: Create your sacred space with the intention of focusing your mind. Decide how long you can dedicate to your meditation and set your timer.

Step 2: Take five deep belly breaths to center yourself.

Step 3: Depending on your choice, use the following and sit or lie down: Diffuser: Add a few drops of essential oil to your diffuser.

Smudge stick: If using a smudge stick, light and smudge yourself with the smoke from the crown to feet in front of your body, up the back, around each arm, circle your head, and finish under each foot. Place the burning herb in a fireproof dish.

Crystals: Hold your crystals in each hand and breathe as you connect to their energy. Hold this focus for five to 20 minutes depending on the time you have available.

Mantra: Repeat your mantra out loud, holding the OM so that you feel the vibration on the inside of your closed lips. Some prefer to do this 108 times, but you may choose as many times as feels right to you until your mind is focused and calm for the task at hand.

Mudra: Raise your energy in your hands by rubbing them together and placing them above your solar plexus chakra. Then touch your thumb to your middle and pinky fingers, keeping the other fingers straight.

Music: Turn on your music and allow your thoughts to follow the rhythm of the music, setting aside any thoughts that come to your mind.

Food: If choosing to focus mindfully on food or tea, each time you take a bite or sip, do so slowly, savoring each mouthful. Think about everything connected to that food: taste, texture, temperature. Give gratitude for the following as you chew or drink: where it grew, the soil that nourished it, the farmer who tended it, the person who picked it, the water that washed it, the person who packaged it, the truck that delivered it, the shop attendant who set it out, and yourself for enjoying it.

Step 4: When your timer goes off, slowly return to yourself. Bring your hands to prayer position with gratitude for the time youve allowed yourself to tune in and focus your mind.

You may use this ritual anytime you feel you need a moment to inspire focus, giving your mind, body and spirit the balance and vibration you need to be the most productive and creative possible in accomplishing your goals. With regular use of this ritual and the tools included, you will find you are no longer plagued with distraction, spinning thoughts or indirection. Your vibration will be in sync with the task at hand and youll be focused and ready to take on anything presented to you with clarity and grace.

Improve Your Self-Confidence Finding confidence within can be a lifelong challenge for many of us. Even the most successful people will struggle with insecurity at times. As we transition from childhood into adulthood, we face the challenge of finding our place in the world, and every time we enter the unknown - whether it be a new job, relationship, neighborhood, or a new step in our personal growth  there is room for doubt and insecurity to creep into our consciousness. Learning to trust ourselves requires overcoming the insecurity and programming we acquired as children. Our amygdalae are programmed to recall memories of when we felt weak or helpless in order to protect us from these experiences ever reoccurring  and this can prevent us from taking the steps we need to overcome those fears and insecurities.

Often, our insecurities stem from having had our opinions restrained or disregarded in childhood. Learning to value our own opinions, speak our truths and trust our judgment all play a part in building our self-confidence as adults. If you have children of your own, I welcome you to be open to what they have to say and empower them to know the difference between speaking their truth and stating an opinion, as well as being open to hearing the words of others. As parents, we have the unique ability to create change for future generations. They can be just as much our teachers as we are theirs.

We cannot and should not depend on those around us to prop up our self-confidence; it must come from within if we are to truly believe in ourselves. This is not to say there arent certain people in your life around whom you feel more confident, but pause for a moment to question why. Is it the comfort they provide  or is it that they empower you to speak your truth? Perhaps its a bit of both. Recognizing how our vibration shifts around others can be incredibly empowering and life-changing for the better, no matter what stage of life we are in.

Fear of failure is another obstacle to feeling confident. We are all human, we all make mistakes, we all face obstacles in life - its part of the human experience. We can use our mistakes as lessons for growth instead of allowing these to inhibit our development. Think of how many times you tried and failed to make a knot or tie a bow as a child. We kept trying, we enjoyed the process of learning, and we shouted in triumph when we finally figured it out! Our lessons may be more complicated in adulthood, but that doesnt mean we shouldnt keep trying. The adult successes are just as rewarding as the childhood ones.

My early adulthood was spent in front of the camera, acting. Between classes and auditions, it was a real struggle to turn on that confidence, knowing as I did that I was being judged not only on my acting ability, but on my physical appearance. Was I tall enough? Thin enough? Toned enough? Blonde enough? Happy enough? Did they like me? Most of the time my inner voice answered, No. On the inside, I was terrified. I said as much to a friend I made on the set of my first movie. He was shocked and couldnt believe I was battling these inner demons of insecurity. I used to depend on my grandmother to help me, my muse, my confidante, who always believed I would be successful in anything I did. When she passed away, it felt like the one person I needed for my self-confidence was gone. I was forced to learn to lift myself up, an important and painful lesson.

My grandfathers sister was as huge a star as Hollywood has ever seen: Rita Hayworth. A famed dancer and actor, she too struggled with crippling insecurity. Most people dont know this, and why would they? Her father, my great-grandfather, loved her dearly, but his way of showing love was by being very critical of anything that wasnt perfection. Although it was meant to make her stronger and better, and did in fact help her rise to stardom, his criticism also affected her confidence in herself. This insecurity showed through in her personal life, with five failed marriages and difficult family relationships. My father remembers how, when he was a child, she would always gravitate toward him at family gatherings: he was the youngest boy of the family and the only one she felt wouldnt or didnt judge her. And yet when I was growing up, my own father, following in family footsteps, was also very focused on what wasnt good enough, rather than what was.

Tools and Rituals for Self-Confidence A sense of being judged can destroy our self-confidence. Ive faced this personally and professionally, just like many of you reading this have as well. In terms of energy, feelings of inadequacy and failure have very low vibes. Let us take a moment to pause that self-doubt, that insecurity and those feelings of inadequacy. Here are some great tools to help . . .

Affirmations for self-confidence Using the power of sound, the magic of words and the infinite possibility of manifesting, affirmations are a wonderful step toward self-confidence. Take a moment to look within or even look in the mirror if that helps you: what do you feel you are lacking and why? Use those feelings to create change by saying affirmations that are the opposite. Here are some examples: What you feel: What you say: I am weak.

I am strong.

I am a terrible parent.

I am an amazing parent and exactly the right fit for my childs growth.

My boss hates me.

My boss is only projecting his/her insecurity; I have an amazing work ethic.

My body is disgusting.

My body is an incredible miracle of life that nourishes and protects my soul.

I am not good enough.

I am an amazing person, deserving of love and value.

My body is weak.

My body is healing and creating healthy cells every second.

Write these affirmations down and put them somewhere you will see them often, reminding you of how incredible you are. You dont have to believe them in the beginning, but say them anyway every day, every hour if you need to. Take your power back from negative thoughts. You can support your daily ritual of self-confidence work with some self-love and chakra healing.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Hum and repeat the sound Ram for three to five minutes to give yourself that boost of confidence before entering a crowd, meeting or group that induces insecurity.

Meditate for self-assertion As well as working with affirmations, you can use a mudra (hand gesture) when meditating to boost your selfconfidence and strengthen your ability to stand up for yourself. Get comfortable in your usual meditation position, and when you are ready, raise your energy in your hands by rubbing them together vigorously and placing them above your solar plexus chakra. Then bend your index finger slightly and touch your thumb to the outside of it, about halfway down, keeping your other fingers straight.

Crystals and essential oils for self-confidence Many people who face insecurity also have an imbalanced solar plexus chakra, our power source. If you think this might be the case, you can use essential oils and crystals to support yourself.

Here are some wonderful crystals you can work with by keeping them on your person (in your pocket, bra, or by wearing them as jewelry) during the day and placing them under your pillow at night: Citrine: Strengthens and balances the solar plexus while supporting the energy work of healing self-confidence.

Desert rose: Reminds us of our worth and value in this world.

Tigers eye: Gives inner strength and the will power to continue working on our self-esteem.

To use essential oils for self-confidence, heat them in a diffuser or dilute one or two drops in a teaspoon of water and rub this on your wrists and behind your ears.

Bergamot oil: Soothes the overburdened mind and helps emotional balance.

Cinnamon oil: Supports a sense of inner strength.

Geranium oil: Helps ease the mind of worries and restore a sense of self-worth.

Lemon oil: Helps cleanse your space of negativity and promotes a sense of empowerment.

SELF-CONFIDENCE RITUAL Using the tools listed above, you can create your own ritual for self-confidence. This can be as complex or as simple as your time and energy will allow. Whats important is that you continue practicing your ritual on a regular basis. Taking even just ten minutes a day will create wonderful changes to your inner strength and confidence. The bathroom or wherever you get ready for each day is a wonderful place to do this ritual.

You will need: essential oils chosen from list above pen and paper (or dry-erase marker and mirror) crystal that supports the solar plexus chakra (see list above) Step 1: Create your sacred space with the intention of raising your vibration for self-confidence.

Step 2: Dab your wrists and behind your ears with a couple of drops of essential oil diluted in a teaspoon of water, or warm the oil in a diffuser.

Step 3: Write down your affirmations for raising self-confidence on a piece of paper (or, if you wish, write them directly on your bedroom or bathroom mirror with a dry-erase marker).

Step 4: Place your chosen crystal on top of the piece of paper or hold the crystal in your non-dominant hand as you say your affirmations out loud five times. Five is the number for change, which is what you are creating with this ritual.

Step 5: (For this step, you will need to complete the Reiki self-attunement first. If you havent done this yet, move on to Step 6.) Invite Reiki energy to flow in through your crown to your hands. Place your non-dominant hand over your affirmations and crystal, and rest your dominant hand on your solar plexus chakra, just above your belly button. Take five deep belly breaths as the Reiki energy strengthens your power source and infuses your crystal and affirmations. Hold for three to five minutes.

Step 6: Bring your hands to a prayer position with gratitude for the incredible healing energy of Reiki, and for the powerful change you have created to strengthen your self-confidence.

Step 7: Place your crystal in your pocket, bra or under your pillow. Continue your day with your affirmations in your consciousness. Go to sleep knowing you are your affirmations.

Remember, you are a divine and beautiful being of life and energy. You are an important part of our world and hold incredible value in continuing the cycle of life. I am so grateful for your part in raising my own vibration and for your efforts to create change, which takes courage, and for your dedication to bettering yourself. Youre doing an amazing job. Just reading this chapter is another wonderful step on your spiritual journey, and may the next step bring you even closer to your dreams and goals!

Create Protection There are times in life when we need a little more than our four walls at home to keep us protected. There is a whole world of energy out there, and unfortunately not everyone in it will have your best interests at heart, so its important that you learn to protect yourself. Sometimes even loved ones can be responsible for draining our energy, often in families where a lot of jealousy is involved. Many times, its not even intentional, but just a brief negative thought sent in our direction can be enough to put us off balance at times. Being in the public eye, in a classroom or in meetings at work can also leave us vulnerable to jealous eyes and malintent.

Throughout history, people have used different methods to ward off bad vibes, and carried various symbols of protection. As a species, we humans are very superstitious, putting faith in charms and customs such as lucky pennies, evil eye jewelry, red string tied in a bracelet, safety pins hidden in clothing, knocking on wood, pinching ourselves  some people even bite and spit on their own hands! But no matter what we may think of the ways in which different cultures attempt to ward off negativity, there is always some truth in every folklore story.

Working with energy opens me up to many different vibes. Just as doctors and nurses are more exposed to germs than most other people, energy healers are more exposed to negative vibes.

Whether its through listening to the negative experiences of others or feeling their negative attachments, we can act like an open door to our clients energy. Empaths are particularly sensitive to bad vibes and those dreaded energy vampires, but even the most enlightened souls can get down from time to time with no particular rhyme or reason. A daily protection ritual keeps me strong and healthy energetically, not to mention emotionally, spiritually and physically! Its actually very simple to keep yourself protected, and once youve learned how, youll begin to notice the sometimes not-so-subtle difference in how you feel on those days when you do put protection in place, versus the days when you forget.

Tools and Rituals for Protection So, how do you protect yourself and your loved ones from ill-wishers, the evil eye, energy vampires and negativity? These tried and true methods can help you keep yourself and your loved ones free of negative energy and vibing at your highest.

SELF-PROTECTION RITUAL Before you work on protecting your loved ones, be sure youve protected your own energy first. If youve been feeling low, its just possible youve picked up some negative energy, so cleansing and protecting yourself will be key to raising your vibes. You can perform this ritual in just one or two minutes, or take a more ceremonial approach so it lasts for 20 minutes or longer.

You will need: 1 white candle 1 selenite wand, smudge stick (palo santo or rosemary) or salt (Epsom, Himalayan or sea salts) Optional: crystals (such as tourmaline, black obsidian, hematite, citrine or smoky quartz) and/or 1 black or white intention candle with a short burn life Step 1: Create your sacred space to do the work, setting the intention, I am safe and free from all negative energy, as you light your candle.

Step 2: Choose two or more tools and/or rituals from the steps below that resonate with you. Its always best to choose those that catch your attention first, but dont worry about getting this wrong; these are all wonderful choices and all will do the job.

Step 3: Before you wrap yourself in protective healing energy, youll want to cleanse your aura of any negative vibes and to cut cord attachments (the kind of attachment formed by energy vampires). Selenite wands, smudging sticks and salt are great for this purpose. Choose one of the following: Cord cutting with a selenite wand Focus on the intention, I am clear of any and all energy and attachments that do not serve my highest good, and hold your selenite wand about 2 to 6 inches (5 to 15cm) from your body. Starting from your root chakra, raise the wand in an upward motion up above and behind your head three times. Repeat on your back from below your bottom and up to your mid back. Wipe the selenite wand down each arm three times, and cut the air below each foot.

Cleansing with a smudge stick Holding your intention as above, use the smudge stick 4 to 6 inches (10 to 15cm) from your body and allow the smoke to pass in front, behind, above and below you as you would a selenite wand, being careful to keep the hot end away from your clothing and skin. Douse the smudge stick in a small bowl of sand or your abalone shell if you use one.

Cleansing with salt Add 1 cup of your chosen salt to your bath or use on your sponge in the shower.

Step 4: Once youve cleansed your aura, you can begin the ritual of protection. Choose one or more vibration-raising rituals from those listed below.

Crystal protection Use a freshly cleansed protection crystal. During the day, keep the crystal close to you; at night, place the crystals under your pillow. With the exception of citrine, which needs much less cleansing work, you will need to do regular cleansings of any crystals used in this ritual (see pages 689 for how to cleanse them).

Black tourmaline: Works like a sponge, absorbing the negative energy and taking the hit instead of you. It is best to cleanse this crystal daily.

Black obsidian: Works like a shield, sending the negative energy back to its source. This one should be cleansed at least once a week.

Citrine: Shields and uses the power of the Sun to radiate light into your aura, essentially blinding the negative energy. This is especially useful for protection from energy vampires, preventing them from latching on (in a cord attachment) and draining your own energy. Cleanse once a month under the Full Moon.

Hematite: This crystal absorbs negativity and is a great choice for protection from toxic family members. Best to cleanse daily.

Smoky quartz: Works like a shield, blocking negative energy. Needs to be cleansed every couple of days.

Violet flame protection Invoke the violet flame. Wrap yourself in its beautiful, healing light and visualize its warm glow swirling around your entire being and sealing you in a bubble of protection with all of your precious energy in its protective light. Say aloud, I am safe and protected within the violet flame.

Angel protection Call upon your angels to protect you! They are always near and ready to assist you; all you need do is ask. Say aloud, Angels! Please shelter and protect me, bless me with your loving energy, protect me from all sources of negative energy so I am safe within your beautiful protection. Angels, thank you.

Candlelight protection Use an intention candle to banish any and all negative energy attached to you into the light of its flame. You will need to get mad for this one. That can feel a bit silly at first, but its most effective when you reach down deep and expel that energy with your anger. Anger is a root chakra emotion and will send all negative energy up and out of your own energetic being, which you then direct into the flame.

Light your candle, holding the thought, This candle will remove any and all negativity attached to me.

Announce out loud, All negative energy, all energetic cords of attachment, get off of me! You are not welcome in my body or spirit. This is MY space! Get off and go to the light of the candle. Do it NOW, so it is done!

Repeat three times. Feel the anger rise up through you and out.

Take three restorative deep breaths to center and ground yourself once you have finished.

Allow this candle to burn through. You can move it to a bathtub or shower for fire safety.

Step 6: Close your ritual with a moment of gratitude, giving thanks for the ability to shield yourself from negative energy. Blow out your candle and keep your crystals close if you chose to use any.

Once you have cleansed your aura and protected yourself, you may use these same steps for loved ones; just focus on directing the protective energy to them. Always cleanse yourself after youve done any energy work on someone else.

Now go on to enjoy your day, or night, knowing you are safe and well protected, knowing only beautiful and positive energy surrounds you! Take a deep and grateful breath and allow yourself a big smile. You have just raised your vibes. Doesnt it feel amazing?

Work on Self-Love We are all divine beings, blessed with our individual talents and traits. Many of us tend to forget this for a variety of reasons, such as having other peoples pain projected onto us, unhealthy relationships, childhood traumas or the constant comparing of ourselves to others. Whatever the reason, know that you are deserving of love  and that this starts with loving yourself. Showing ourselves some love is a beautiful way to lift ourselves up, raise our vibes and start attracting those who will also show us love.

When we are vibing low, its easy to blame whats happening in our lives as the cause of our unhappiness, but we dont need to stay in a state of apathy, worry or pain. Journaling out these emotions can help us release them. But what about the space left after that release? By creating a shift in our own vibration to the positive, we are making space for all thats new and wonderful to come into our lives. Seeing ourselves in a more positive light will help to attract the love we all need, and to feel accepted, valued and worthy of love. If you dont love yourself, how will you learn to accept the love of anyone else?

It all starts with you, so show yourself some love!

Many issues of self-love originate during our formative years. Not everyone is blessed with emotionally supportive parents and some of us might even have been abused as children and made to feel unloveable. In an effort to protect ourselves, we close off our ability to trust anyone. Overcoming these deep-rooted experiences can feel like an uphill battle  but know that you are loved. You are an important part of this world and can use these experiences to create a better life for yourself and others. Through your pain, you have the ability to show compassion, recognize the emotional hurts of others and guide them back to a place of love and healing. By starting your own practice of self-love and self-worth, you create a shift in vibration that radiates out to all those you come into contact with.

Our thoughts about ourselves are an important part of self-love, so take a moment to pause the negative ones. The media and society tend to dictate what we think is beautiful, and when our own appearance doesnt match this, especially during our developing years, we hold on to the negative thoughts about our body. It may be more common with girls, but boys also feel the pressures of societys definitions of masculinity. But the truth is, not everyone agrees with societys views about whats attractive. And definitions of beauty change over time. In the Renaissance, for example, it was fuller-figured women who were thought more desirable. Weve seen how Jennifer Lopez and Kim Kardashian kicked off the new fabulous of large hips and big bottoms  a drastic change from the anorexic look of ballerinas and runway models a decade earlier. Suddenly women no longer looked negatively at their fuller hips  and some felt they had to get implants to give the illusion of a smaller waistline and larger hips. So it goes from one extreme to another.

New mothers especially struggle with these ideals; their postmaternity bodies have changed and the baby weight may not come off immediately or at all. Having had three children myself, I remember looking in horror at my reflection and crying over my clothes not fitting. It was only after seeing my younger sister go through the process, and seeing that same look of disapproval on her face at her own reflection, that I was shocked back to a healthy state of mind. She had the same little marks on her belly and I remember thinking how beautiful she was and how ridiculous that anyone could think those were ugly. She was a goddess, a mother  a creator of life!

All our blemishes and scars are beautiful. I have scars on my tummy and my back from my surgery. Sometimes I joke that Im a human Frankenstein, but the truth is I am whole and healed. My scars are a reminder of my past, yes, but they also represent the incredible journey of healing Ive experienced. I am grateful for them. They are battle wounds, proof I overcame suffering, while my stretchmarks represent the beautiful life I was gifted to bring into this world. And no one will ever be able to take that away from me, because I chose to reclaim my power and change my perspective of what beautiful really means.

And you can do exactly the same. The next time you catch yourself judging another, pause to consider if you are perhaps projecting your own insecurities or past traumas on them  and stop the cycle; choose instead to find something about them that you can admire or send them some love yourself with a smile or words of encouragement. Its important to remember that others may be going through the same hardships around self-love and self-worth.

Tools and Rituals for Self-Love Be kind to yourself, no matter your shape, color, scars, features or inner feelings of value, and know you are a beautiful and magical part of life. When you came into this world, everyone who looked at you saw this, so its time to see yourself with the same love and potential. An interesting side effect to energy healing is that when you begin to focus on your inner being and that of others, you begin to feel the beauty within.

Here are some beautiful yet simple ways to bring more self-love into your life.

Flowers and herbs Self-love should be a natural part of all our lives, so here are two wonderful plants to encourage it to grow: Roses: Roses are a symbol of love all on their own, and incorporating them into your self-care with their beauty and fragrance is one of the quickest ways to infuse yourself with love. They lift your vibe and overwhelm the senses with love with their own beautiful energy.

Basil: This herb has been used as a symbol of love and protection for centuries. In some parts of the world it is customary to give to newlyweds to keep love strong in the marriage. Many believe keeping a fresh basil plant by your homes entrance will bring love to the home.

Smudging sticks and incense Cleanse your mind and your body of all those negative thoughts and feelings with your choice of smudge stick. (See pages 10710 for suggestions.) Follow with a quick smudge of roses or basil to bring love into your vibration. Once youve cleansed that negative energy, repeat with a rose-scented incense stick. You can also make a smudge stick of your own with rose petals wrapped around your chosen smudge.

Rose essential oil is fairly easy to find, so add some to your diffuser to spread that loving energy into your home and raise your vibration to one of love.

Reiki Channeling gentle and loving Reiki energy to your heart chakra will raise your vibration to one of love and clear away blockages or negativity held from trauma or heartache. Once you have experienced your Reiki Blessing Attunement Ceremony (see pages 3843), you can perform a self-treatment, focusing on the heart chakra for three to five minutes.

Love crystals Choose one or more of these love-vibing crystals to keep next to you as you sleep, during meditation, or place them directly on your heart chakra. This last practice is especially powerful with an infusion of Reiki energy.

Desert rose: Especially helpful for self-worth and self-love.

Rose quartz: Gentle, all-encompassing love energy. Very helpful for relationships with partners and children.

Malachite: Heals the heart from old traumas and assists in understanding the lessons the heart must go through both in this lifetime and those of the past.

Rhodochrosite: Especially helpful for healing the child within and beautiful vibrations of self-love.

Rhodonite: Very helpful for self-worth and for finding your life purpose through expression of love.

SELF-LOVE BATHING RITUAL Taking a spiritual bath with an emphasis on self-love means taking a moment to pamper and indulge yourself in some love. You can easily make some adjustments for the shower as well. The salt and smudging stages will help remove blockages and negativity, allowing space for love to replace them.

You will need: 1 rose incense stick 1 cup of salt (Epsom, Himalayan or sea salt) water-safe crystals (see above for options) 1 handful of rose petals 23 basil leaves a few drops of rose essential oil smudging stick (sage or whatever resonates for you)  cup rose water Step 1: Create your sacred space with the intention that you are healing your heart chakra and raising your vibration to one of love. Light your rose incense stick. You are welcome to play music that resonates with you as well. This is a time for bringing in love, so its best to avoid music that triggers memories of pain or heartache, even if its a love song.

Step 2: Run your bath or shower.

Step 3: Add your salt, crystals, petals, herbs and essential oils to the bath. (If showering, place the crystals where you will see them, being mindful to keep them away from the drain, and add dried herbs, salt and oils to your loofah or sponge, before laying the petals in a circle just outside the flow of water.) Step 4: Smudge your entire body, head to toe and back up. Smudge a few inches above the water or inside the shower stall to cleanse the water as well. (See the chapter Smudging, pages 10512, for further guidance on this practice.) Step 5: Step into your bath or shower of loving energy. Allow every cell in your body, your mind and spirit to be open to the vibration of love as the water envelops you. Keep your mind focused on love, releasing thoughts of pain or heartache for this time youve created for yourself to heal. Enjoy this loving energy for as long as you feel you need it.

Step 6: After you dry off, use the rose water to lightly wash down your body and face to seal in that vibration of love. You can also add some rose water to your lotion to moisturize if this is something you do after bathing.

SELF-LOVE MEDITATION This is a powerful ritual for infusing your whole being with the vibration of love. Set aside 20 minutes to enjoy its healing benefits.

You will need: timer a couple of drops rose essential oil (diluted in 1 tsp water) music with a frequency of 432 Hz (search on YouTube for options) rose petal or basil leaf crystals (see pages 1867 for heart chakra suggestions) Step 1: Choose a quiet space you will be uninterrupted. Set your timer for just over 20 minutes, allowing time to get yourself comfortable and centered.

Step 2: Rub a couple drops of diluted rose essential oil on to your wrists and behind your ears to incorporate the power of smell to your meditation, infusing you with the scents of love.

Step 3: Play your music. Use headphones if you need to keep the volume down.

Step 4: Lie down and place a rose petal and/or basil leaf over your heart chakra. Place your choice of crystal on top to hold it/them in place. If you have additional crystals, you may keep one in each palm to hold during this meditation.

Step 5: Take four deep belly breaths to center and clear your mind.

Step 6: Each time your mind wanders, return to the word love as your focus. Enjoy!

You will notice your whole spirit feels lighter and warmer after a love-centered meditation or spiritual love bath. Try to keep that feeling going throughout the day by bringing your thoughts back to the word love. Then go to sleep with your rose petals and/or crystals on your bedside table to keep their vibration of love near you.

It is okay if you become emotional during these rituals; allow yourself to feel all the feelings as you release them, making space within for the vibration of love. Return to these rituals to infuse your vibration with the energy of love any time you feel called to, or if you need a little extra loving energy for your day.

Nurture Your Relationships We human beings are naturally social beings and are dependent on our families, communities and societies to help define our place in the world. This can be a source of many of our greatest moments of happiness, as well as our sorrows. Friendships, family relations and intimate relationships all have their own pulls on our heartstrings. There are those relationships we choose to be in and those we are born into. Both kinds have their own unique connection to our spirit and offer us valuable lessons. How we choose to express ourselves within these connections can have a major effect on our vibration and happiness.

If we are in a close relationship, our partners are hopefully part of our support system on our journey too. Of course, when we are not on the same vibration, we may grow apart and need to follow a new direction in our lives. If this happens, it helps to ease the hurt when we can accept that some relationships will eventually serve their purpose and release our attachment to them, allowing ourselves to grow and move on to those that better serve us. However, sometimes all we need to do to bring the positive energy back to a relationship is to change our own perspective and reopen lines of communication. When we realize that people have their own lessons to learn, we may see how we can play a part on their journey in a positive way.

Whoever we are and whatever the nature of our close relationships, respecting ourselves and others as unique spiritual beings is very important. Try to accept that your actions or behaviors may have contributed to the emotional response of those you love. One thing we all have in common is a tendency to project our own emotions on to others. Think about how many times you have had a bad day and snapped at someone through no fault of their own! Now think about how many times someone has possibly done the same to you. Honest and open communication will always be a major key to resolving relationship struggles, whether with friends, children, partners or loved ones. So, starting today, lets try to be kind to all living things. Lets choose happiness; lets choose love.

Tools and Rituals for Relationships You and those you love will face many trials and moments of weakness that can affect the vibration and health of your relationship. You dont need to face these challenges alone. There are some simple things you can do to help get you back to vibing high and on the same frequency as your loved ones.

Here are some rituals and methods that I have personally and professionally found to be very helpful. If you are working on a relationship with someone who you live with, be sure to cleanse and raise the vibration of the home you share for a healthy and happy environment. (See pages 20510 in Make a Happy Home and Workplace for helpful crystals to place around the home.) Crystals for communication These beautiful crystals are well known for assisting with communication and throat chakra balancing, allowing you to speak and listen with openness and without judgment. They are wonderful choices for the rituals below or to keep close during conversations with a loved one. Be sure to cleanse them before each healing session.

Blue kyanite: Facilitates communication and helps clear up misunderstandings.

Blue lace agate: Allows you to communicate clearly and effectively while keeping your cool in stressful situations.

Chrysocolla: Helps balance and heal exchanges, allowing you to know when to speak and when to listen; also releases stress and tackles imbalances.

Lapis lazuli: Supports focus and is good for written communication.

Turquoise: For efficient communication and receptivity.

Gentle crystal Reiki energy for relationships Using crystals with Reiki can create gentle yet profound shifts in energy that will help to bring you and a loved one closer, even if the other person might be hesitant about engaging in energy healing. Keep your Reiki-infused crystals with you during the day and under your pillow or on the bedside table at night to keep you vibrating from a place of open and loving communication with your loved one.

OPENING COMMUNICATION RITUAL This ritual can be a great way to create a safe and honest space in which to share emotions, thoughts and goals with your loved one. This can be very intimate and intimidating to start with, but with regular practice, youll both find it easier to speak your truth in a compassionate way.

You will need: 2 sets of pens and paper (if available, blue to vibe with the throat chakra) crystals (to be chosen by each of you) timer Optional: intention candle, box of tissues Step 1: Sit and create your sacred space together, with the intention of opening and healing the lines of communication between you. If using a candle, light this now as you set your intention.

Step 2: On your pieces of paper, make a list of your concerns, those areas you feel you are struggling to agree on and where you feel emotionally triggered. Try to be clear in your wording, yet withholding judgment and accusation. Avoid using phrases such as you make me feel, replacing these with I feel like . . . when . . . Remember that this is not a competition; if you list only one or two things and that feels like its enough, stop there.

Step 3: Exchange papers and read the list of each others thoughts, feelings and concerns.

Step 4: Each of you now hold the crystal of your choice and take five deep belly breaths as you calm, center and consider the others writings.

Step 5: Decide who will speak first and who will listen. Allow yourself to be patient as the other speaks their truth. Keep your tissues nearby if necessary, withhold judgment and allow any tears to flow as emotions are released. It can help your connection to hold hands during this spoken exchange.

Step 6: Respond to each item on the list, acknowledging their feelings without blame, guilt or interruption, considering what changes you are willing to make, and ask if that change will satisfy your loved one. If not, ask what changes they would like to see and write them down.

Step 7: Take five deep belly breaths to help soothe any emotional responses and re-center before changing roles of speaker and listener. This will also help keep the communication flowing in a compassionate and calm manner.

Step 8: Look over the revised list and note where you may have to accept some responsibility for triggering their emotional response. Accept responsibility for your part and apologize for any areas you feel you either didnt realize you were a part of and/or for your negative response to their actions (e.g. I am sorry my actions caused you to feel . . . or I am sorry I responded in that way).

Step 9: Accept each others apology with gratitude for listening and hearing your own. Agree to make any changes you are capable of in order to support your loved one.

Step 10: Set a timer to meditate together for 520 minutes, in this way allowing your energy to align with each other.

Step 11: Finish the meditation with a physical connection  an embrace, kiss or caress of the cheek. Physical contact allows for an open heart, acceptance of the other and reconnection.

Step 12: Close your ritual with your hands in prayer position in a moment of gratitude for the incredible healing energy you have allowed this space to hold. Blow out your intention candle if using.

It is okay if you find this ritual difficult to do the first time; do it anyway. Yes, it can be very hard on our egos to listen to how we may have been a source of someone elses pain or discomfort, but it is also a wonderful part of our own growth. We cant always see how our actions and comments affect other people, especially those we have a heart connection with. At the close of this ritual, you will feel so much lighter and so much happier and possibly even walk away having learned something new about yourself and your loved one. The gratitude in your being and shift in your vibration is well worth the time you spend facing emotional discomfort.

This ritual can be amazing for maintaining healthy relationships through regular practice. Each time, you may find the lists change, and that is a wonderful sign of growth. Keep the other persons list with you in the following days so that you can reflect upon it and remind yourself of any changes you can make. It is easy to slip back into old patterns, and having their list close by can serve as a wonderful reminder of the work you are committing to do in order to keep your relationship healthy and balanced.

By creating a routine of doing energy work together, you can keep your vibrations in sync and have an open mind to all that life brings to your relationship. Since circumstances can change and new experiences get added to the mix, its important to create a habit of maintaining a high vibration and open communication.

Meditating together will help keep emotions stable, tempers calm and lines of communication open as you raise your vibration together. If you sense conflict coming into play, repeat the Opening Communication Ritual above.

Make a Happy Home and Workplace Creating a high vibing home and workplace keeps us happier and more productive, which means making more money and bringing joy into our lives. Ive done a lot of healings to help people clear their homes and workplaces of negative energy, enabling them to welcome love, success and happiness into their lives. But we dont need to be dependent on others for our happiness and success; we all have the ability to raise our vibes ourselves!

Wherever we find ourselves, we will be exposed to many different energies, some of which are amazing and well-intended, while others are jealous, competitive, angry or just plain negative. Just as our minds are so quick to gravitate toward the negative, low-vibrational feelings and thoughts, so too are our energy fields affected by these. We may busy ourselves with buying things that we think will make us happy or which are meant to improve our productivity, but lets not forget that the energy circulating in our environments and our minds is really the driving force of our happiness.

Tools and Rituals for a Happy Home and Workplace Giving our environment a boost of positive energy is the key to our happiness and success. Here are some wonderful and simple ways to do this when youre short on time and need a steady flow of positivity, along with a couple of rituals for when you have more time to devote to raising the vibes in your space.

Declutter your space!

Clutter is like a magnet and safe haven for negative energy. Many of us struggle with this one, as its so easy to toss stuff in a pile rather than store it neatly in a drawer. Perhaps this is our subconscious placing our negative thoughts and feelings into a spot away from ourselves. What were really doing, though, is creating a place for negative energy to fester and spread.

So clear off those counters, keep your dirty laundry in a closet or get a bin with a lid (an open bin is another big negative energy source), and keep those piles of mail, paperwork, etc. in a drawer instead. You will be amazed at the immediate shift in your vibe to the positive.

Fresh flowers and plants Mother Earth, with her incredible natural beauty, is one of lifes most magical forces. Bringing her into your home is like a gift to yourself. Fresh flowers in the home bring in beauty and ooze positive energy. Many can be dried and used for smudging once theyve lost their vibrancy. Why not keep a small vase of blooms on your nightstand to help you raise your vibes as you sleep, so when you awake in the morning, youre feeling the love?

Dont love the idea of cutting flowers? Thats okay; just use alternatives such as keeping a potted flowering plant, using a diffuser with your favorite flower essential oil, or light a rose incense stick to welcome the loving energy of flower essence into your home or office.

Bringing houseplants into your space can also make a huge difference to your vibe and the energy in your environment. Plants purify our air, give off oxygen and hold the gift of life while helping to keep us grounded. Even just touching a plant can make you feel better, so nurturing one in your home is an amazing feeling.

You dont need to have a green thumb to keep a plant at home; there are some amazing indoor plants that grow well even with little to no sunlight or water. They also serve as wonderful cleansing for our crystals or you can add any crystals you have that may have broken to the soil. Easy-care house plants include bamboo, Philodendrons, succulents, the ZZ plant and snake plants.

Music Turn up those tunes! Music has been used throughout time for raising our vibe. Allow your inner child to let go and move your body, shaking off those bad vibes and restoring you with a sense of joy. Music does wonders to remove low vibrations like fear and anger, replacing them with happiness and love. If you want to relax, listening to 432 Hz music will create deep healing and help restore your sense of wellbeing.

HOME AND OFFICE CLEANSING RITUAL This is a great ritual to perform after moving into a new home, hosting guests or office meetings, or if you simply notice yourself feeling emotionally drained or low vibrational. It helps to bring the energy back to a spiritually healthy and cleansed state that radiates positivity. The same applies if you are limited to your bedroom in shared accommodation, or feel you only need one space cleansed (as I do with my healing room between sessions).

If youre practicing this ritual at work or are sensitive to smoke, you can use essential oils in a diffuser, repeating mantras or affirmations as you channel Reiki energy to your space.

You will need: smudge stick or incense of your choice lighter or matches fireproof dish or pot (plus small charcoal piece for use with resins) large feather or folded paper source of sound (your favorite high vibing music, a singing bowl, Tibetan bells, or even loud clapping) Optional: a small bowl of sand to douse the smudge stick when you are finished.

Step 1: Decide on your choice of smudge. (See pages 10710 for suggestions.) Step 2: Open all the windows and/or doors in your home to allow all the negative energy to leave your space. When you want to be extra thorough, open up your drawers and closets too.

Step 3: Break up the energy! Turn up the tunes, get your bells ringing or hands clapping. This will release any stagnant energy, and force negative vibes out from under furniture and cluttered spaces so you can then cleanse it away.

Step 4: Light your smudge. Starting with the front door, move clockwise around the living spaces of your home, paying special attention to corners and under furniture, and around windows and doors, followed by bathrooms and bedrooms. (If you are using resin, make sure the pot is cool enough to handle safely or use a kitchen mitt to hold the handle.) Fan the smoke with your feather or paper fan toward the ground and away from you before allowing it to rise.

Step 5: As you fan the smoke, repeat a prayer, healing mantra or affirmation. I really like to say, Love, light and happiness, to pour those energies into my home, but you can use whatever words feel right to you.

Step 6: Cleanse yourself. Wash the smoke all around your body to be sure that none of the negative energy attaches to you.

Step 7: Close your ritual. Once youve smudged all the rooms of your home, office or space, return to the main entrance for one more cleansing. Repeat your affirmation, mantra or prayer. Douse your smudge stick, or leave your pot on the stove (the wealth center of the home), and bring your hands to prayer position over your heart chakra, giving thanks for the blessings you have welcomed into your space. Leave your windows open for at least 20 minutes.

I like to do this ritual at least once a month and after entertaining visitors, but some feel that once annually is enough. You will know when the energy is vibing lower by how you feel in your space, and that is the best time to perform your home-cleansing ritual. Enjoy the new and positive vibes youve brought in and smile!

HEALING WITH SOUND RITUAL This ritual works wonderfully for changing and raising the vibration of your personal space and environment, as well as breaking up any stagnant energy.

You will need at least one of the following: singing bowl (crystal or Tibetan bowls are both great) Tibetan bells tuning fork online or other recording of one of the Solfeggio frequencies (choose the frequency you want to work with) your voice Step 1: Create your sacred space with your healing intention.

Step 2: Create your healing sound. If you are using a crystal singing bowl or Tibetan singing bowl, it is best to do so in a sitting position. If using a tuning fork, you may choose to lay down as an option and sound the tuning fork over each chakra center for three to five minutes. If listening to recorded music, your body position can be whichever is most comfortable.

Step 3: Clear your mind of all thoughts beyond the sound of your instrument (including your voice, if you are using this as an option).

Step 4: Focus your attention on the sound until you can no longer hear it (or run out of breath). If wishing to raise the vibration of your space, begin by making the sound in the middle of the room, followed by each corner, and then return to the center. Alternatively, for recorded music, simply turn up the volume of your device.

Step 5: Repeat until you feel centered or as long as time will allow. About 20 to 30 minutes is great but adjust the time to whatever feels right for you.

Step 6: Close your ritual with a moment of gratitude for the beautiful healing energy of vibration. Be sure to put any instruments somewhere safe where they can be left undisturbed for future use. Sound healing has been an incredible source of healing on my own journey and I know it will be for you, too  have fun!

Crystals for Home and Work As most of our lives are spent within the home and workplace, keeping these environments vibrating at a higher frequency will manifest positive change in all aspects of your life. By placing crystals around these areas, you will benefit from their incredible vibrations. I encourage you to choose those stones that resonate with you most, even if not listed below. If youre a crystal enthusiast, as I am, and already have some of these beauties, you can start creating crystal grids for your individual needs (see Crystals, pages 715).

Computers and WiFi routers/towers With technology a key element in todays society both in our homes and workplaces, its recommended that you keep at least one of these crystals near your WiFi towers, routers and hard drives to shield you from Electro Magnetic Fog (EMF) and 5G.

Lepidolite: Keeps the stress level low while shielding you from harmful EMF. Supports all chakras, especially the heart and third eye.

Malachite: Protects your physical body form EMF, allows you to work from your heart space so all your work is efficient and accurate. Supports the heart chakra.

Shungite: Cleansing, purifying and offers EMF protection. Supports all chakras.

Tourmaline: Absorbs negative energy, protects from EMFs. Supports the root chakra.

Crystals for your home Our home is where we nurture ourselves, our loved ones, and where we recharge. Keeping your home vibing high will assist your own health and happiness. Amethyst is a wonderful go-to crystal for anywhere in the home and I personally keep large amethysts on display throughout my home to help keep the vibe high and provide protection. Here are some other helpful crystals to have around your home: Kitchen This is the heart of the home, where you nourish your body, strengthen your power center (i.e. solar plexus chakra) and welcome abundance into your life.

Apatite: Aids balance, tissue regeneration, bone health, and soothes digestion to prevent overeating. Supports the throat and third eye chakras.

Citrine: Brings abundance, protection and inner strength. Supports the solar plexus chakra.

Green aventurine: Brings prosperity, stimulates cell repair and regrowth, vitality and heart-centered healing. Supports the heart chakra.

Pyrite: Provides protection from environmental pollutants, strengthens the mind and will power, vitalizes your energy and improves financial prosperity. Supports the solar plexus chakra.

Entryway As this is where people enter the home, its important to keep this area protected and allow only positive energy to be admitted. These crystals are wonderful for placing in windows as well.

Obsidian: The return-to-sender stone, which sends negative energies back and offers protection. Supports the root chakra.

Selenite: Cleanses the aura of negativity and blockages, allowing for a sense of security with a divine flow of positive energies. Supports the third eye and crown chakras.

Tourmaline: Provides protection, grounding and absorbs negativity. Supports the root chakra.

Turquoise: Brings divine healing and protection, allowing space for peaceful and positive energy to flow. Supports the throat chakra.

Dining room Where we meet for communication, bonding and nourishment.

Ametrine: Balances yin and yang energies, fosters compatibility and acceptance, strengthens the immune system, stimulates the metabolism and eases digestion. Supports the solar plexus and crown chakras.

Blue lace agate: Aids communication and creative expression, soothes worries. Supports the throat chakra.

Jade: Brings heart-centered connection to family and ancestors and aids family unity. Supports the heart chakra.

Rose quartz: Brings love and emotional connection. Supports the heart chakra.

Bedrooms Where we spend most of our time in the home to sleep, rest, enjoy divine intimacy with loved ones, and regenerate.

Amethyst: For psychic protection and intuitive dreams during your sleep cycle, helps overcome insomnia for more restful sleep, soothes and clears an overactive mind. Supports the third eye and crown chakras.

Desert rose: Balances the body both physically and emotionally, aligns the spine and muscles, promotes universal love and unity, self-value and self-love. Supports the root, heart and crown chakras.

Moonstone: Divine goddess energy, helps soothe and de-stress, assists with pregnancy and psychic abilities. Supports the sacral, third eye and crown chakras.

Shungite: Helps with cleansing, purifying and EMF protection. Supports all chakras.

Living room Where we entertain and enjoy guests and family.

Angelite: Opens communication from a place of love, brings protection and guidance from the angels and promotes harmony. Supports the throat chakra.

Clear quartz: The master healer, transmutes negative emotions, brings divine connection to the Source. Supports all chakras.

Smokey quartz: Fosters a sense of belonging, heals negative emotions and absorbs negative energy. Supports the root chakra.

Sunstone: Brings warmth and uplifting happiness. Supports the sacral and solar plexus chakras.

Bathrooms Where we cleanse and ground ourselves with water, and release toxins from the body.

Agate: Centers and stabilizes your physical body, bringing balance between mind, body and spirit. Known for its healing abilities, particularly of the lymphatic system as well as stomach, uterus and pancreas. Primarily a grounding stone, it supports all of the chakras, depending on the color of the stone chosen.

Amazonite: Calms the brain and nervous system, soothes the spiritual, emotional and physical bodies. Supports the heart and throat chakras.

Chrysocolla: Helps balance and heal digestive tract issues, releases stress and imbalances from the physical body. Supports the root, heart and throat chakras.

Jasper: There are many types of jasper, all connecting us to Mother Earth with their grounding properties, allowing for a balanced and harmonious connection between the physical and the spiritual worlds. Supports all chakras.

Crystals for your workplace Our work environment has a huge impact on our wellbeing, and provides a source of security and abundance for our lives on the physical plane. We typically spend most of our time interacting with others in this space, so its important to make sure your environment here keeps your own spirit at a higher vibration. This can apply to working from a home office, as well as continuing with your studies. Keep these stones on your person (in your pocket, bra or jewelry) or on your workstation to enjoy the benefits of these beautiful crystals. You dont have to buy them all; just choose the ones that resonate with you. Some days you may need a different energy depending on your mood, so have the crystals with you that you feel you need for the day.

Communication Having a successful and prosperous career requires clear and heart-centered communication, whether as part of a team or working independently.

Blue kyanite: Opens lines of communication, clears the fog of miscommunication. Supports the throat and third eye chakras.

Blue lace agate: Allows you to communicate clearly and effectively while keeping your cool in stressful situations. Supports the throat chakra.

Rose quartz: Allows you to speak gently from a place of love, gives a sense of purpose and belonging to those close to you. Supports the heart chakra.

Turquoise: Brings serenity and peace while allowing you to communicate efficiently, helping others to accept and appreciate your contribution. Supports the throat chakra.

Productivity What you put out is what you receive, and these crystals keep that cycle going strong and positive.

Carnelian: Returns a sense of joy and purpose to your work, allows you to create from a high vibration, making you more enthusiastic about completing tasks. Supports the sacral and solar plexus chakras.

Citrine: Gives you that will power to get things done efficiently. Supports the sacral and solar plexus chakras.

Green aventurine: A prosperity stone that attracts financial gain through heart-centered actions stemming from a place of love. Supports the heart chakra.

Tigers eye: Gives you drive and inner strength, energy and vitality to push through on those longer days at work while preventing others negativity from permeating your aura, keeping you protected and on task. Supports the root, sacral and solar plexus chakras.

Desk Your workstation is where creativity and productivity meet.

Amethyst: Soothes and clears an overactive mind while keeping your aura protected. Supports the third eye and crown chakras.

Black obsidian: Sends negative energies back and provides protection, especially from energy vampires. Supports the root chakra.

Desert rose: Allows you to see your contributions as worthy, balances the body both physically and emotionally, and aligns the spine and muscles. Supports the root, heart and crown chakras.

Hematite: Provides grounding energy alongside protection, so you can stay focused and on task without outside influence on your energy field. Supports the root chakra.

Windows Where outside energy is admitted to your workspace. Keep this area protected and allow only positive energy to enter using the same crystals listed for entryways on page 209.

Overcome Fear and Guilt Fear is a necessary human response, designed to keep us safe from any perceived threats in our surroundings. However, the guilt that is often associated with these sorts of instinctive responses relates to how we then process our actions mentally, which we sometimes do to our own detriment. When we give in to these kinds of low vibrational thoughts, they can manifest as conditions such as depression and anxiety. We will dive into those emotions soon, but, for now, lets begin with the possible source of them: fear and guilt.

Think about how many times in your life you really wanted to do or try something, but you didnt because of your fear of failure. Then you experienced self-inflicted guilt for not trying, with a constant flow of what if thoughts. This kind of negative thinking can keep you stuck in a loop and hold you back from living your best life. It is okay to be fearful of the new and different  it makes us cautious and keeps us safe  but moving through that obstacle of fear is also incredibly empowering.

Learning to live your truth and stepping out of your comfort zone isnt easy, but the growth and feeling of accomplishment are so worth it. Even if we fail the first time, or the second time, that doesnt mean its game over. Its simply a process of learning what works and what doesnt. Releasing our minds of their patterns of fear and guilt is a huge stepping stone on our path to self-confidence, self-love and raising our vibes so we can enjoy the gifts of the life that awaits us. You are worthy and deserving of all you set your mind to achieve.

For years  decades even  my mom and other friends along the way have told me I should write a book. My dad, who is a wonderful writer himself, helped me write one when I was in elementary school, which ended up winning an award. Even with that early childhood success, however, I had no faith in myself as an adult author. Every time someone said I needed to write a book, my mind would busy itself with horrible negative self-talk: What would I write? Why would anyone care what I say? What if its terrible and people laugh at me? and so on. When I look back now, Im floored by it: Why was I so mean to myself?

I think a major moment that triggered change for me was when I became a parent myself. My son started crying over a school assignment. As I tried to comfort and help him, he told me, I just cant, Mom! Oh my goodness. I saw in him the same selfdoubt and fear repeating itself, and it just burned me on the inside. I did not bring this beautiful soul into our world so he could destroy himself with self-doubt  no way! And Im not about to stand by and wait for you to do it either. We are all in this together, and with a little support and direction, we can accomplish our goals, finish those projects, write those books, get that job, and value ourselves.

We may not be able to control what other people say to us, but we can control what we say to ourselves. Maybe we had a negative experience (or two or three!) with a teacher, sibling, parent or lover that told us we werent capable or worthy of our dreams or who belittled our hopes. First, you need to realize those people were very likely projecting their own lack of self-worth onto you. It happens; were all human.

Our fear and guilt make it more likely can even keep us on a path we know isnt right. Perhaps we feel stuck in a job or relationship, but we are too scared to leave. Forgive yourself for your feelings of fear and guilt. Acknowledge why you feel this way and start making small changes each day to raise your vibes. Make small steps in the direction you want to go. Only you know what you can or cant handle in your soul, but let your soul, your intuition decide, not your ego.

We are our greatest ally and our biggest foe all in one. We can learn to turn that negative self-talk into a positive, to prove to ourselves that we are capable of anything we put our minds to. Shifting our thought process and vibration is how we do this.

Tools and Rituals for Overcoming Fear and Guilt Its time to take your power back. There are two chakra centers that are most affected by fear and guilt: the throat and solar plexus chakras. Our root and sacral chakras can also play an important role. By balancing these to a healthy vibration, you will feel more empowered to take back control of the drivers wheel in your life. What follows are some wonderful tools you can use; simply choose the ones that resonate with you in the moment and feel free to combine them too.

Talk to your ego First, lets talk about that voice in our heads  the one that tells us we will fail. This is the voice of your ego speaking, so go ahead and give it a name. I like to call mine Bobbie! Those I cant . . . and what if . . . thoughts are your ego talking, not your spirit. Start to call it out every time he/she starts that negative self-talk, and you will be on your way to breaking the cycle of fear and guilt.

I realize this feels strange in the beginning. I even laughed at myself for being silly when I started calling out Bobbie, but then something clicked. When I started doing it, and replaced that low-vibrational self-talk with affirmations, my view of myself changed. I felt more empowered and worthy of my dreams. These days, Bobbie still creeps in, but now I have the tools to overcome that voice and push past the fear. Telling her to take a hike is so empowering; it gives me back my own power, strength and choice!

Quick Vibe Fix!

Give your ego a name and tell him/her to take a hike each time fear creeps into your mind!

Blast your ego with affirmations Replace your negative self-talk with positive affirmations. As we saw in the Affirmations chapter, words carry powerful vibrations. These can and will help shift your vibes to the positive once you allow yourself to begin the process of healing your fears and the guilt that comes with them. Start each day on a positive note before you even get out of bed by repeating an affirmation or two. You may use the words that resonate with you, but here are some examples for tackling fear and guilt to get you started:  I am strong.

I am capable.

I am brave.

I am worthy of accomplishing my goals.

I am a loving and beautiful soul who deserves to create my own happiness.

I am going to do this and its going to be amazing!

Chakra balancing with crystal Reiki When it comes to tackling fear and guilt, and balancing the chakras that relate to these emotions, I love working with the calming effects of the following: Black obsidian - for the root chakra.

Blue lace agate - for the throat chakra.

Citrine or tigers eye - for the solar plexus and sacral chakras.

Use whichever crystals resonate most strongly with you and the issues that you are tackling. If you have gone through the Reiki Blessing Attunement Ceremony (see pages 3843), place your crystals directly on your chakra centers and perform a Reiki self-treatment (see pages 457). This powerful combination of crystal and Reiki energy will raise your vibration, soothe your fears, ease your feelings of guilt, and shift your energy into a positive vibration.

JOURNALING THROUGH GUILT AND FEAR RITUAL Journaling is a wonderful way to release the bonds of those negative thoughts that lie trapped within our minds, as well as to empower ourselves to create change. This practice is also very good for shifting our perspective and our energy to a positive state by strengthening the throat and solar plexus chakras.

In the following ritual, I like to burn the written negative thoughts and release them to the Universe to be transmuted for healing, but it can also be helpful to keep them for later reflection  to see how far youve come. Feel free to choose the approach that is best for you, or keep some of your notes and burn the most toxic ones.

You will need: 1 intention candle matches or lighter pen paper orjournal Optional for Steps 4 and 5: 1 tsp Epsom salts, fireproof pot and 1 tbsp rubbing alcohol (see the section Working with Fire, page 50) Step 1: Create your sacred space with an intention candle to release your fears, the guilt attached to them, and the decision to raise your vibration.

Step 2: Write down your current fears. You dont have to start with them all and overwhelm yourself, so just list those at the forefront of your mind. Then go ahead and list all the reasons your ego is telling you that you cant accomplish your goals on a separate line.

Step 3: Go down each item on the list and write an affirmation that expresses the exact opposite to that doubt, for example: Fear: I am scared.

Affirmation: I am brave.

Fear: I wont have enough money if I quit my job.

Affirmation: The Universe will supply all I need and help me find a way.

Step 4: Read over your list and fold it up so it is small enough to fit easily in your pot. Alternatively, you may choose to tear the paper up, visualizing with each rip the fears separating from you. You may then toss them in the trash outside your home or bury in the ground to allow Mother Nature to transmute them.

Step 5: If youve chosen to burn your fears away, sprinkle the Epsom salts into a fireproof pot, adding just enough rubbing alcohol to saturate the salt, being careful not to spill any. Stow the sealed alcohol bottle safely away from your ritual area. Now, light the alcohol very carefully. Then light the corner of the paper and drop it into the pot to burn through.

Step 6: Take a deep belly breath and visualize all these fears, and the feelings of guilt that are attached to them, leaving you on the exhale. Allow yourself to let them go. Tell your ego you dont need these fears to keep you safe.

Step 7: Close your ritual with a moment of gratitude for the time and energy youve allowed yourself to heal and release. Blow out your candle. If youve chosen to keep the writing, put it in a safe place with your intention candle, away from your eyes so that it cannot remind you of your fears.

You have just taken your first step in healing and releasing your mind from fear and guilt, so give yourself a smile! You may repeat any or all of these rituals as often as you feel called to. There will be days that the feelings return and that is okay. Continue your practice of releasing them and enjoy each moment of freedom from your struggles. Not long from now, you will look back on this time with gratitude in your heart for empowering yourself and raising your vibration. Remember to enjoy each small success along the way. Your journey is a beautiful one of love, learning, growth, and is truly a gift from the amazing energy of our Universe.

Beat Anxiety and Stress Living with anxiety can be both overwhelming and debilitating, affecting our decision-making, lifestyle choices and physical body. This low-vibration response to fears can bring down even the cheeriest person. Many people struggle with anxiety and feel helpless about taking back control of their mind. But whether your anxiety is a family trait or triggered by an external event like the onset of a pandemic in 2020, know that you have the ability to win this inner battle. I have found with my own clients that Reiki energy is a particularly gentle and effective healing modality when dealing with anxiety and stress. With a little guidance and willingness to change the negative vibrations, you can and will get through it.

Young empaths may pull in the emotions of others, triggering a physical and mental response that isnt really their own. Have you ever been around someone and could actually feel their emotions? Empaths are more receptive to the energy of others, and until they can recognize this, may find it hard to understand why they are feeling anxious. Learning to recognize when you are being affected by the energy of others is an important step that can change your life in the most wonderful ways.

Children are likewise very sensitive to other peoples energy and vibration, in part because they havent learned to build up walls around themselves yet  one of the reasons they are so pure and beautiful. Pay attention to them, listen to them, notice when they seem out of sorts, as your own vibe may be their trigger, which is an important sign that its time to do some energy work of your own. As a parent to three beautiful earth angels, I have had to adjust my own energy when I see it affecting them in the hope that I am not passing my own anxieties on to them.

Those witnessing an anxiety attack can feel very helpless and disheartened when observing a loved one who is struggling. If you know someone like this, whether its a friend, partner or child, the tools in this chapter will help you learn how to empower them and give them a respite from their struggles.

Identifying anxiety triggers Anxiety starts in the mind, creating a loop of fear and panic that the body responds to, consuming our thoughts and leaving you exhausted once it passes. The physical body responds to anxiety in very specific ways that can sometimes lead to a total mental and physical shutdown with a panic attack. Our heart rate increases, hormones are released, our oxygen levels increase, we break out in a sweat, and our amygdalae go into overdrive.

Learning to recognize your anxiety triggers can help you stay in control of your mind and body. While some people suffer from specific phobias or disorders, such as obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), in others the mental spinning is brought on by certain social circumstances or a general, overwhelming feeling of fear. Watching the news can be a serious trigger for many people. Remember that while you cannot control the world around you, you can control your response and your thoughts.

Tools and Rituals for Tackling Anxiety and Stress Our root, solar plexus and third eye chakras are out of balance during an episode of anxiety. Balancing all our chakras is important, but these three take the hit during a panic attack, affecting our sense of control, connection to the physical world and clarity. Try one or all of the methods below to strengthen them and take your power back, then continue with daily practice and watch your life improve.

Switch your focus You control what your mind focuses on. As soon as you notice your mind beginning to spin into anxiety, take a moment to pause the cycle of negative thoughts. Do this by switching your focus to something that is physically close to you, which will ground you and distract you.

To do this, simply touch something physical next to you  a table, the steering wheel of your car, your shirt, a crystal, a tree, a plant, whatever you have immediately close to you. Start asking, How does this feel? Whats the texture like? What color is it? How much does it weigh? Tune in o the physical sensation of the object you have chosen and continue until you notice you are returning to a calmer state. Then take five to ten deep belly breaths while visualizing positive energy on the inhale flowing into you and the negative energy leaving your body on the exhale. By touching something physical and asking these types of questions, you are breaking the negative thought pattern, returning to your physical being, grounding yourself, and helping to rebalance your root chakra.

Practice mindfulness Mindfulness meditation is excellent for preventing and controlling anxiety and stress. A study of MRI scans carried out at the University of California of Los Angeles (UCLA) has shown how the brain is physically affected by daily meditation practice. Their research showed how just six weeks of meditating for 20 minutes a day opened neural pathways and eased the effects of anxiety.2 Learning to meditate is, quite simply, one of the best tools available for our peace of mind.

Mindfulness meditation focuses on the breath, a tool we always have at our disposal. To make a start, get comfortable, take some deep belly breaths to center yourself and every time another anxious thought comes in, simply send it away. Tell your ego you hear it, but that is not what you are choosing to concentrate on right now: Right now, I am focused on my breath. Set aside time every day to meditate and give your mind a break from the negative voice in your head. (If youre struggling to use this tool, try revisiting the chapter Meditation, see pages 5865).

SHOWER MEDITATION FOR ANXIETY Use this meditation every time you get into the shower.

You will need: 1 intention candle lighter or matches Step 1 Create your sacred space in your bathroom by setting your intention to calm your anxiety. Light your intention candle where it can burn safely.

Step 2 As the water touches your crown, allow it to wash away all the negative thoughts from your mind while you repeat one of the following affirmations:  I am safe.

I am in control of my mind, thoughts and body.

I am connecting to Mother Earth as she helps me release my fears and worries.

Right now, in this moment, I am safe and free from worry.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Place a drop of lavender oil on your wrist and rub your wrists together to calm the body, mind and spirit.

GROUNDING RITUAL This beautiful ritual will help balance your root, solar plexus and third eye chakras and bring you back to a place of peace. No matter which kind of anxiety you struggle with, this will be an amazing support. It may be performed outside, while you sit on grass or soil and are connected with nature, or inside. If inviting in Reiki energy in Step 4, first complete the Reiki Blessing Attunement Ceremony in Part 1 of this book (pages 3843).

You will need: 1 intention candle (red, yellow, purple or white are all good choices) lighter or matches smudge stick or incense (rosemary, lavender and sandalwood are wonderful choices) crystals (black tourmaline, citrine and lepidolite are great, but other crystals that will help balance the root, solar plexus and third eye crystals are perfect too) house plant or handful of soil or sand in a container to represent the element of Earth 1 glass of lunar water (see pages 1434 for how to make this) Step 1: Create your sacred space with the intention of grounding and calming the mind. Light your intention candle.

Step 2: Smudge your crystals, Earth element and intention candle with your chosen smudge stick or incense.

Step 3: Smudge your physical body, starting down the front of your body, up your back, around your arms, head, and under each foot. Place your smudge or incense in its holder beside your candle and sit yourself down on the ground or floor. (If indoors, keep a window open to release the smoke.) Step 4: Holding your hands in prayer position (gassho), invite Reiki energy to flow in through your crown chakra.

Step 5: Pick up your crystals and hold them between your palms in prayer position. Allow Reiki energy to flow through your hands into the crystals; then allow it to flow back into your being with the crystals energy, feeling their combined energy vibrate throughout your body and mind. Hold for five minutes as the energy flows. (If you dont have crystals, hold your hands directly over your chakras one at a time, keeping them above each chakra center for three to five minutes. You may do this in addition to working with the crystals if you feel called to.) Now place your charged crystals in your lap or by your feet.

Step 6: If you are using a plant, place it between your knees or at your feet, whichever feels right to you. Hold your hands with fingers together and palms facing each other on either side of the plant, allowing Reiki energy to flow through your hands to the plant and back to your body and mind. If using soil or sand to represent Earth, hold this in each hand as you allow Reiki energy to flow into it and back into your body and mind, combining the energy of Mother Earth and Reiki. If you have chosen to do this ritual outside, place both your palms flat, fingers together, directly on the ground. Allow Reiki energy to flow through your hands to the Earth and back to your body and mind. In each case, hold this energy exchange for five minutes with your focus on the flow of Reiki energy.

Step 7: If using, put your soil or sand back in its container and place this by your feet. Pick up your glass of lunar water with both hands and allow Reiki energy to flow through your hands to the water and back to your body and mind. Hold this energy exchange for three to five minutes with your focus on Reiki energy. Drink your purified lunar water while visualizing the positive energy entering and flowing throughout your system. Set the glass back down.

Step 8: Bring your hands to prayer position with gratitude for the healing energy of Reiki and the time youve been allowed to heal yourself. Blow out your intention candle and set aside for next time.

You may repeat this ritual daily as part of your healing from anxiety, or as often as you feel called to. Creating a regular routine incorporating any or all of these rituals will have the best long-term effect. Remember that healing is done in layers, and the more you do, the better. If you missed a day or even a week, that is okay; each healing ritual will bring you closer to liberating yourself from the struggle of anxiety. Take care of and nourish your physical, emotional and spiritual bodies by eating well, getting enough sleep, and working with energy healing. Be patient and gentle with yourself as you create this shift in your vibration.

CHAKRA HEALING RITUAL Essential oils are so powerful for healing our energy centers, helping to unblock and balance them. This ritual is super easy and you can do this when youre short on time or just want to lay down and relax after a hard day.

Before you begin, choose which chakras (and correlating oils) you wish to work with and create your sacred space. Its best to focus on two or three chakras at a time so as not to overwhelm the senses, but again this is only a suggestion  there are no rules! Do what feels right for you. Lie down, rest easy, play some music, light a candle if you like. You can make this ritual as intricate or simple as you feel called to.

Step 1: Place one drop of essential oil diluted in a teaspoon of water directly on your chakra center(s), rubbing your finger in a circular motion to allow it to absorb into your skin. (For the root chakra, place the diluted oil between your thighs, avoiding your privates, or at the base of your spine just above your bottom.) If you have sensitive skin, you may also add the oil to a cotton pad or piece of fabric instead of placing the mixture directly on your skin.

Step 2: Close your eyes and visualize the color of the chakra as a rose in the center of your chakra. Remember the color associations of the chakras, as follows: Step 3: Take three deep restorative breaths as you visualize the rose; pick off any wilted petals and see it opening as if its in full bloom. Repeat for each chakra you choose to work on.

Step 4: Relax and inhale the beautiful energy as long as you feel called to or as time allows. Take a moment of gratitude when you finish for the time youve been given to help yourself heal.

This ritual is so easy to incorporate into daily life and will give you a wonderful boost of positive energy and feelings of relief and lightness, even during the most stressful of times.

Heal from Depression As the world uses ever more technology and shifts toward online social settings instead of human interaction, cases of depression have surged. Globally, it is estimated that nearly 300 million people are now living with depression. It affects everyone, with no mercy for the rich and famous, for mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers, friends or loved ones. This condition isnt about being sad or heartbroken; it runs much deeper than that. But if you or a loved one suffers from depression, know that there is hope and support available for you.

Researchers have found that one of the contributing factors in depression is the brains inability to create new neural cells and healthy neurotransmitters, and to regulate hormones.3 The hypothalamus, the part of our brain that controls our emotions, has been found to be smaller in those people who suffer from depression. Studies show that women are twice as likely as men to be affected by depression, and that stress is a major contributor, as are genetics, life circumstances, other medical problems, childbirth, and the seasonal changes of sun exposure.

Seasonal depression is one of the easier forms of depression to treat, using Vitamin D supplements and light therapy. When I lived in London, I felt its effects in a big way. Likewise, I experienced postpartum depression, and depression from living with physical pain after my surgeries. My vibration was so low at these times, I could barely stand being in my own company, let alone with others. Over the years, I have found how to help myself with energy healing  better late in life than never. Remember that creating change is a process; it takes commitment and time. With consistency and determination, you will raise your vibes and live the life you love.

Tools and Rituals for Tackling Depression Our root, solar plexus, third eye and crown chakras are often out of balance when we are coping with depression, so doing the work to heal and balance these chakra energy centers can be a wonderful way to lift ourselves out of the fog and shadow. Begin by creating a daily ritual for yourself using the tools below. Start by doing at least two of these practices every single day, and as your vibration lifts higher, add another, building on the work youve done. You will enjoy a snowball effect of positive energy and heal your mind, body and spirit.

Some days you may not have the energy to work with any of these rituals or suggestions  and thats okay; release that guilt and repeat some affirmations to lift yourself up instead, and try again tomorrow. Be gentle with yourself as you create the change you so desire and need to thrive again.

Learn to meditate the blues away Mindfulness meditation is one of the few energy healing methods that have been studied in connection to depression. Like anxiety, depression relates to brain function, and neuroscientists found that neural pathways became wider in those that practiced meditation consistently, allowing for the easier passage of hormones such as serotonin and dopamine  the bodys natural mood boosters.4 The cortical thickness of the hypothalamus grew in size while the amygdalae had fewer cells. These amazing finds have incredible implications for helping people deal with mood disorders. See pages 5865 for more on using this wonderful tool as part of your healing journey. If you already know how to meditate, the time to begin is now  give your beautiful mind and physical brain the gift of healing.

Practice gratitude, despite it all Creating a shift in perspective and starting your day on a positive note are simple yet amazingly effective ways to raise your vibes. When you begin your day on a positive note, it helps set the tone of rest of the day. So, even if life feels anything but easy, before you get out of bed in the morning or look at your phone first thing, state out loud five things you are grateful for.

Start with the little things if that is easier to focus on, such as: I am grateful for the bed that gave me rest. I am grateful for another day to try again. I am grateful I am sheltered and safe. I am grateful today is a new day.

Then keep these thoughts close to your heart as you take on the day. (For more on gratitude, see pages 1469.) Take care of your physical body Weve all heard how exercise and diet can affect our mental health, but it can be a challenge to motivate yourself while in the depths of depression. Take small steps each day to help raise your vibes. Go for a walk in the morning sun if you can  fresh air is amazing for our crown chakra health. Spend a few minutes each day doing some form of exercise, whether it be something simple like going up and down stairs, or taking a class in yoga, stretching or another form of exercise that you enjoy. Getting your body moving will release endorphins and stimulate blood flow, things your body needs to thrive.

Be mindful of what you feed your body, limiting sugars and carbs even if you really crave them. That craving can be your bodys response to needing a shot of energy, but these foodstuffs only provide a short-lived boost that can leave you feeling worse than before. As with healing from anxiety, gut health is an important factor in tackling depression (see page 161 for foods that are wonderful for gut health).

Raise your vibe at home Our homes are where we retreat to heal and thrive. Keeping this space in a state of high vibration is very important for our mental health (see pages 198200 for some great ideas).

Get rid of the clutter: Cluttered places are major magnets for negative energy.

Tidy up: I find that even tidying one dresser top in the bedroom before bedtime can be enough to shift the vibe into the positive and give me a better nights sleep.

Clean your stove: This is another amazing vibe-raising area of the home. The stove is the wealth center, which not only applies to financial riches, but to all forms of wealth  especially love and positive vibrations.

Smudge away low vibes: Make a regular practice of smudging your space (or use aromatherapy if sensitive to smoke). Sandalwood, yerba santa, yarrow, sweetgrass and rose are all good options for clearing low energy.

Crystals to bring back your sparkle Aligning your energy with crystal energy is an easy and gentle way to raise your vibes. Carrying one on your person will keep the stones healing energy close to you. If you have a collection, start making crystal grids with the intention of healing your mind. The crystals below can support you in healing from depression. Choose the ones you feel called to.

Citrine: The sunshine crystal brings inner strength and supports the sacral and solar plexus chakras.

Clear quartz: This master healer crystal helps transform negative emotions. Supports all chakras.

Desert rose: Balances the body physically and emotionally, nurturing a sense of self-worth and self-love. Supports the root, heart and crown chakras.

Jade: Fosters connection and family unity. Invites the support of your ancestors. Supports the heart chakra.

Rose quartz: The crystal of love and emotional connection. Supports the heart chakra.

Smoky quartz: Fosters a sense of belonging, heals negative emotions and absorbs negative energy. Supports the root chakra.

Selenite: Cleanses the aura of negativity and blockages, allowing for a sense of security and flow of positive energies. Supports the third eye and crown chakras.

Tigers eye: Brings inner strength, energy and vitality, while keeping others negativity from permeating your aura. Supports the root, sacral and solar plexus chakras.

Reiki healing for depression The Self-Healing with Reiki exercise on pages 457 will help ease the pain that may be triggering your depression. Daily practice of this healing modality may be just what you need to lift yourself out of the shadow of depression. It has worked for me and for so many people I have done healings for, and I know without a doubt it will help you too.

Sound healing for raising the vibe Using sound to heal yourself is a powerful tool that permeates every cell in your body, something especially important for brain function and regenerating healthy cells. The following frequencies and methods are great choices for helping to heal depression. These are wonderful to use during your meditations and Reiki self-treatments for a powerful combination of healing energy: Music or healing sounds at 432 Hz  Verdis A  the frequency that is closest to our Universes natural vibration.

Music or healing sounds at 528 Hz, for transformation and miracles (including DNA repair).

Crystal singing bowl tuned to 432 Hz or 528 Hz.

Tuning fork tuned to 432 Hz or 528 Hz.

Connecting with natures vibes Simple grounding techniques, also known as earthing, are a wonderful and easy way to connect your aura and energy to the healing vibes of Mother Earth.

Earth element: Hug or lean on a tree. The roots of a tree run deep into our Earth, helping you to connect to the spirit and healing energy of Gaia. If youre too shy to hug, sit or lean against her trunk. The older the tree (youll know by its girth), the deeper the roots and stronger the energy.

Water element: Water is a powerful healer and the carrier of life, cleansing and releasing you of negativity. The shower meditation on pages 2245 is especially powerful for healing. Spiritual baths, foot soaks and swimming in natural water are also wonderful choices.

Fire element: Fire is a gift of nature embodied by the energy of our sun. It warms our spirit and is amazing for releasing attachments and emotions. Try a fire release ritual to let go of the burdens of the mind (see overleaf).

Air element: Air carries the seeds of life to new places for growth, gives us the oxygen we need to survive, and fosters the healing power to create change. Try the wind energy ritual on pages 2812 to carry your needs toward healing and blow away all you are ready to release.

RELEASING DEPRESSION RITUAL Let the following steps provide the framework for your own beautiful healing ritual. This practice can be wonderful to do anytime and especially during the Full Moon.

You will need: 1 intention candle lighter or matches pen and paper smudge stick and holder fireproof pot crystal(s) infused with Reiki energy (see pages 6675) Step 1: Create your sacred space outside, on your patio, balcony or next to an open window, with the intention that you are healing from depression. Light your intention candle with this in mind.

Step 2: Write down all you are ready to release: your pain, sorrow, guilt, everything that triggers your depression.

Step 3: Fold your paper and hold the corner to the flame of your candle to light it. Drop the note into the small pot to burn completely.

Step 4: As the paper burns, visualize all those things you wrote down rising with the smoke and being blown out into the Universe to be transmuted, freeing your mind of their weight.

Step 5: Pick up your Reiki-infused crystal and hold it in your nondominant hand. Hold your smudge stick in your dominant hand and light the smudge stick with your intention candle.

Step 6: Smudge your entire body, starting with your crown, down the front of your body, up the back and under each foot as you repeat the mantra, Love, light and happiness. Put the smudge stick in its holder or bowl and the crystal in your pocket or bra.

Step 7: Bring your hands to prayer position with gratitude to the Universe and to Reiki for their beautiful healing energy, for releasing you from the bonds of depression, and for our choice to heal. Enjoy a glass of cool water to assist grounding.

You will notice you feel lighter after just a single performance of this ritual. Give yourself a smile and a hug: youve just created a shift in your consciousness and taken an active step in raising your vibration so you may heal. When you make the choice to take your power back and step into the light again, know that no force on Earth can stand in your way.

Heal from Emotional Pain Oh, the joy of pain! Our bodys response to emotional pain can feel completely out of our control, leaving us with a sense of helplessness, as if it is beyond our power to fix, cure or otherwise move on from suffering and live a happier life. We all experience some form of emotional pain, often stemming from childhood. As adults, we cling to the same coping mechanisms we used as children, and it may be time to reassess their usefulness in our lives today. We cannot change our experiences, but we can change our perspective, and thereby our emotional response. We can even go back to the moment in time that caused the pain, to release our attachment to it and move forward with a sense of peace in our hearts.

Before we dive into the cures, let us have a look at some of the causes for our experiences with emotional pain. Most of the leading causes for emotional pain involve the heart center; heartache, fallouts between friends and loved ones, disappointment in our own failures, losing a loved one, hurt feelings, betrayal, disappointment in ourselves or others, unmet expectations and loss are some of the key culprits of emotional pain. (If grief is your primary focus, we will cover that in more detail on pages 25160.) It can be difficult to release these responses once triggered, and very often the pain grows rather than dissipates as we continue to focus on the hurt. Resentment sets in, keeping us bound to the emotional pain in our hearts.

Luckily the mind is a powerful tool, far stronger than we often give it credit for. When it comes to mind over matter, doctors and scientists frequently write this off as the placebo effect, but lets have a second look: why does the placebo effect work? Because, quite simply, our minds have an incredible healing ability if given the right tools and the right environment. It is through working with the mind-body connection that we can help ourselves heal from emotional pain. The tools listed in Part 2 of this book can help you create an environment in which you dont need to self-soothe or feel the need to numb yourself in order to escape emotional pain; rather, they will help you to change your perspective so you can free yourself from its bonds.

Tools and Rituals for Healing Emotional Pain To begin, lets do a little soul searching. Im going to invite you now to take a moment to look honestly and openly, without judgment, at the source of your emotional pain. The following exercises can also be a trigger for strong emotions, so find a quiet space where you will be uninterrupted in your work.

As we have seen, healing is done in layers, so I encourage you to revisit these exercises until you have achieved a sense of peace and wellbeing. Healing in any capacity takes time and effort, so have the courage to commit to the work that will help you heal.

JOURNALING ON EMOTIONAL PAIN RITUAL Writing down your thoughts and feelings may seem like an easy task, but when you get to it, you may find it is harder than you realize to shape those emotions into words. Beginning with some key questions can help you to do this. Before you start, gather these items and create your sacred space.

You will need: 1 new notepad or journal (using a fresh pad of paper or journal will create a space devoted to your emotional healing) pen or pencil 1 white candle box of tissues Step 1: Create your sacred space. Take a moment to acknowledge the work you will be doing.

Step 2: With gratitude for the time you are going to spend healing, light your white candle.

Step 3: Do a quick body scan to ensure you are comfortable. When you are ready, take three deep belly breaths to still and focus the mind.

Step 4 Try to focus in on an important event that caused you pain and write down answers to these questions:  Where were you?

Who were you with?

What happened leading up to that moment?

How did you respond to that moment?

What happened immediately after that moment?

Write down all the details of the event so you can see it before you and sitting separate from you. It is okay to become emotional and cry during this step, you are releasing your emotional pain and are in a safe space to do so.

Step 5 Choose one or more vibration-raising rituals to work with. Affirmations, Reiki and meditations with crystals and/or sound healing are excellent choices for this purpose.

Affirmations Look at each question you asked and, without moving on to the answers, repeat each of these affirmations three times:  I am safe.

I am doing the work to heal my emotional pain.

I am separate from my pain.

I am allowed to feel my emotions.

Go through each question you wrote down in your journal and repeat an affirmation that creates the balancing response you want. For example, if you harbor uncomfortable feelings toward the location of the event, you might say: I will revisit [name of location] with love in my heart. Even if you have no plans to revisit the place, you are creating a new emotional response to that location.

If you are not happy with how you responded to the event at the time, you can use an affirmation such as: I accept my response to the situation as being the one I needed to make at the time. I am ready and willing to release my disappointment about my past reaction. This will help you to forgive yourself for a past response you cannot change and to move forward with acceptance.

If it was a person who caused your emotional pain, you can say: I am ready and willing to accept [name]s actions, knowing these were only a projection of their own pain. I am free of their pain. I am free of my pain. This will help you release your negative emotional pain in response to their actions.

Reiki Once you have finished writing in your journal, take a moment to hold your hands over the Reiki symbols on page 39 of this book as you invite Reiki energy to flow through you. Using visualization, see yourself in the actual moment that caused your emotional pain. During this exercise you will be healing and releasing your attachment to the emotional pain you have been holding on to.

Now, Place your hands on your heart chakra for three to five minutes, allowing Reiki energy to open and infuse your heart chakra.

While keeping your dominant hand over your heart center, move your non-dominant hand over each energy center, starting with your crown chakra and working down to your root chakra.

Hold each position for three to five minutes as you bring loving Reiki energy from your heart center to each energy center in your body.

Close the session with gratitude to Reiki energy with both your hands in a prayer position.

Drink a glass of cool water to assist grounding at the end of this exercise.

Following this exercise, Reiki energy will continue to work on your energy centers for the next two to three days. However, a daily self-treatment is highly recommended until you find you are able to think of the situation without an emotionally painful response.

Meditation with crystals Once you have completed the journaling part of this ritual, hold a piece of rose quartz, rhodochrosite and/or malachite for a heart-centered and heart-healing meditation lasting 1122 minutes. Rose quartz is wonderful for self-love when your emotional pain stems from self-inflicted judgment/pain; rhodochrosite is especially helpful for assisting emotional pain specifically; while malachite is an amazing heart chakra healing crystal that represents the lessons the heart goes through during your lifetime, including pain inflicted by others. (See the chapter Crystals for more options.) As you sit in meditation, use the word forgiveness in your mind as your focus. Every time your mind wanders to the situation, bring your attention back to the word and emotion of forgiveness.

Meditation with sound Once you have completed your journaling, perform a soundhealing meditation either using a D note singing bowl or listening to music with a frequency of 528 Hz for emotional heart healing or 639 Hz for relationship heart healing. (639 Hz is wonderful for relationship-based emotional pain while 528 Hz is considered the miracle tone of nature frequency.) See the chapter Sound Healing for specific frequencies and chakra healing notes.

Step 6: Close your ritual with a moment of gratitude, giving thanks for the time youve been given and the ability you have to self-heal. Blow out your candle and keep your journal in a safe place for further healing work.

CANDLE MANIFESTATION OR RELEASE RITUAL This is a wonderful ritual for when you want to dedicate more time and purpose to your wish-making or for when you are ready to release patterns, behaviors or people from your life that are no longer for your highest good. You can choose to add crystals and/or essential oils to your ritual as well for that extra bit of positive energy for your purpose and intention.

You will need: 1 candle in your chosen color matches or lighter fireproof candle dish or holder tool for inscribing on candle Optional: pen and paper, crystals, essential oils Step 1: Using a pen, the edge of a paperclip, or any pointed tool, write your name and intention into the wax. If space is limited, you can use one-word intentions for what you want to attract, such as: money, love, health, peace, protection, etc.

For a releasing ritual, youll want to write down all youre ready to let go of, either as single words on the candle itself, such as: guilt, fear, anxiety, unhealthy attachments, or as affirmations such as: I am ready to release all unhealthy attachments, or even in journal or letter form.

Choose whichever feels right for you in the moment; you can try a different method each time as well to find what works best for you. There is no wrong, only intention.

Step 2: Set the candle in your chosen sacred space or out under the moonlight (especially at a New Moon and Full Moon) with any chosen crystals surrounding the base in a circle. With your intention in mind, light the candle. If choosing to write your one-word intentions into the wax on the candle and/or anoint it with essential oils, you may do so now before lighting the candle. (To anoint the candle, rub 12 drops of essential oil directly onto it.) You can leave it burning for as long as you feel is necessary. If youre using a small candle that will burn quickly, allow it to burn through to the end.

If keeping the candle, every time you light it from then on, you will be bringing in the energy of your set intention. So, if you need a little love next week and you made yourself a self-love candle, go ahead and light it for some soothing heart chakra vibes.

Step 3: When single words wont fit or you have more in mind, write down your wishes on a piece of paper and place the folded note under the candle where it can remain as long as the candle has wick to burn. Alternatively, you may use the candles flame to burn the paper to release your intentions out to the Universe, something I love to do during my Full Moon rituals.

If you prefer not to write down your wishes or those things you wish to release, whether for fear they might be seen or you prefer them to remain secret (or simply for lack of pen and paper in the moment), that is okay too. The mind is a powerful tool, and your voice carries the vibration of sound, so just clarify what you want in your thoughts before you begin your ritual.

Step 4: Blow out your candle or move it to a safe place to burn down. Show gratitude for the changes you have set in motion. If youve chosen to allow the candle to burn all the way down, you can burn, flush or bury the paper afterwards. With the candle itself, once you have finished using it, you can choose to bury it or dispose of it safely in the garbage outside your home. After a candle manifestation ritual, I am always left feeling like Ive made a conscious choice and taken action to create positive changes for my life. Whether it is the candle itself or your decisive action to create positive vibes, youll find that you feel so much better after a candle ritual, as though a weight has been lifted.

Emotional pain can be crippling, affecting every aspect of your life, and can even manifest itself into physical pain. You may find a welcome surprise side effect of doing this work is a lessening of physical pain. I once worked with a woman who was grieving her abusive mothers passing. She struggled to let go of the pain her mother had caused her, and felt guilty for not achieving closure with her mom before she passed. When we began her Reiki treatments, she complained of knee pain; however, upon doing the work of healing, within two sessions, she found that her knee pain was gone. With loving Reiki energy, she was able to experience deep healing of her heart center and, in turn, her knee. Each body part may house unexpressed pain. Through performing Reiki self-treatments, you too will be able to effect healing on your own emotional and physical pain.

You may find that some days are harder than others to work on yourself  and that is okay. If you find the idea of journaling out your emotional pain too hard to bear at first, perhaps begin with the gentle Reiki healing or meditation until you feel you are ready to begin facing your pain on paper. Remember to be gentle with yourself and release expectations of an instant fix. You are a beautiful soul deserving of love and peace: give yourself time to experience the gift of emotional healing and watch as your whole life begins to shift into the positive.

It is so wonderful that you are taking the time and energy to heal yourself. It takes incredible courage and strength to work on your emotional pain; even reading through this chapter is a beautiful start. Depending on how deep or repressed your pain is, go slow and take the time you need to work through it. Your pain is valid; it does not need to be compared to the pain of others; it is real to you, so it is equally important for you to heal it. Try to remember that healing is done in layers, so if you have a setback, dont be discouraged. Just when you think youre done and vibing high, something will come along and trigger you; know that this is normal. It is simply your body, mind and spirit reminding you to continue doing the work of healing your emotional pain. As long as you hold an emotional pain response, you have more work to do. Do the work and raise your vibes!

Let Go of Grief Grief is one of the hardest feelings we all face, and how we deal with this emotion varies greatly, depending on our attachment to what we have lost and the nature of our loss. Loss will mean different things to different people  loss of a loved one, a pet, a friendship, a job, a home, or a way of life. Life can at times feel unfair, but we are all here for our own lessons on this journey, and although we may miss and grieve for people we have lost, we must trust that they have received their lessons for this life and are ready to move on to the next phase, whatever that may be. There is always a silver lining; if we cant see it at the time, it often reveals itself later.

I have mentioned earlier how I was devastated at the passing of my grandmother. I felt like she not only helped facilitate a large part of my personal growth, but she was also my muse, always in my corner. When I lost her I felt like Id lost my biggest supporter, my closest ally and the gift of her love in my life. What I didnt know at the time was that the bond and love we shared could never be lost. Gratitude for this connection and the lessons I learned from her are what I hold on to when I am missing her. But there are many other things we can do to be active in our healing as well as express our gratitude.

My husband lost his country as a child. Born in Iran, the Islamic Revolution happened when he was just a kid, and life as he knew it would never be the same. The country fell into war and repressive religious practice, no longer the safe and happy place he had so loved. He and his family were forced to flee to save him from the draft and ravages of war. Moving across the world to a new land that he didnt understand or feel welcomed in only made the loss harder. He held on to that loss and pain for decades. His grief and resulting anger showed through in many ways, but through a combination of meditation, gratitude, receiving Reiki, burning rituals  and perhaps my sneaking crystals under his pillow at night!  he has been able to release his attachment to anger and live with gratitude for the blessings that have come to his life since. There are still days of struggle, as you may find as well, but by continuing to make the choice to heal, you too will overcome the loss youve experienced.

I once heard that when we lose a person or suffer a loss, we are not grieving them per se, but rather feeling their absence, the hole left behind in our own life. This really resonated with me because its true that each person, or home, or job, etc. fills a space in our energetic field, and once that energy is no longer there, we do feel the absence. Often it is familiarity and comfort that are lost, while other times, it is a chance to express ourselves which was never quite met. This feeling of loss can lower our vibration to one of apathy and defeat. But we still have so many wonderful things to look forward to, joys to be had, and love to be felt; by healing ourselves and this space, we can release the blockages to our own happiness.

Tools and Rituals for Releasing Grief Small changes to your daily life and mindset can make a huge difference in helping you heal and raise your vibe back to one of love and happiness. Choose the rituals and methods in this chapter that resonate with your own energy, for those are the ones that will put you on the path to healing from grief and the low-vibrational emotions attached to it. Remember to be gentle with yourself and know that healing takes place one layer at a time. Allowing yourself time and patience to heal is as important as taking an active role in your own healing in order to raise your vibration back to one of love.

Dont be afraid or feel guilty about crying: tears are a beautiful form of release. Continue with your chosen rituals as each layer receives love and healing. If your grief is manifesting itself in your physical body, dip into the chapter Soothing Physical Pain for tools to help you. Our emotional, spiritual and physical bodies are all connected and work together.

Ask for signs This method is especially helpful if you have experienced the loss of a loved one who has passed on, giving you comfort that they are still with you. Many people have told me their stories of signs that loved ones who have crossed over are still near. My best friend, for example, was grieving her uncle. After asking for a sign, the next morning on her way to work, she saw clouds in the shape of a heart. She got emotional, yet the sign that he sent for her helped her to release the pain of loss and move on, knowing his love was still with her. Others find pennies or dimes by their feet in a place where they shared a special moment, or literally a book falls off a shelf as they were talking to their loved ones and opens at a page that holds special meaning.

When I once visited my grandmothers grave, I was sitting and quietly shedding a few tears when a stray black cat approached and started purring against me. I knew intuitively that my grandmother was sending me a message of comfort. The cat stayed with me the entire time I was there.

To ask for your own sign, simply speak to your loved one who has passed, sharing your feelings and love. Then ask for a sign that they are still with you, watching over you. Be open to receiving their message over the next few hours or days, with faith that you will receive it.

Your message may be different to those Ive described, but you will know by the way it stands out suddenly and unexpectedly that the message is that they are with you.

LETTER-BURNING RITUAL This ritual is very helpful for all types of loss, whether professional, a friendship, or for words left unsaid. The act of physically writing out your emotions by hand can be really helpful in giving you new perspective. It allows you to express all that youve been holding inside, leaving nothing out, so you become an observer of the emotions, rather than staying immersed in them, which will provide you with clarity and, hopefully, peace.

You will need: 1 intention candle in the color of your choice pen and paper (blue ink activates the throat chakra, helping you to express your truth, but use a color of your choice) lighter or matches 1 fireproof pot (saucepans work great) Step 1: Create your sacred space and light your intention candle.

Step 2: With the pen and paper, write down all your unspoken words, feelings, emotions and/or any thoughts you want to share. If your grief relates to the loss of a job or home or relationship, you can express your gratitude for the time you had and the lessons learned. Read this list back to yourself.

Step 3: Light the paper and drop it into your pot to burn safely as you envision your words being carried out to the Universe with trust that your message is released to be received.

Step 4: Take a moment for gratitude that your message will be received. Blow out your candle. You may flush or bury the ashes once the paper is burned through and complete.

You may perform this ritual at any time you feel called to; there is no right or wrong, only when it feels right to you. If you prefer to make it more ceremonial, the New Moon is a wonderful time for manifesting, healing and asking for signs, while the Full Moon is great for releasing, letting go of emotions or patterns that no longer serve your highest good, and breaking habits or releasing attachment to pain, etc.

Meditation for letting go of emotional pain Daily meditation will give your mind a break from the emotional pain attached to your grief. The more often you meditate, the longer that feeling of peace and love will stay with you each time. Many people also experience visions or spiritual messages during meditation, when their mind is clear of distracting thought patterns and strong emotions. This simple practice is especially helpful for breaking the patterns of attachments that take the form of emotions such as anger, sadness or heartache.

As you sit quietly, choose an area of focus and continue to return your thoughts to that focus each time your mind wanders. Examples for focus may include your breath, your hands held in prayer position or a mudra, a repeated mantra or word, a crystal, or music. You may choose to meditate for as little as five minutes at a time or work up to 20 minutes. You are welcome to do longer if you feel called to. For more guidance, see the chapter Meditation (pages 5865).

To make the acceptance mudra, curl your index finger into the space above your thumb. Now rest your thumb on the nail of your pinky finger and keep your remaining fingers straight. This mudra is wonderful for overcoming sadness, finding acceptance and moving on from the past.

There are few things in life that offer the peace and mental break from emotional distress as powerfully as meditation. Meditation is always available to you and an invaluable use of your time, which costs nothing while giving so much.

Crystals for soothing loss and grief Here are a few crystals that are very supportive in healing from all types of grief. By keeping them close, under your pillow at night and/or held during meditation, you will receive their beautiful healing energy and allow this to align with your own.

Amazonite: This beautiful crystal brings balance and harmony to the emotional body, helping to heal grief. Activating the heart and throat chakras, it is especially helpful in forming a creative outlet to express feelings or thoughts that were left unsaid.

Apache tears: A form of obsidian found only in parts of the southwest United States and in Mexico. It heals the root, sacral and heart chakras, giving comfort and allowing the floodgates to open. It helps to release and heal feelings of grief, guilt and negative emotions, while bringing in tenderness, calm and a sense of peace.

Black onyx: A stone of powerful strength, this crystal supports you in difficult or confusing moments of overwhelming stress and grief. Activating the root, solar plexus and third eye chakras, this crystal brings reason to passionate feelings of anger, soothes anxiety, and restores personal will to continue on your journey. This one is especially helpful for long-held grief as a reminder that all is part of the beautiful wheel of birth, death and rebirth.

Jade: This magical stone supports the heart chakra and assists in connecting with loved ones who have passed on.

Lepidolite: This beautiful stone activates the heart chakra, releasing a wave of loving energy over the auric field, helping you to heal from trauma, grief and anxiety while supporting and soothing your nervous system.

Malachite: A gorgeous choice for heart chakra and solar plexus healing on those days when you may feel you dont have the strength to go on, opening your heart and mind to the possibility of love again.

Moonstone: This beautiful crystal will help you to destress, tune into your intuition and connect to Goddess energy, bringing you a sense of peace and inner guidance. Activating the crown, third eye and sacral chakras, it is very helpful in easing the loss of a pregnancy, loss of a feminine figure, and/or a partner with whom you had an intimate relationship.

Pink opal: This gem is especially helpful for emotional pain that has been suppressed subconsciously. Opening the heart chakra, it helps release the emotions and anxieties attached to grieving while restoring a sense of calm and acting as reminder you are loved.

Rhodochrosite: This beautiful crystal assists in releasing old hurts, bringing them to the surface to heal. Activating the heart chakra, this stone will help lift you out of the fog of depression from mourning as well as assisting you in reconnecting with loved ones who have passed. This is wonderful for all stages of grief, including loss experienced as a child.

Rhodonite: This wonderful crystal helps you to see the silver lining of your loss, giving you the strength and clarity to carry on to the next phase in your life. Activating and healing the heart chakra, this stone helps restore self-worth and is wonderful for helping emotional healing of all kinds.

Rose quartz: This gentle and beautiful stone is wonderful for healing your heart chakra, reminding you that you are loved and deserving of love. It draws off negative energy and replaces this with loving vibrations for kindness, compassion, empathy, calm and serenity.

Smoky quartz: An amazing grounding stone, this crystal helps absorb the low-vibrational emotions of depression, overwhelming stress and the fear attached to loss. Activating the root chakra, smoky quartz will help you to reengage with the physical world after the shock of loss, while also releasing unspoken resentments and suppressed emotional conflict.

There are many crystals that can support you on your path to healing from grief. If you dont have one of these, that is okay; all is not lost. Perhaps the ones you do have are exactly what you need to heal. Trust that their energy will support and guide you through the phases of grief and act as a path back to a place of love and emotional stability; where memory of your loss is no longer blocking your own success and happiness, but transmuted to a cause of gratitude, leading you further on your journey through this life.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Keep an angelite crystal near you to assist with expressing your deepest emotions from a place of love, protection and guidance from the angels.

Please remember to be gentle with yourself as you release and heal. Everyone experiences and reacts to loss differently, so make the conscious choice to do so in a healthy and constructive way. You are a beautiful soul worthy of love and value. As you continue incorporating these rituals into your daily life, you will begin to notice the shift in your vibration back to the positive. Working with these tools not only raises your vibe, they empower you to take an active role in your own life, being the creator of your future rather than the observer. You will find your strength once again and see your life in a positive light once more. So it is done!

Soothe Physical Pain Life gives us both pleasure and pain, but rarely are we given the tools today to heal physical pain ourselves. However, the body is an incredible vessel that some believe is entirely self-healing given the right circumstances. Learning to trust yourself to achieve this takes time and effort, but it is possible.

I dont claim lightly that these methods work; I have experienced first-hand how incredible the body is, and how all options are important for our healing journey. In 2018, after suffering from 16 years of chronic back pain, I underwent lumbar fusion surgery  a life-changing and most humbling experience. Six screws and two brackets were put into my spine to hold it together permanently. Let me tell you, I was not prepared for the mental, physical and spiritual energy it would require to heal. A huge percentage of back surgeries fail, so I had put the procedure off for years, hoping something new, something magical, would enter the medical field. Alas, it didnt come and the stabbing ice pick in my back became intolerable. I couldnt walk without excruciating pain, my patience for my family was gone, and my self-worth was at an all-time low. I simply could not go on like this; I had to have the surgery.

My post-op care was to play a major part in my recovery. Having family to support me and take care of me (and my children) was a massive help that I am so grateful for. I followed the hospital regime, took loads of vitamins, ate as well as I could, and rested as much as possible, but none of this  not the drugs (which made me crazy and had side effects), the vitamins, the bedrest  was easing my pain. The ice pick was replaced with something I cant even put into words. My jaw would rattle as I sobbed from pain I felt throughout my body, like someone had broken me in half and put me back together with a rubber band.

At the height of my pain, I remember my husband screaming over my sobs, Youre a Reiki master, for Gods sake! Do Reiki on yourself! It was like a light switch. It hadnt even occurred to me that Reiki would lower my pain levels; all the Reiki Id ever performed was in a quiet and calm setting, nothing like this. And so I began to do a self-Reiki treatment, and it was amazing. I calmed down within minutes, my jaw stopped shaking, and I came back to full awareness of those in the room with me. The hospital offered to have a Reiki practitioner come in to provide more healing. Ive mentioned earlier how my best friend brought her crystal singing bowls to my bedside and did a sound-healing session as well. I was open to everything because none of the drugs were helping. I was there for five days and it was only the beginning of my journey, a debilitating experience that took me months to recover from. I am not cured; I still have several unhealthy discs, but I am so grateful to say, even with a bit of hesitation, that I am now pain-free.

Spiritual, emotional and physical pain are all connected. Ask anyone who suffers from depression, grief or a high-stress environment. The effects of emotional pain often manifest in the physical body. Stress releases hormones in the gut that can affect everything  from hair loss, to illness, to headaches and so much in between. I have one client who suffers from migraines, bi-polar disorder, and terrible shoulder and neck pain, all stemming from a root cause of abuse and trauma during childhood. This beautiful woman underwent so many medical tests, procedures and medications with no relief for decades. With trauma therapy, crystal healing and Reiki, she is finally turning a corner and taking her power back, finding relief through holistic, noninvasive treatment. Treating symptoms often misses the root of the issue. This is not to say that alternative practices should ever be a substitute for professional medical attention, but rather that we need to create a beautiful collaboration of healing modalities. We can take our power back, and with the tools Ill share with you in this chapter, youll feel confident to do just that.

Tools and Rituals for Soothing Physical Pain The stages of physical healing and emotional healing have some similarities as they tend to coincide. You will have good days and setbacks, moments of feeling helpless and moments of strength. Hold on to those moments of strength to keep going. The body is an incredible vessel, regenerating and creating new cells every minute. Allowing your body to regenerate in a positive mind-over-matter attitude, and having the courage to face your physical pain with empowerment, will lead you to a life you can once more enjoy. Do the work, keep the faith, and remember that a consistent practice will be well worth the effort.

HEALING INTENTION-SETTING RITUAL Make the choice to heal. Making this decision is by far the most important initial step for two reasons: one, you are taking your power back by allowing yourself the choice to be pain-free; and two, you are creating a mindset that your body will follow.

You will need: 1 green candle (green is the color associated with healing and health) 1 new notepad or journal devoted to your physical healing pen/pencil green dry-erase marker 1 green calcite or clear quartz crystal box of tissues Step 1: Create your sacred space. Take a moment to acknowledge the work you will be doing and use the intention, This is the space in which I will overcome my pain.

Step 2: With gratitude for the strength you have to heal, light your green intention candle.

Step 3: Do a quick body scan to ensure you are comfortable and take three deep belly breaths to still and focus the mind.

Step 4: Write down the days date and your current pain level on a scale of i to 10. This will be your starting point and reference for progress in your healing. Where is your pain? How does this pain affect your mood? Try to focus your attention on the source of pain from outside yourself  you are simply observing the pain, rather that feeling it.

Note all these points in your notepad or journal, making them separate from you and unattached. It is okay to feel frustration here, so allow it: The sense of frustration will give you strength. If you need to have a moment to cry, that is okay too; tears are a powerful form of release, and you are in your safe space.

Step 5: Choose at least two vibration-raising rituals to practice daily, and one to do bi-weekly. Visual affirmations, meditation, Reiki and crystal healing are excellent choices for this purpose. See the options listed in this chapter.

Step 6: Close your ritual with a moment of gratitude, giving thanks for the ability to heal, and for the strength to overcome your physical pain. Blow out your candle and keep your journal in a safe place for further healing work.

Visual affirmations for healing pain Using your dry-erase marker, write the following affirmations in large print and capital letters on a mirror: I am pain-free.

I am strong.

I am loved.

Seeing your affirmations in front of you as soon as you wake up each morning will have an incredible impact on your healing and reaffirm your decision to reclaim your power to be pain-free. Begin each morning by looking at these affirmations and repeat them out loud three times.

On those days when you are feeling better, you can use affirmations like, I am doing the work my body needs. I AM conquering this pain. I AM strong. This will strengthen your will to continue and reaffirm your decision to heal. Remember to show gratitude for having a moment of no pain.

Record in your journal how long the pain-free moments lasted. This will also give you positive proof that your mind is creating the results you need and your body is listening. On the days you are struggling, repeat affirmations such as: I AM healing.

My pain IS lessening.

I AM reclaiming my power over my body.

TREAT YOURSELF WITH REIKI HEALING ENERGY Reiki energy is a beautiful and gentle healing modality that is a gift for relieving physical pain. The more you practice, the more profound your healing will be. You will need to complete the Reiki Blessing Attunement Ceremony (see pages 3843) before performing this ritual, as it focuses Reiki energy directly to the area(s) that cause(s) you pain. You will also be focusing on releasing your physical and emotional attachment to this pain while allowing Reiki to do its beautiful healing work.

Step 1: Once you have looked on your visual affirmations and written down your pain scale, hold your hands over the Reiki symbols on page 39 as you invite Reiki energy to flow through you.

Step 2: Place your hands on your solar plexus chakra for three to five minutes, allowing Reiki energy to open and infuse your solar plexus chakra.

Step 3: While keeping your dominant hand over your so plexus, move your non-dominant hand over eac] the other energy centers, starting with your crown chakra and working down to your root chakra. Hold each position for three to five minutes as you bring loving Reiki energy from your source of strength to each energy center of your body.

Step 4: Once you have channeled Reiki to each chakra center, place your hands on, or as close as you can manage comfortably, to the area causing pain. Allow Reiki energy to flow to this area and visualize the entire area being enveloped in the white healing light. Hold this position for a minimum of five minutes.

Step 5: Finish by expressing gratitude to Reiki energy with both hands held in the prayer position in front of your heart chakra.

Step 6: Have a glass of cool water to assist grounding at the end of this exercise and rinse your hands under cool running water.

Use this ritual as many times a day as you feel is necessary. If youre experiencing acute post-surgical pain, twice a day will be very beneficial. An easy way to remember is to do the ritual each time you take your prescribed medication  think of it as part of your pain management program. Making this a daily practice is highly recommended until you find your pain lessens in between sessions.

Meditate to soothe your pain Once you have completed your Healing Intention-Setting Ritual journaling, choose a form of meditation per day (see the suggestions below)  try different ones or just repeat the one that works well for you. The more you meditate, the more effective and easier it will be, so try to do it every day. You can work up to the recommended 20 minutes a day by starting with five minutes and increasing this by five minutes each week. Having 20 minutes a day of not focusing on your physical pain can be life-changing!

Shower affirmation meditation Begin by creating your sacred space and lighting your green intention candle in the bathroom. Then, in the shower, position yourself so that you can feel the water flow over your crown. Wait for the moment you can only feel the water, not the pain, then say to yourself, In this moment, I have NO pain. Feel the water running like streams down your body. Visualize the water washing away the pain, leaving only a feeling of peace.

Mindfulness meditation ritual The Simple Mindfulness Practice on pages 635 was developed by doctors at UCLA as a way for those patients who didnt respond to traditional pain management to manage their chronic pain. You will need to set aside 20 minutes for this practice while sitting in a quiet location.

Meditation with sound Meditate using an E note singing bowl, or listening to music that is at a frequency of 285 Hz for regenerating/healing tissues, or at 174 Hz to alleviate pain. (The frequency 285 Hz is wonderful for healing from a physical trauma, while 174 Hz is best for acute and more immediate pain relief.) Meditation with crystals Meditate while holding your green calcite and/or clear quartz.

Crystal healing for physical pain relief Crystals can be a wonderful support for managing both pain as well as the low-vibrational pull of pain. Below are crystal options to support your physical healing.

Apatite: This crystal is amazing for supporting bone health, helping to make healing fractures stronger and easing arthritis.

Amethyst: This beautiful crystal is incredible for pain relief and the mental exhaustion that goes with it. Pain can often interfere dramatically with our sleep patterns and mental health, and amethyst will assist you in easing your whole being into a more relaxed state. Keep it close to you, either on your person (in your pocket, bra or jewelry) and/or under your pillow at night.

Clear quartz: The master healer crystal is a wonderful amplifier, intensifying wellness and feelings of health. Keep this crystal under your pillow when you sleep at night to raise your vibes and allow your body to heal faster.

Green calcite: This crystal is excellent for physical healing, especially from an illness and for soft-tissue repair. You can add a piece to your water bottle to sip its beautiful healing as an elixir.

Living with physical pain is a journey all of its own. It can humble even the bravest and strongest of our world. Be gentle with yourself. It is so beautiful that you are brave enough to think outside the box. Or perhaps the medical world has left you desperate for some other forms of relief  and that is okay too. By incorporating two or more of these rituals into your daily life, you are taking an active step in your physical healing. The more you do these, the longer your place of peace will last, the less pain you will feel, and the better your life will be.

Every form of therapy takes time, whether your approach is holistic, traditional, spiritual or a combination of all, so be patient with yourself. When you have a setback, that is okay; your body needs time and you can always begin again tomorrow. Write down your feelings and let it go for another day when you feel stronger. I know how powerful these tools are firsthand and I know they will work for you too. Take your power back and raise your vibes!

Release from Old Traumas We hold our traumas from our past within our energetic body, in the memory of the water in our cells, and deep within our consciousness. The pain of trauma, and even our repressed memories of it, can manifest as physical and mental or emotional pain and find their way into patterns of behavior we then project onto our loved ones, thus continuing the cycle of pain. With reflection and powerful energy healing, we may shine a light on those things we have been trying to avoid or hide from so that we may heal. Patterns of abuse and neglect dont have to control our lives. We can heal from them.

There are so many types of trauma we can experience during our lifetime that will shock our system and leave us with an imprint of negative energy. All traumas are valid sources of pain, whether they occur from childhood abuse, sexual abuse, an abusive partner, war, major car accidents, cancer, natural disasters, the sudden and unexpected death of a loved one, violence, or any other experience that has scarred you. Know you are allowed to heal and to move past it.

Counseling or speaking to a trusted loved one can be a wonderful support; dont feel you need to heal alone. Journaling is a tool that many therapists encourage. Energy healing practices can take these processes to an even deeper level of healing, allowing you to raise your vibes in a safe and gentle way.

Trauma is part of the human experience and may be a part of your story, but it is not the end of your journey. You have survived; you are a survivor  that in itself takes profound strength. Use this strength now to do the work to heal yourself. Allow yourself the gift of healing so you may live a fuller life of joy and create a life of joy for those you love  for children you may bring into the world, for friends you will make along the way, and the freedom of forgiveness. There is always a silver lining to every cloud. Look for it and see how your trauma has helped shape you into the beautiful soul you are today.

Tools and Rituals for Healing Trauma Like you, I am a survivor. I have experienced physical, emotional and sexual traumas. I have no shame in sharing this with you, for I have healed myself, forgiven myself and those who have hurt me, and released the attachment to painful experiences. My past has brought me to where I am today, allowed me to follow a path that has led me to Reiki energy, and given me the empathy and compassion for those still struggling to heal themselves. Even in the hardest moments of darkness and negativity, I made the choice to rise again  and you absolutely can as well. You are not alone, we are all connected, and if we choose to, we can lift each other up and help each other heal.

Reiki energy for healing trauma Reiki energy has been a wonderful part of my own growth, and I have seen how it has healed myself and others time and again. Trust that this energy can and will help you on your own journey in self-healing. When using Reiki healing, remember that it continues to work in the days following your session, so allow any emotions or feelings that come through to flow as they are released and transmute. Be gentle with yourself during this process. You may find that with each session you feel lighter, more at peace, and in a much higher vibrational state. When you notice a shift toward negative thoughts or emotions, this is a wonderful sign to perform another session on yourself.

Sound healing with Reiki is yet another way to incorporate this beautiful process of healing your old traumas. If youve ever had a one-to-one Reiki session, youll have noticed the practitioner uses music. It is not a requirement, rather an intuitive practice on the part of the practitioner to offer you the most transformative experience they can. Likewise, the use of crystal energy with Reiki offers that unique addition of ancient healing vibrations formed from our Mother Earth. Some of the most powerful healing sessions can occur during Crystal Reiki Sound Baths, a healing modality my dearest friend and I created together, and which it is now my privilege to share with you.

CRYSTAL REIKI SOUND BATH RITUAL You will need to have performed the Reiki Blessing Attunement Ceremony (pages 3843) before attempting this ritual. Then you may sit or lie down for the healing session, whichever makes you most comfortable, though crystal placement over your chakras is best while lying down. If you prefer to sit, place the crystals around you in a circle on the floor.

You will need: a recording of a sound bath session (try YouTube!) crystals of your choice Step 1: In a quiet place where you will be undisturbed, create your sacred space with the intention to heal and release old traumas.

Step 2: Play the recording of your chosen sound bath loud enough to feel the vibration without discomfort. If you live with others in the home, headphones may also be used.

Step 3: Place your crystals directly over your chakra centers or in a circle around you. If you dont have enough to make a circle, place them near your feet.

Step 4: Bring your hands to prayer position (gassho) as you invite Reiki energy to flow in through your crown, permeating your entire being and moving to your hands.

Step 5: Place and then hold your cupped hands over each chakra center, one at a time, for three to five minutes, or for as long as you feel called to.

Step 6: When you have finished your hand positions, rest your open palms at your sides or in your lap for the remainder of your sound bath recording, breathing naturally and easily. Allow any intrusive thoughts to fade away.

Step 7: When your recording has finished, bring your hands to prayer position with gratitude for the deep and penetrating healing energy of your old wounds and spirit.

Step 8: Be sure to enjoy plenty of water after this session to ground yourself and in the hours following the healing session to flush any negative energy that has been released within. You may repeat this ritual as often as you feel called to.

JOURNALING RITUAL FOR HEALING BURIED TRAUMA In journaling, we are freeing ourselves from the burden of trauma in our mind, body and spirit. Perform this ritual in a place where you will not be disturbed or interrupted. This is a very private healing session that can bring buried emotions to the surface. It is okay to cry; tears are a wonderful release.

You will need: 1 intention candle (green is wonderful for physical trauma and matters of the heart, orange for sexual trauma, or white is always a good option) pen and paper smudge stick and holder (sage, yerba santa and myrrh resin are wonderful choices) lighter or matches fireproof pot crystal(s) infused with Reiki energy (angelite or clear quartz are wonderful choices) Optional: box of tissues Step 1: Create your sacred space outside, on your patio, balcony or next to an open window, with the intention you are healing from old traumas. Light your intention candle with this in mind.

Step 2: Write down all you are ready to release: your pain, guilt, anger, and attachment to these emotions.

Step 3: Fold your paper and hold the corner to the flame of your intention candle to light it. Drop into the small pot to burn completely.

Step 4: As the paper burns, visualize all those things you wrote down rising with the smoke out into the Universe to be transmuted, freeing your mind, body and soul of their burden.

Step 5: Pick up your Reiki-infused crystal in your non-dominant hand and hold your smudge stick in your dominant hand. Light the smudge stick with your intention candle.

Step 6: Smudge your entire body, starting with your crown, down the front of your body, up the back and under each foot as you say the mantra, Love, light and happiness. Place the smudge stick in its holder or bowl of sand and keep the crystal on your person (in your pocket, bra or jewelry).

Step 7: Bring your hands to prayer position with gratitude to the Universe and to Reiki for their beautiful healing energy, for releasing you from the chains of trauma, and for your choice to heal. Enjoy a glass of cool water to assist grounding.

Congratulations on another step on your journey in healing! You are such a beautiful and strong soul for continuing to take your power back. Within the safety and comfort of your own space, you are manifesting incredible changes to your vibration in such an amazing way, and your life may never look the same again! Please remember that healing is done in layers. New circumstances and situations can trigger old wounds, bringing to light those pieces of yourself that have not yet healed. When they do surface, know that you have the opportunity and the ability to heal them, one layer at a time. It is not a race to a finish line, but a voyage to your true self, so enjoy the process and the journey. Using these energy healing tools will raise your vibration and liberate your mind, body and soul from the ball and chain of old traumas so you may live with love in your heart and peace in your spirit.

Manifest Positive Changes Creating the life we want can seem out of our control, but we have the power to manifest positive changes that can last a lifetime and make dreams we thought impossible a reality. The power of thought carries its own vibration, and when we focus that vibration with manifesting, we can achieve magical change. Its not luck when things go our way; its our mind at work creating our reality. We are actually manifesting all the time, with every thought affecting our choices and actions  so keep your thoughts positive. If you feel yourself slipping into self-doubt, take note of this, and make the choice to vibrate higher.

This can feel like a daunting task at first, but once you get started youll find everything beginning to fall into place, like the natural flow of a stream into a river. One of the reasons people give up and lose faith, surrendering to a life they arent happy in and feel trapped by, is a lack of trust and not acknowledging that everything happens in divine timing. Just because what you want hasnt happened yet, it doesnt mean its not on its way to you. When you manifest, you are setting in motion events to occur, leading you toward your goals. The Universe works in ways we are only beginning to understand. Like a domino effect, once a single piece is set in motion, this sends us on our way. Once weve made the decision to set this motion in play, all other actions we take will be in line with those thoughts and decisions.

If you permit the belief that what you want isnt possible, you are essentially sabotaging your own manifesting. For example, think of a time you were absolutely determined to make a change and, at the last moment, thought, No, I cant. That slight moment of doubt, that decision of cant, became your reality instead. The domino fell backward instead of toward your goals.

Now, parking in Los Angeles can be a real challenge, so I often find myself talking to my angels before arriving at my destination. I literally visualize someone leaving a store or building, walking to their car and creating that space for me. My children have seen me make this magic happen so many times, its become a bit of fun for them to join in with: Parking angels, my mom needs a parking spot, thank you! My luck with finding amazing parking spots has been truly uncanny since I started doing this.

Tools and Rituals for Manifesting Positive Changes I find its always best to keep your mind focused on what you want. Then, once youve actually received it  and only then - can you say, Wow, I didnt think that could actually happen. How amazing! By then, of course, youve already created a positive shift.

Next, enjoy your success with gratitude. Youll find that when something doesnt work out, your response will be a feeling of knowing it wasnt right for you rather than defeat. Keep the faith that your wishes are coming to you in divine timing.

Here are some simple tools and rituals to keep you manifesting positive changes in your life. You may choose to do any of the following practices during and in addition to your New Moon rituals (see pages 13540).

MANIFESTING WITH WIND ENERGY I love the beautiful energy of the wind for manifesting my wishes. The Air element carries powerful energy: just look at what a tornado can do. Of course, we are looking to create positive change, so keep any thoughts of failure or destruction out of your mind as you create.

Remember to be careful what you wish for: You are setting into motion your thoughts and words, so be sure they are really what you want.

You will need: your voice the wind or breeze Step 1: Create your sacred space outside, where you can feel the breeze or wind, with an intention to manifest positive changes.

Step 2: Think or say out loud what it is you want for your life as though those things are already yours. Feel this wish deep in your being as you say it.

Step 3: Visualize the wind carrying your wishes out to the Universe and flowing with her beautiful energy.

Step 4: Repeat three times as you raise your arms up in front of you with the wind blowing from behind you so your wishes flow out and away from you, into the Universe.

Step 5: Release any fears, doubts and wanting, so that all that is left in your mind are the positive goals you are asking for. This is a wonderful time to ask your angels to assist you in carrying your wishes for your highest good out to the Universe.

Step 6: Believe these things are already yours: say it, feel it, breathe it, know it in your mind, body and soul.

Step 7: Bring your hands to prayer position in gratitude to the Universe for setting in motion your dreams. Keep any thoughts of doubt out of your mind.

Step 8: Each day thereafter, remind yourself of your chosen wishes and know that these are what you are bringing into your life. All will happen in divine timing and for your highest good.

THE POWER OF THE PEN Writing down your wishes and dreams is a powerful tool for manifesting, as this brings your thoughts out of your mind and into the physical plane.

You will need: pen and paper (I prefer to use blue ink for throat chakra to assist with writing my truth) Optional: intention candle, lighter or matches, fireproof pot Step 1: Create your sacred space with the intention to manifest positive changes. If you choose to use an intention candle, light this now.

Step 2: Write down all your wishes and goals. If you are focusing on buying a home, for example, you can write, My perfect home is coming to me, in the perfect location, at the perfect price. This home will be a place of peace and happiness for my life and family. So it is done.

Step 3: If you wish to burn your wishes, you may do so now, reading over them before you light the paper and drop it into the pot. You may flush or burn the ashes after. If youve chosen not to burn them, you may keep them under your pillow or bury them in the earth outside. Long-term goals are wonderful for keeping close, as a reminder of the shift in energy you are creating. Short-term goals can be buried so that the beautiful energy of Mother Earth can give them that extra dose of positive energy.

Step 4: Bring your hands to prayer position (gassho) in a moment of gratitude for the positive shift in energy.

Manifesting with the power of the pen can be done anytime you have a pen and paper at hand. Writing So it is done at the end of your goals is a wonderful way to make your announcement that it is done, that they are yours, but you may close with whatever feels right to you.

MANIFESTING WITH AFFIRMATIONS Remember the Affirmations and Mantras chapter? Your words carry vibration, so using positive affirmations is another way to manifest as well.

Step 1: Decide what it is you truly want. Phrase your affirmations so that the words align with your wishes. For example: I will finish this book on time so it may help others on their journey. (My own personal goal!) I will be hired for the best job for my life and wellbeing.

I will meet my life partner and enjoy a life of love and happiness.

Step 2: Release any doubt or possibility it cant happen. Decide that it will and keep your thoughts positive.

Step 3: Give thanks to the Universe for bringing you your wishes in divine timing.

Keep your thoughts positive and firm in your decision to create wonderful changes for your life, in the knowledge that they will come to you in divine timing. Often, they will come to you in even better ways than you couldve hoped for or imagined. After all, the Universe and your angels want the best for you. Trust that they are making it happen and keep the faith as all choices you make fall in line with your goals.

And do the work. Theres no point manifesting if youre not willing to take the steps necessary to make your dreams come true. You cant win the lottery if you dont buy a ticket, just as you cant get that dream job if you dont apply, or find the perfect partner if you dont leave your home. Manifesting empowers you to create the change you want, so use this as a tool to support you on your journey and bring you that much closer to your wishes. You are deserving of love and happiness: know that in your heart, keep telling yourself that until you believe it and youll see the miracles of manifestation create a new and wonderful reality!

Helping Loved Ones While on our journey in healing and spiritual enlightenment, it is natural to want to bring our loved ones with us. Our friends and family can play a significant role in the state of our own vibration, especially when we live in the same household. However, its important to remember that everyone has their own journey of lessons and those may not always align with ours, and thats okay!

Learning to be patient and respectful of others (and yourself) can be a lesson all on its own. We cannot force growth; we can only be there to support others on their way. Beyond sneaking a few crystals under their pillow, like I often will, our loved ones need to be ready, willing and open to shifting their vibration. When we try to force our practice and will on them, it can backfire, creating disharmony and frustration, no matter our good intentions.

Sometimes we take on their missteps as our responsibility to fix, but thats just not the way it works. When we are toddlers, our parents can hold our hands to steady us as we learn to walk, but we have to let go and believe we can. Whether we are learning to walk or learning to heal, it will be a personal journey. Its incredibly rewarding to be that pillar of support and just as important to have loved ones be there for us when its our turn to lean on them in our own struggles.

While Reiki is a wonderful and gentle way to ease the transition to a more spiritual life, just be sure you have permission to do energy healing for your loved one. If you have their permission, they dont have to believe it works; you know it does, and can enjoy seeing the benefits as their world shifts into the positive, while Reiki energy eases their emotional and/or physical pain and allows their spirit to experience some peace.

I find the best way to share knowledge on a spiritual level is by being an example. When your loved ones see you performing rituals, invite them to join you, without expectation. Its natural for them to be curious, so make it fun! Even if they only observe, you are still doing your part in sharing the gift of energy healing. Your thoughts and actions carry a vibration that they will resonate with, even subconsciously. As you create changes around your home, work on your own healing and raise your own vibration, those closest to you to will also enjoy the benefits  even if they dont take an active role. A single drop of water in the ocean creates a vibration that can be felt far beyond where it started. You can be that vibration of love and support for your loved ones too.

How to Raise the Vibes with Your Friends and Family Its always a joy to have loved ones join you in raising the vibes. Create a ritual you can share all together, meditate together, create crystal grids together, and make it a fun routine. When its enjoyable, its easier to continue. For example, my husband and I attended meditation classes together. At the time, I thought I was going to support him; I didnt realize how much those classes would raise my own vibration. We continue to meditate together today and it has been a wonderful bonding experience, bringing us in sync with each others energy and creating harmony for our home.

Consider giving energy tools as gifts. A couple of years ago, I commissioned my first art piece from a beautiful lightworker Id found on Instagram. She recreated a Seed of Life geometric figure for me on a large canvas, using gold leaf on a base of red (for the root chakra) and sealed it with an infusion of energy.

I gave this to my husband for our 16th anniversary. Its now displayed above the stairs in our entryway, blessing all who enter with its powerful vibration. The shift in energy for our home and lives has been magical. You dont need to go to the lengths I have: even a small gift of a crystal youve infused with Reiki energy can be a powerful blessing on the life of a loved one. This gentle encouragement to grow and heal can be all that is needed for their own positive shift in vibration.

If youve chosen to use Reiki as a tool for helping loved ones, you can use the hand positions shown in this book for selftreatments on your partner, children and friends (see page 46). When you draw in the beautiful energy of Reiki, you are also healing yourself as it flows through you to them. This is one of the things I adore about working with Reiki energy. Its a gift that keeps on giving and its healing power is unlike any other, with its blessing felt by both the giver and receiver.

When my uncle was going through cancer, I hadnt finished my Reiki master certification yet, but I did have my Level Two, allowing me to perform distance healing. My uncle was in terrible pain and mostly unresponsive in his final weeks of life, and it was heartbreaking to see him suffer. On one of my visits, I asked him if I could perform Reiki on him. I doubt very much whether hed ever even heard of Reiki, but as his was an ever-patient nature, he gave me the nod of approval anyway.

I was still very physically restricted (wearing a back brace at the time), so bending over him was not an option and I was thankful to be able to do distance Reiki while I was seated next to him.

During the session, he woke up, demanding, What is this . . . magic? I was so startled and shocked that not only was he speaking, but he felt the Reiki energy! His nurses shared with me later that he was calmer after my visits and seemed to be in less pain. I am so grateful that I was able to help ease his transition from this life.

All the energy tools in this book are amazing in their own ability to raise our vibes. Whenever my best friend lights intention candles, she uses the intention and energy of the ritual to bless her loved ones with energy too. This is another wonderful way that you can also share healing energy with those you love. They dont even need to know youve done the work to receive its benefits: your intention is the key. Of course, letting them know your intention (if they are open to it and not scared or reluctant) can be a wonderful way to share your energy healing work, and perhaps they will even tune into any shift in consciousness and vibration. You will know what feels right in the moment, so trust yourself, trust the process, and let your intuition be your compass.

Quick Vibe Fix!

Slip a crystal under the pillow of your loved one to give them the gift of crystal energy while they sleep. Rose quartz can be a wonderful choice to keep the love flowing.

Working with Children Our little earth angels, as I refer to children, are so open to the beauty of energy healing, having no judgment or fear to create, as adults often do. We can learn so much about ourselves through their pure hearts and intentions. They are very easily trusting of their intuition, so allow them to choose what tools they gravitate toward and resonate with. My daughter, who is six at the time of writing this, is a wonderful guide in choosing crystals for me whenever we visit our local American Indian crystal shop. While she often wants the more expensive jewelry too, I try to allow her options within a price range.

My eldest son, now a teenager, uses meditation and wearing crystal bracelets as tools to help him through the turmoil of emotions and hormones  a welcome shift in the vibration of our home. Hes been amazing at identifying raw crystals on his hiking adventures, bringing home gifts of beautiful hunks of quartz crystal, native to our area. My second boy loves to receive regular Reiki sessions to help him with sleep and to resolve conflicts with classmates, as he is very sensitive to the emotions of others. He finds crystal energy to be a wonderful support emotionally and spiritually, and even uses them to ward off nightmares and negative spirit visitors. Whether or not parents view this kind of response as figments of a childs imagination, that is not whats important: its that the child feels safe and secure. There can be no harm in keeping a piece of selenite and amethyst under their pillow, so why not give them the tools they find comfort in?

When I do my home cleansing with sage, all three of my sweet earth angels love to be a part of the process, blessing their rooms and even smudging me with the mantras, Love, light and happiness. I cant even put into words how my vibe shifts when they do; its just magical. My own little magical healers. They were also incredibly involved and helpful while I recovered from surgery. A childs love and hugs are as precious as any energy tools, and express the same universal love.

As with adults, every child has their own unique energy vibration. They are facing a whole new world of issues, debates, politics, peer pressures and social norms that will very likely look different from our own experiences.

They are our future and our legacy, so giving them the tools to keep their own vibration high on their journey is a wonderful gift for our world.

Vibing in Tune with Your Partner Keeping vibrations in sync and in love brings harmony to any relationship. Encourage your partner to join you on this journey and, if they arent willing, have patience until they are ready to join you.

You will be able to channel Reiki to your partner through your hands once youve done the work of your Reiki attunement blessing. If they are willing, they can be a wonderful canvas on which to practice as you begin to recognize the feel of the energy, while keeping you both on a high vibration. Using energy tools can be a wonderful exchange of energy in relationships, bringing you both closer and more in love.

Practicing with Pets Our animal members of the family are very sensitive to vibrations. Dogs are known to sense earthquakes, for example, long before we feel it. They are equally sensitive to our own energy. When I was a teenager going through my own transitions, I remember my family dogs were a huge source of comfort. We are also that comfort for them. Currently, I have the sweetest English bulldog, whom I inherited from my late uncle, and a beautiful sleek black cat. I keep small crystals on their collars to give them love and balanced energy. I placed a rose quartz on my dog Dodos collar to help her ease into our home and heal from the loss of her human parents. My cat, Minx, was more drawn to amethyst, so that is what I keep on his collar. He especially loves to jump up on my desk anytime I have amethyst laid out in a crystal grid, attracted to its energy.

Our pet family members respond very well to Reiki energy and there are many Reiki practitioners who focus solely on animal Reiki. Once you have been through your Reiki self-attunement, you will be able to give the same loving energy to your own pets, helping them through vet visits, surgeries, and the emotional impacts of loss and/or loneliness and anxiety after youve been away from the home for long periods. They have a way of shifting their body under your hands to where they need healing, so dont worry about getting the right spot  they will show you. Likewise, you may find your pet baby coming to join you when you work with other energy tools  and its wonderful to share that bond with them as well.

Continuing Your Spiritual Journey Your spiritual journey is a lifelong practice that will bring so many rewards to your world. By the time youve reached this section, you will have learned many wonderful and perhaps new ways of raising your vibes. Of course, it doesnt end here. Whether you are just starting out or are well on your way in energy healing, these tools and rituals can create lasting positive change. There will be successes and setbacks, but they all hold their own unique lessons and purpose on your path through life. Treading a spiritual path will bring clarity and understanding to the lessons life presents you. Remember that everything happens in divine timing, healing is done in layers, and there is always hope when you do the work to raise your vibration.

Developing Your Practice As you begin using the different rituals, you will discover what works best for you. You are welcome to make subtle changes each time you perform one, to align with your energy in the moment. You may find you start using some of these tools instinctively, as they become second nature, which is wonderful. There are no rules here: you are free to create a flow in energy that fits your life and circumstances. I have only given you a guide so that you can begin to raise your vibes, but know that what you choose to do with these tools will set in motion a rewarding and abundant invitation from the Universe to live a better and happier life.

Trust that the Universe is working in your favor, and know that it is the journey that is important, not the destination. Learn and grow with love and light in your heart as you shift your perspective to allow yourself to heal from old wounds, understanding and accepting that they too shape the beautiful soul that you are today. It is never too early or too late to begin your spiritual journey: youve always been leading this way of life, though perhaps now you can recognize it and notice the signs of guidance from your angels, and see how energy and vibration are at your core.

Living a Spiritual Life Learn to embrace the light and the dark within you, and accept and forgive yourself when you stumble. We dont always get it right, but we always learn. Release judgment of others, as they too are on their own path to enlightenment. Share your gifts and successes so that others may raise their vibration too. We are all connected and together on this journey: supporting each other, forgiving each other and accepting each other are all necessary for us to create a world in which we will love living. As you walk the path of healing, put yourself and your own wellbeing first before attempting to heal others. Remember to fill your cup and replenish yourself when you feel low: you cant pour from an empty cup.

The Universe unfolds in amazing ways, and although no one person has all the answers, if we share our knowledge, we empower ourselves and others. Listen to your angels, watch and ask for signs when you need them, and show gratitude for the answers. I encourage you to continue learning from others who have chosen to share their stories, their gifts. Be open to where the messages come from; they are not always in the form you may expect. Learn about and accept other cultures, creeds, religions and faiths, for they all have their own unique experience and importance in life. Take the parts that resonate for you into your own vibration and leave the rest without judgment. And always show gratitude for their part in your journey.

Notes 1. For more information on these findings, visit: pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/131/5/902 www.downloads.imune.net/medicalbooks/Neurochemistry %20of%20music.pdf www.musictherapy.org/assets/1/7MusicTherapyMilitaryPops_2014.pdf 2. For more information on research in this area, visit: sanlab.psych.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/ 31/2015/05/Creswell_mindfulness-2007.pdf www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/03/120314170647.htm www.scn.ucla.edu/pdf/Dickenson(inpress)SCAN.pdf www.semel.ucla.edu/marc www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3072791/ 3. Ibid.

4. Ibid.

Further Reading and Resources In these pages, you have been blessed with the Reiki energy you need to enhance your life and raise your vibration. If you wish to continue your healing journey, here are some other books and resources to help you on your way.

Recommended reading Philip Permutt, The Crystal Healer: Crystal Prescriptions That Will Change Your Life Forever (CICO Books, 2007).

Lisa Powers, Reiki Level I, II & Master Manual (CreateSpace, 2016).

Swami Saradananda, The Essential Guide to Chakras: Discover the Healing Power of Chakras for Mind, Body and Spirit (Watkins, 2011).

Robert Simmons and Naisha Ahsian, The Book of Stones: Who They Are and What They Teach (North Atlantic Books, 2015).

Bronwen Stiene and Frans Stiene, The Reiki Sourcebook (Ayni Books, revised edition, 2008).

Dr Mikao Usui with Frank Arjava Petter, The Original Reiki Handbook of Dr Mikao Usui: The Traditional Usui Reiki Ryoho Treatment Positions and Numerous Reiki Techniques for Health and Well-Being (Lotus Press, revised edition, 2008).

Valerie Ann Worwood, The Complete Book of Essential Oils and Aromatherapy, 25th anniversary edition (New World Library, 2016).

Finding a Reiki master If you have found that you are really enjoying the infusion of Reiki energy in your life and want to continue your journey, finding a Reiki master might be your next step. If you do decide to continue, I encourage you to find a teacher with whom you resonate, who is open to teaching you and is respectful of your newly attuned connection to Reiki. Here are some options to help you begin your search: Online courses: Lisa Powers https://lisapowers.co Beth Wishbow https://www.insightholistichealth.com Reiki organization members: Search for a Reiki master in your area: https://reikiassociation.com https://iarp.org https://shibumireiki.org/directory/ Acknowledgements Every chapter in life begins with that one special person who sets you on a new voyage. So much love and gratitude to my amazing Publishing Editor, Fiona Robertson, for bringing to life a reality I could not yet see. You are such a gift. Your vision, guidance and determination are unmatched. For my brilliant copyeditor, Sue Lascelles, so much gratitude for your intuitive strengths for filling in the gaps and creating a flow I could not. Dearest Victoria, your eye for words is magical all on its own. For my most talented designers, Glen Wilkins and Luise Roberts, thank you for bringing beauty and magic to these pages. So much gratitude for all the beautiful and incredibly talented souls who have worked tirelessly, even through a pandemic, to put this book together as a light for those who may need it.

Thank you, Daddy, for inspiring me at such an early age to begin my journey in writing, for the early mornings spent teaching me your skill, and for always being my rock. Mom, thank you for always steering me toward my creative goals, for always believing in me, and for your spiritual guidance and wisdom; you are truly the strongest woman I know. My darling sisters, thank you for supporting me and offering your beautiful wisdom. My love, Mohsen, thank you for your incredible dedication, love and support in every adventure Ive taken us on. My babies, thank you for your incredible patience and encouragement during this process; I could not have done this without your love. So much gratitude to my loving and supportive Cansino East family and my in-laws for being here to help me heal so that I could rise again stronger than before: your love and care during my recovery will always be with me. To my nearest and dearest friends Michelle and Karin, your strength, divine feminine energy, guidance, inspiration and shoulders to cry on are the stuff of dreams. And for the small circle of friends closest to me, you know who you are, know that I am so grateful for your love and friendship.

So much love and blessings to the beautiful souls and clients who have allowed me to be a part of your healing journey, I am grateful for you. And of course, my love and appreciation for all the Reiki masters before me, for the beautiful gift of Reiki itself, and the Universe for blessing me with your light.